Angioplasty: Procedure, Types & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Angioplasty
Advertisement
Advertisement
Angioplasty
Angioplasty is a procedure that creates more space inside an artery that has plaque built up inside it. Your healthcare provider uses a tiny balloon to force plaque against the artery walls so blood can get through your artery. Often, they also place a stent or tube inside the newly opened space to keep it open.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is angioplasty?
Angioplasty is a minimally invasive procedure that opens
arteries
(large blood vessels) to let
blood
flow more easily. It most commonly treats
atherosclerosis
(a collection of
plaque
made of fat and
cholesterol
) in your arteries.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Angioplasty involves a tiny medical balloon that pushes plaque through in spots that are too narrow or blocked.
Angioplasties are generally safe procedures. They’re less invasive than other heart and vascular procedures, like bypass surgery.
Your
cardiovascular
health is very important to your overall health. Angioplasties are often necessary to try to prevent serious complications of atherosclerosis, like heart attack and stroke.
Types of angioplasty
Healthcare providers use certain words to explain which arteries they’re treating. The two most common include:
Coronary artery angioplasty
. The
coronary arteries
are major blood vessels that supply blood to your
heart
. Another name for this procedure is
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
.
Peripheral artery angioplasty
. Peripheral arteries are
blood vessels
that carry blood away from your heart to your extremities, like your legs and arms.
Different angioplasty techniques include:
Balloon angioplasty
. Most angioplasty procedures involve a tiny medical balloon to move the plaque out of the way and off to the side of the artery wall.
Angioplasty with or without stenting.
Your provider may or may not place a permanent
stent
(a small tube) in the newly opened artery to help keep it open. Stent placement comes after most angioplasties.
Excimer laser coronary angioplasty (ELCA)
. This is an alternative to using a balloon to unblock a coronary artery. The laser destroys the plaque. It’s not as common as balloon angioplasty.
Advertisement
When might I need angioplasty?
You may need angioplasty if you have:
A
heart attack
. Angioplasty may limit damage to your heart during or right after a heart attack. In this case, it’s an emergency treatment.
Carotid artery disease
. The
carotid arteries
are in your neck. Left untreated, blocked carotid arteries can lead to a
stroke
.
Chronic kidney disease
. When plaque collects in the arteries in your
kidneys
, it affects how much blood and oxygen can reach them. Sometimes, a renal (kidney) artery angioplasty can help.
Coronary artery disease (CAD)
. Your coronary arteries make it possible for your heart to beat and pump blood throughout your body. A blocked coronary artery can cause
chest pain
and/or a
heart attack
.
Peripheral artery disease (PAD)
. Angioplasty can clear plaque in the major arteries in your arms, legs and pelvis. Without treatment, PAD can lead to pain,
ulcers
and
gangrene
.
Your healthcare provider will use an
angiogram
(an imaging procedure) to help guide the angioplasty.
Treatment Details
During angioplasty, a balloon forces plaque against your artery wall to make more room for blood to flow through.
How do I prepare for angioplasty?
Your provider will give you specific instructions for preparing for the procedure. They’ll also go over your medications and health history. In general, your provider will likely:
Tell you to not eat or drink anything except water (fast) for eight hours before the test
Adjust your medications (especially if you take
anticoagulants
)
Ask if you’ve had an allergic reaction to contrast dye or
anesthesia
before
Ask if you’re
pregnant
For your safety, you won’t be allowed to drive yourself home on the same day of the procedure. You should figure out transportation from the hospital if you’re going home the same day. You may need to stay overnight at the hospital.
What happens during angioplasty?
In general, you can expect the following during angioplasty:
You change into a medical gown and lie on your back for the procedure.
A healthcare provider gives you medicine that makes you feel relaxed (a
sedative
) through an IV. But you’ll still be awake enough to follow instructions.
Certain monitors will keep track of your
vital signs
, like your
pulse
and oxygen levels, during the procedure.
A provider gives you local anesthesia to numb the area where they’ll access an artery. This is usually in your groin or arm. You may feel pressure in this area during the procedure, but you shouldn’t feel pain.
A provider accesses a blood vessel with a needle. They slide a sheath (or tube) over the needle and into a large artery.
They pass wires and catheters through the tube to the artery they’re targeting.
An X-ray machine rotates around you (called
fluoroscopy
). It allows the provider to see where the catheter is going from all angles.
Once your provider gets to the targeted artery, they put a special dye into the tube. They look at X-rays to watch the dye go through your artery. For a few seconds, you might feel flushed or like you need to pee.
The provider can find the blockage or narrowing of your artery with the imaging. They’ll cross the problem area with a guide wire. This allows the balloon-tipped catheter to pass over the wire.
Once across the blockage, they’ll briefly inflate the balloon. They may need to do this more than once.
The provider will look at more X-rays to see how much blood flow has improved.
They’ll usually then put in a permanent stent. Stronger than a balloon, the stent keeps the artery open after balloon removal.
Advertisement
After the procedure, the healthcare provider takes out the catheter. A provider will use a bandage to cover the place where the catheter went into your skin. They’ll put pressure on the site to stop or prevent any bleeding. You may need to lie on your back for a few hours if the catheter was in your groin.
How long does angioplasty take?
A typical angioplasty procedure can take 30 minutes to two hours. You’ll then need to recover in the hospital afterward. Your healthcare provider can give you a better idea of what to expect for your overall hospital stay.
What are the risks of angioplasty?
The risks of angioplasty include:
A repeat blockage if you don’t get a stent in your artery
Abnormal
heartbeats
(
arrhythmia
)
Allergic reaction to the contrast dye or anesthetic
Blood vessel or kidney damage
Blood clots
Heart attack
Low blood pressure
Pain, bleeding or infection where a needle or catheter went into your skin
Stroke
It’s a good idea to get angioplasty from a healthcare provider who does them often (at a high-volume center). Most of the time, they’re safe procedures. Serious complications are rare.
You’re more likely to have complications if you:
Are over 65 years
Have
kidney disease
Have several blocked arteries
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time for angioplasty?
You’ll need to stay at the hospital for several hours or even overnight to recover from angioplasty. If you’re leaving the hospital the same day, someone else needs to drive you home.
Advertisement
You may feel tired after the procedure. Get rest at home and drink fluids. Your provider may tell you to limit your activities for a couple of days after you get home. Your wound may be sensitive or bruised for a week or more.
You may need to take medicines like
aspirin
or other blood thinners after the angioplasty. If your provider prescribed blood thinners, it’s important to take these as directed. Don’t miss any doses. If you think you need to stop taking them, you should discuss it with your provider before you do.
You should be able to drive and go back to work about a week after the angioplasty. But this can vary depending on the type. Check with your provider.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You’ll have a follow-up visit after you go home. But you should contact your healthcare provider after an angioplasty if:
You have bleeding or an infection where the catheter went through your skin
Your leg color changes
It hurts or feels warm where the catheter was
Additional Common Questions
What is the success rate of angioplasty?
The success rate of angioplasty varies for several reasons, including:
The type of angioplasty and the artery that’s blocked
The severity of the blockage
Your overall health
Your age
Your healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what you can expect. Don’t hesitate to ask questions.
Advertisement
Is angioplasty painful?
Overall, angioplasty should involve minimal pain. You may feel some temporary mild pain or discomfort when the provider:
Inserts an IV line with a needle to give you a sedative
Injects local anesthesia
Inflates the angioplasty balloon
You shouldn’t feel pain from the catheter during the procedure. You also won’t feel the provider threading the catheter through your blood vessels and arteries.
After the procedure, the sites where the IV and catheter went into your skin may be sore. But this should go away after a week or so.
Tell the provider immediately if you feel intense pain during any part of the procedure.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be stressful to hear you need angioplasty. You may be worried about what it means for your health. But angioplasties are often safe and effective procedures. They’re also very common. Don’t hesitate to ask questions if there’s anything you don’t understand. Your provider’s there to help you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment