Tinea Barbae (Beard Ringworm): Symptoms, Causes, Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Tinea Barbae (Beard Ringworm)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tinea Barbae (Beard Ringworm)
A fungal infection most commonly found in animals like cows causes tinea barbae or beard ringworm in people. The condition causes red, ring-shaped skin rashes. Inflamed areas called kerions can lead to scarring and hair loss. Oral antifungal medicines, and sometimes oral steroids, treat this fungal infection. It rarely spreads among people.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is tinea barbae (beard ringworm)?
Tinea barbae (tin-EE-uh BAR-bee) is a rare fungal infection that affects your skin, hair and hair follicles in the beard and mustache area. Tinea is the medical term for ringworm. Barbae is the Latin word for beard.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The condition also goes by beard ringworm or barber’s itch because barbers once spread the infection by using the same contaminated razors on different customers.
What is ringworm?
Despite having the word “worm” in its name, a fungus — not a worm — causes ringworm. The condition gets its name from the raised ring-shaped rash that forms on the skin.
What causes tinea barbae?
Fungi called
Trichophyton
cause tinea barbae. There are many different types of
Trichophyton
responsible, and they are almost always also found in animals like cows, sheep, horses.
Trychophyton
are part of a group of fungi called dermatophytes. Other related fungi cause
athlete’s foot, jock itch and ringworm on your scalp
.
How do you get tinea barbae?
Most people pick up this fungal infection through direct contact with an infected animal. Livestock animals, especially dairy cattle, are most likely to have this fungus. But sheep, pigs, dogs and cats can have it, too.
It’s possible, yet extremely uncommon, to pick up the fungus through contact with contaminated soil or other humans.
Is tinea barbae contagious?
Yes, tinea barbae is contagious. However, it’s rare for this fungal infection to spread from person to person or from contact with a contaminated object like a towel. You’re more likely to get the fungus from an infected animal.
Advertisement
How common is tinea barbae?
This type of fungal infection is extremely rare. Since the first report of tinea barbae in 1842, there have been about 150 known cases. Bacterial infections in the beard area are more common.
Who is at risk for tinea barbae?
Teen and adult
males
who work with farm animals are most at risk for this fungal infection. You could be at higher risk if you have one or more of these factors:
Autoimmune diseases.
Diabetes
.
Skin trauma due to scratches or razor blades.
Misuse of
anabolic steroids
or prolonged use of
corticosteroids
.
What are the symptoms of tinea barbae?
Tinea barbae causes red, ring-shaped rashes on the outer layer of your skin (epidermis). The rash may be itchy, but it isn’t painful.
This rash may appear on the:
Cheeks.
Chin.
Neck.
Upper lip (mustache area).
What are the complications of tinea barbae?
Some people develop a deeper skin infection that causes inflammation in their hair follicles. Hair follicle infection from the fungus is called tinea sycosis. Swollen, pus-filled patches of skin (kerions) can form.
Scarring
and hair loss can occur at the site of the kerion. You may also experience
fever
,
fatigue
and
swollen lymph nodes
.
How is tinea barbae diagnosed?
A
dermatologist
(a medical doctor specializing in skin diseases) or another healthcare provider may diagnose tinea barbae after evaluating your symptoms. Your provider may scrape the area and pluck a beard hair. Providers then examine the samples under a microscope for signs of a fungal infection.
Other conditions like bacterial infection,
herpes simplex virus
,
acne
and
rosacea
can cause similar symptoms. Your provider may perform additional tests to confirm a diagnosis, such as:
Lab culture on a plucked beard hair.
Skin biopsy
.
How do you get rid of tinea barbae?
Topical (applied to your skin) and oral antifungal medicines stop the growth of fungi infections. Tinea barbae responds well to these treatments. If you have severe inflammation or kerions, you may also take an oral corticosteroid like
prednisone
. This steroid can relieve swelling and reduce the risk of scarring. It can take up to six weeks for the infection to clear up.
What are the complications of tinea barbae treatments?
Some fungi that cause infections have developed antifungal
resistance
. That means the fungus isn’t killed by certain antifungals, making the condition more difficult to treat. If a certain antifungal doesn’t work, your provider may prescribe a different one.
What are tinea barbae home remedies?
Antifungals are the only way to get rid of tinea barbae. But you can soothe inflamed skin and kerions by applying a warm, moist compress to the skin.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
Can women get tinea barbae?
Tinea barbae almost exclusively affects teen and adult males. There are rare instances of females developing tinea barbae. Females who develop the condition may have
excessive hair growth (hirsutism)
.
Advertisement
Can you prevent tinea barbae?
These steps can lower your risk of getting tinea barbae:
Wash your hands
thoroughly after coming into close contact with livestock or other potentially infected animals.
Don’t share beard-grooming tools or other personal hygiene items with others.
Treat infected animals with antifungal medicine for ringworm.
Can tinea barbae affect the hair on the scalp, chest or genitals?
Tinea or ringworm can affect many parts of your body. The conditions have different names based on the affected area. Tinea barbae only affects your beard area.
Other types of ringworm include:
Tinea capitis:
Scalp.
Tinea corporis:
Trunk, limbs and body.
Tinea cruris (jock itch):
Groin, upper thighs and rectum.
Tinea manuum:
Hands.
Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot):
Feet.
Tinea unguium:
Fingernails and toenails (
toenail fungus
).
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Tinea barbae, or beard ringworm, is a fungal infection that often spreads from direct contact with infected livestock animals like cattle. You can get it from other animals, too. Although this infection is contagious, it rarely spreads among people. The condition almost exclusively affects males, causing ring-shaped skin rashes in the beard area. Some people may develop inflamed lesions, called kerions, which can lead to scarring and hair loss. Oral antifungals almost always treat this fungal infection.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/22/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider