Parinaud Oculoglandular Syndrome: What It Is, Causes & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Parinaud Oculoglandular Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Parinaud Oculoglandular Syndrome
Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome happens when an infection spreads to your conjunctiva — the clear layer that protects your eye. It causes symptoms like redness and irritation. A healthcare provider will treat the infection that caused your symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome?
Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome is an infection that affects the
conjunctiva
in one of your eyes. The conjunctiva is the clear tissue that lines the inside surface of your eyelid and outer coating of your
eye
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The infection causes bumps called granulomatous nodules to form on your infected conjunctiva. They irritate the tissue around them and cause symptoms like pain, redness and
watery eyes
.
An
eye care specialist
will diagnose and treat the infection that’s causing Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome. Most people recover in a few weeks after getting the original infection treated.
Visit an eye care specialist as soon as you notice any changes in your eyes or vision.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome?
Symptoms of Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome include:
Eye pain
Feeling generally sick or unwell
Fever
Redness
and irritation in one eye
Swelling in the
lymph nodes
near your ears.
Watery eye
or extra tearing
You might have additional or different symptoms depending on which exact infection causes Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome.
What causes Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome?
Infections that spread to your eye cause Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome. Any infection can cause it, including:
Bacteria
Funguses
Viruses
Parasites
An infection can get into your eye directly off your finger if you rub or touch your eye. Some infections can be spread in the air through infected particles or spores.
The most common causes of Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome are:
Cat scratch fever
(cat scratch disease)
. Cat scratch fever is a bacterial infection that you can get if an infected cat bites or scratches you or licks an open wound on your body.
Sporotrichosis (rose gardener’s disease)
.
Sporotrichosis is a fungal infection that spreads from plants to your skin. The fungus usually gets into your body through a cut in your skin after you touch a plant carrying the fungal spores.
Tularemia
(rabbit fever or deer fly fever)
. Tularemia is a bacterial infection that spreads from infected insects to animals and humans. You can get it after being bitten by an infected insect or handling infected live or dead animals.
Advertisement
It’s less common for other infections to cause Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome, but they can include:
Leprosy (Hansen’s disease)
Listeria
Mumps
Syphilis
Tuberculosis
Valley fever (coccidioidomycosis)
Risk factors
Anyone can develop Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome after being exposed to an infection that causes it.
People with pets are more likely to get these kinds of infections. The most common types of pets that transmit these infections include:
Cats
Rabbits
Rodents (like hamsters, mice or rats)
Other types of pets and wild animals can transmit these infections, too.
Even if you have a pet that’s known to transmit infections, that doesn’t mean they have these diseases (or that you’re guaranteed to catch them). Make sure your pets get regular veterinary checkups and screenings to reduce the risk that they’re carrying an infection that can spread to humans.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome diagnosed?
A healthcare provider or eye care specialist will diagnose Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome with an
eye exam
. They’ll look at your eye and examine your other symptoms (like a fever or swollen lymph nodes).
Your provider might use a
blood test
to check for signs of infection in your blood.
Management and Treatment
How is Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome treated?
Your provider will treat the infection that caused Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome. Which treatment you’ll need depends on which infection you have. The symptoms will improve and eventually go away as the original infection gets better.
If the Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome is caused by a bacterial infection, your provider might prescribe
antibiotics
. Make sure to take the full dose as long as your provider instructs — even if you start feeling better in a few days. If you stop taking antibiotics early, there’s a chance the infection will return and be more severe than it was the first time.
It’s rare, but some people with Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome need surgery to remove infected tissue near their lymph nodes. Your healthcare provider will tell you what to expect.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome?
You should expect to make a full recovery from Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome. How long it takes depends on which infection causes it, but most people recover in a few weeks after starting treatment.
Your eye care specialist or healthcare provider will tell you how long it’ll take you to recover.
Prevention
How can I prevent Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome?
Washing your hands
often — especially after touching or holding animals — is the best way to prevent the infections that cause Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome.
Take your pets to the vet regularly to make sure they’re healthy and aren’t carrying any infections that can spread to you.
Avoid contact with wild animals like rabbits and squirrels. Check yourself and your pets for
ticks
after spending time outdoors.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit an eye care specialist or healthcare provider as soon as you experience new symptoms or notice redness and irritation in your eye. Lots of conditions cause symptoms similar to Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome, so it’s important to get any changes in your eyes examined right away.
Go to the emergency room if you experience any of the following symptoms:
Severe eye pain
Sudden vision loss
You can’t open or move your eye
Which questions should I ask my provider?
You might want to ask your provider:
Which infection caused Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome?
Will I need any tests?
Which treatments will I need?
How long will it take for me to recover?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome can be painful and annoying, but it’s not usually a serious threat to your eye or vision. It’s caused by infections that spread from animals to humans, so make sure you wash your hands after handling or playing with your pets — even if they’re healthy.
The most important step to recovering is treating the infection that’s causing your symptoms. Visit an eye care specialist or healthcare provider as soon as you feel sick or notice any changes in your eyes.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/18/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment