Hirsutism: What It Is, In Women, Causes, PCOS & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hirsutism
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hirsutism
Hirsutism is a condition that causes excess hair to grow on certain parts of your body. It mainly affects females. Hirsutism doesn’t have a known cause, but it’s a symptom of other conditions, including polycystic ovary syndrome. Treatment options include weight loss, medications and other hair removal options.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Hirsutism causes thick, dark hair to grow in areas that typically grow fine, light hair.
What is hirsutism?
Hirsutism is a common condition that causes excessive hair growth. It primarily affects
females
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You may develop coarse, dark hair growth on your upper lip, chin, chest, abdomen or back instead of the fine hair sometimes referred to as “
peach fuzz
” that commonly grows in those areas. Hirsutism can cause distress, but it’s treatable.
Who does hirsutism affect?
Hirsutism mainly affects females. It can affect males, but it’s difficult to tell the difference between hirsutism and typical thick, dark, long hair growth (terminal hair).
You’re more likely to have hirsutism if you have a family history of conditions that cause it, especially
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
and
congenital adrenal hyperplasia
. Obesity can also increase your chances of having hirsutism.
You’re also more likely to have hirsutism if you’re Mediterranean, Hispanic, South Asian or Middle Eastern.
Hirsutism rarely affects children. If it does, it’s typically a sign of
early puberty
.
How common is hirsutism?
Hirsutism affects 5% to 10% of women who are around child-bearing age. It affects over 40% of women.
How does hirsutism affect my body?
Hirsutism doesn’t affect your physical health. However, it can affect you psychosocially (how society and social groups affect your thoughts and emotions) and psychologically (how you think about yourself and your behavior). You may experience emotional
stress
,
anxiety
and
depression
.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hirsutism?
The main symptom of hirsutism is dark hair growth.
Another symptom of hirsutism is
virilization
. Virilization is a condition in which you develop the secondary sex characteristics of males. Virilization occurs when your
androgen
levels are high. Androgens are a group of sex hormones that help people enter puberty and mature physically. Males make more androgens than females.
Some of the secondary sex characteristics you may develop from virilization include:
Deeper voice
Decreased breast size
Increased muscle development
Clitoris enlargement (clitoromegaly)
Increased sex drive
Acne
What does hirsutism look like?
Hirsutism causes thick, coarse, dark hair to grow on parts of your body that would commonly grow as fine, thin hair. For example, hair may grow thicker and coarser on your face, chest, back, lower abdomen, upper arms or lower legs.
What is the cause of hirsutism in women?
In many cases, hirsutism doesn’t have a known cause. But several conditions cause hirsutism, including:
The natural production of androgens
. All people have androgens, but males make more of them. If a female has high androgen levels or their hair follicles are more sensitive to androgens, they may develop hirsutism.
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)
. PCOS is a common hormonal condition that causes females to produce too many androgens. Other symptoms of PCOS include acne, abnormal menstruation, diabetes, weight gain and fertility problems.
Postmenopause
. The hormonal changes that take place in your body after menopause may lead to increased facial hair, including a mustache or whiskers.
Cushing’s syndrome
. Cushing’s syndrome happens when your body has too much of the hormone cortisol, which can impact the set of organs that affect your hair, skin, nails, glands and nerves (
integumentary system
). Other symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome may include rapid weight gain in your face, wounds that heal poorly, high blood pressure (hypertension) and diabetes.
Other conditions
. If hirsutism occurs suddenly along with symptoms like a deeper voice, acne or increased muscle development, you may have a more serious condition. More serious conditions may include an adrenal gland disorder or an ovary disorder, such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia or a
tumor
on your adrenal glands or ovaries that produce androgen.
Medications
. Some medications can cause hirsutism, including
anabolic steroids
,
testosterone
, cyclosporine (Sandimmune®),
minoxidil
(Rogaine®), danazol (Danocrine®) and phenytoin (Dilantin®).
Does hirsutism always mean PCOS?
PCOS isn’t the only cause of hirsutism. However, 70% to 80% of all people with PCOS develop hirsutism.
Is hirsutism contagious?
No, hirsutism isn’t contagious.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hirsutism diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will conduct a physical examination to determine the extent of the uncommon hair growth. They’ll also note any other physical signs that may accompany the hair growth, such as acne.
Once your healthcare provider has diagnosed hirsutism, they may use the Ferriman-Gallwey scale to grade its severity. The Ferriman-Gallwey scale examines nine areas of your body: your upper lip, chin, chest, upper abdomen, lower abdomen, upper arms, thighs, upper back and lower back/butt (buttocks).
These areas receive a 0-4 score based on hair growth. A low number means your hirsutism is mild, and a high number means your hirsutism is more severe.
After examining the areas, your healthcare provider will add the scores together. If you’re Black or white, a total score less than 8 is common. If you’re Mediterranean, Hispanic or Middle Eastern, a total score less than 9 or 10 is common. If you’re Asian, a total score less than 2 is common.
What tests will be done to diagnose hirsutism?
If you have hirsutism, your healthcare provider may perform a variety of tests, including:
Blood tests to check your hormone levels
Ultrasound
to examine your ovaries and uterus
X-rays
to evaluate your ovaries and adrenal glands to rule out other conditions
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What are the treatment options for hirsutism?
Yes, hirsutism is treatable. Treatments include:
Weight loss
Weight loss
is often the first step in treating hirsutism. Losing even 5% of your body weight can lower your androgen levels and stop excessive hair growth.
Medications
Birth control pills
(oral contraceptives)
: Birth control pills are the most common medication used to treat hirsutism. They lower androgen levels, regulate your
menstrual cycle
and prevent pregnancy. Side effects may include breast tenderness or swelling, headaches, irritability or moodiness, nausea and spotting between periods (
abnormal menstruation
).
Androgen-suppressing medications
: These medications, including
spironolactone
(Aldactone®), finasteride (Proscar®) and flutamide (Eulexin®), can effectively treat mild cases of hirsutism by lowering the amount of androgens your body produces. Side effects of these medications may include dry skin, heartburn, spotting between periods, dizziness, fatigue and liver damage.
Low-dose
steroid
medications
: If overactive adrenal glands cause your hirsutism, your healthcare provider may prescribe low-dose steroid medications. Your adrenal glands are small glands just above each kidney. They produce sex hormones, including adrenaline and cortisol. Side effects may include increased appetite, weight gain, changes in mood and blurred vision.
Insulin-lowering medications
: These medications, including
metformin
(Glucophage®) and thiazolidinediones like
pioglitazone
(Actos®), reduce blood levels of insulin and androgens. These medications are controversial and shouldn’t be a first-line treatment because of their significant side effects. Side effects of these medications may include allergic reactions, breathing problems, slow or irregular heartbeat, blood in your pee (urine), and signs and symptoms of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia).
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists
: These substances decrease androgen production in your ovaries. This therapy requires injections and can be expensive, and it doesn’t offer any more benefits than birth control pills. Side effects may include hot flashes, weight gain, fluid retention and a decreased libido (hypogonadism).
Eflornithine skin cream
: Eflornithine skin cream (Vaniqa®) is a topical product that you rub on your affected areas. It doesn’t remove hair, but it slows down how fast your hair grows. It may take six to eight weeks to see noticeable results. Once you stop using the cream, your hair starts to grow at the same rate as before you started using the cream. Side effects may include allergic reaction, hair bumps, discoloration (red, purple or brown skin) and stinging or burning.
Advertisement
Hair removal options
Electrolysis
: This technique uses a tiny needle and a mild electrical zap to destroy your hair roots one by one. Each hair follicle requires treatment, so it may not be practical to use electrolysis over a large area of your body. Side effects are rare, but they may include slight discoloration (red, purple or brown skin), temporary dark spots and a slight tingling sensation.
Laser hair removal
: In this technique, heat from a laser destroys cells that have a lot of pigment (color). Dark hair has a lot of pigment, so it absorbs the most heat. Hair transfers heat to the hair follicles and destroys them, so hair can’t grow. Side effects may include blisters, burns, scars, dark areas of skin (
hyperpigmentation
) and light areas of skin (
hypopigmentation
).
Home remedies
Shaving
: This is the most common method of hair removal. It’s simple and safe, but you must shave regularly to prevent stubble. Side effects of shaving may include cuts and
ingrown hairs
.
Bleaching
: Bleaching products lighten unwanted hair. Be aware that some bleaching products can cause skin irritation if they remain on your skin for too long.
Waxing and plucking (tweezing)
: Waxing or using tweezers to remove hair from the root is effective but painful. Side effects may include skin irritation and ingrown hairs.
Advertisement
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
It depends on the severity of your hirsutism and your treatment.
Medications may take weeks or months before you see noticeable results.
You may need to schedule electrolysis appointments every week or every other week. The appointments can last for up to a year and a half. For laser hair removal, you’ll likely need six to eight treatments, and appointments are about six to eight weeks apart.
Shaving immediately cuts your hairs down, but it doesn’t remove the roots. You may have stubble in as little as a few hours. Waxing and tweezing your hair removes the roots. The results should last from three to six weeks. The effects of bleaching may last up to a month.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have hirsutism?
Hirsutism requires ongoing treatment. None of the treatments make the hair go away completely, but they help make your hair grow more slowly and decrease the amount of unwanted hair. Most people are happy with their results once they find an effective treatment regimen that works for them. Once you find an effective treatment, you may use it long term.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk of developing hirsutism?
Reducing your risk of developing hirsutism depends on its cause.
If you have PCOS, losing weight through healthy eating and regular exercise may help reduce your risk.
If you’re taking any medications that may cause hirsutism, talk to your healthcare provider about how to reduce your risk.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
It’s a good idea to see your healthcare provider as soon as you notice unusual hair growth. Hirsutism may be a symptom of PCOS, Cushing’s syndrome or other conditions.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
How can you tell that I have hirsutism?
If I don’t have hirsutism, what’s causing my hair growth?
What medications or treatments do you recommend?
What’s the complete list of side effects for the medications and treatments?
Should I see a
dermatologist
?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hirsutism is a common condition that mainly affects women. It doesn’t cause any pain, but it may be a symptom of another condition. Unwanted hair can also make you feel embarrassed, which can affect your mental health.
It’s a good idea to reach out to your healthcare provider as soon as you notice signs of hirsutism, especially if it causes stress, anxiety or depression. Medications and treatments are available to limit your unwanted hair growth.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/08/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment