Urinary Incontinence: Causes, Leakage, Types & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Urinary Incontinence
Advertisement
Advertisement
Urinary Incontinence
The experience of uncontrollably leaking pee can be embarrassing for many people. Urinary incontinence is a common condition that causes you to lose bladder control. There are many different types with different causes that require unique treatment. A healthcare provider can determine the cause and recommend the right treatment for you.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Incontinence?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Is Incontinence?
There are different types of urinary incontinence, ranging from leaking after activities to total loss of bladder control.
Urinary incontinence is when you lose control of your
bladder
and leak pee. It’s a condition that can have a negative effect on your life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
urinary system
consists of many different organs. These organs work together to filter, store and remove waste from your body as pee (
urine
). When your urinary system works as expected, you usually have time to get to a bathroom to pee, and you don’t leak pee. Urinary incontinence occurs when these parts don’t operate as they should. This can happen for many different reasons throughout your life.
Many people think incontinence is a normal part of getting older, and you can’t do anything to stop it. It’s true that your risk of incontinence increases as you get older. But it can happen to anyone, regardless of age. And treatments are available to help you manage it. Incontinence doesn’t have to disrupt your life or keep you from being active.
Urinary incontinence is very common. About 62% of
females
age 20 and older have some type of urinary incontinence. In males, a little less than 14% have incontinence.
What are the different types of incontinence?
There are many different types of incontinence. They have different causes, characteristics and triggers. Knowing the type of incontinence is an important part of your diagnosis and treatment plan.
Types of incontinence include:
Urge incontinence
. Urge incontinence causes an intense need to pee right away. Many times, it happens too quickly for you to make it to a toilet, and you leak pee.
Overactive bladder
is a common cause of urge incontinence.
Stress incontinence
. Stress incontinence is when you leak pee during certain activities, such as laughing, coughing, sneezing, running, jumping or lifting heavy objects.
Overflow incontinence
. Overflow incontinence is when your bladder doesn’t completely empty each time you pee. You’re more likely to have overflow incontinence if you have an enlarged prostate (
benign prostatic hyperplasia
) or other conditions like
stroke
or
diabetes
.
Mixed incontinence
. Mixed incontinence is when you have a combination of several conditions that all lead to bladder leakage problems. For example, you may have stress incontinence and an overactive bladder. If you have mixed incontinence, pay attention to what you’re doing when you leak. Providers can help you figure out what type of incontinence you have and talk to you about ways to manage it. A good first step is figuring out what triggers it.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of incontinence?
The primary symptom of incontinence is leaking pee before you can make it to the bathroom or during activities like sneezing, coughing, laughing or exercising. If you have incontinence, you might leak a lot of pee or a small amount. It could be a constant drip or an occasional leak. Your symptoms usually depend on the type of incontinence you have. But they may include:
Peeing more than eight times a day (
frequent urination
)
Needing to use the bathroom but only a little amount comes out each time
Waking up to pee more than twice (
nocturia
)
Wetting the bed (
enuresis
)
Leaking pee during activities like exercise, laughing, coughing, sneezing, bending over or having sexual intercourse
Why am I not able to hold my pee?
There are many different reasons why you might not be able to hold your pee. These may vary depending on if you’re female or male. Some causes are temporary and go away with treatment. Other causes may be chronic medical conditions. Even with treatment, chronic conditions may not go away, and you may have to manage incontinence over time as a symptom of your condition.
Temporary or short-term causes of incontinence may include:
Urinary tract infections
(UTIs)
Pregnancy
or after delivery
Certain medications, including water pills (
diuretics
) and
antidepressants
Certain beverages, like coffee and alcohol
Constipation
Chronic causes of incontinence may include:
Overactive bladder
Stroke
Diabetes
Menopause
Multiple sclerosis
(MS)
Parkinson’s disease
Enlarged prostate
Prostate surgery (
prostatectomy
)
Why does pregnancy cause incontinence?
Pregnancy may cause incontinence for the following reasons:
Pressure against your bladder
. During pregnancy, your body goes through a lot of changes. A few things can happen as a fetus grows and your
uterus
stretches. The fetus may squish against your bladder, so you have to pee more than usual. This can become even more challenging toward the end of pregnancy when the fetus is at its largest.
Weak pelvic floor muscles
. Your pelvic floor muscles may get weaker during pregnancy and after delivery. These muscles support all the organs in your pelvis. As your uterus grows during pregnancy or after delivery, the muscles can stretch and weaken.
Who does incontinence affect?
Anyone can get incontinence. But it’s more common in certain groups of people and at certain times in your life. In females, incontinence often relates to:
Pregnancy
Childbirth
Menopause
Each of these can cause your pelvic floor muscles to weaken over time and make changes to your bladder that might lead to incontinence.
Am I at a higher risk of incontinence at an older age?
Yes, you’re at a higher risk of incontinence as you get older — usually over the age of 50. Your body constantly changes throughout your life.
Advertisement
Your risk for developing incontinence as you age might be higher if you:
Have a chronic health condition
Have given birth
Are in
postmenopause
Have an enlarged prostate
Had prostate surgery
It’s important to talk to a healthcare provider about your incontinence risks, including ways you can manage incontinence without it interfering with your daily life.
Is incontinence more common in women?
Yes, incontinence is more common in females. Pregnancy, childbirth and menopause can all lead to bladder control problems.
Pregnancy can be a short-term cause of incontinence. But bladder control issues usually get better after childbirth. Some people have experience after delivery (
postpartum
) because childbirth strains and weakens your pelvic floor muscles.
Menopause also causes a lot of changes in your body. Your
hormones
, especially
estrogen
, change during menopause, which can affect how you can control your bladder.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is incontinence diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can diagnose incontinence by reviewing your symptoms and medical history and performing a
physical exam
. They may ask you questions, such as:
How often do you pee?
Do you leak pee between trips to the toilet?
How often do you leak pee?
How much pee do you leak each time?
When did you first notice you were leaking pee?
What medications are you currently taking or have you taken in the past?
Are you pregnant or have you ever been pregnant?
How many times have you given birth?
Advertisement
These questions help a provider determine a pattern in your leakage, which helps them diagnose the type of incontinence. They may also perform or order tests to help them confirm the incontinence.
What tests will be done to diagnose urinary incontinence?
A healthcare provider may order the following tests to help diagnose incontinence:
Pelvic exam
. A pelvic exam can help determine your pelvic muscle strength and make sure there are no other health problems that could cause incontinence.
Digital rectal exam
. A digital rectal exam can help a provider diagnose an enlarged prostate.
Pee test (
urinalysis
)
. You’ll provide a pee sample, and a provider will examine it for signs of infection or blood in your pee (
hematuria
).
Bladder
ultrasound
. An ultrasound is a painless test that allows a look at your bladder and checks how well you can empty pee.
Stress test
. If you notice that you leak during certain activities, like coughing, running or jumping, a provider may ask you to repeat the actions to see if you leak.
Cystoscopy
. A provider will insert a thin tube with a camera at the end (cystoscope) into your
urethra
and guide it up to your bladder to examine your urinary system. Most people don’t need a cystoscopy to check for incontinence.
Urodynamic tests
. This is a series of tests that check how much pee your bladder can hold, and how well you can hold pee and then empty your bladder.
Pad test
. A provider may give you a special pad to wear in your underwear, which will catch any pee that you may leak. At the end of the test, they’ll check the pad to see how much pee it contains.
Advertisement
A provider may also recommend that you keep track of any bladder leaks in a journal (bladder diary) for a few days. They may be able to identify a pattern with this information and diagnose a specific type of incontinence. Be sure to write down:
How often you pee
How much you’re able to pee each time
If you leak between trips to the bathroom
Any activities you’re doing when you leak
Don’t forget to bring your bladder diary with you to your appointment.
Management and Treatment
How do you fix urinary incontinence?
It depends. A healthcare provider must diagnose the type of continence. They’ll also talk to you about the available treatments and help you choose the one you’re most comfortable with.
The main types of urinary incontinence treatments are:
Lifestyle changes
Physical therapy
Medications
Surgery or other procedures
Each option has pros and cons that a provider will go over with you.
Medications to treat incontinence
There are many urinary incontinence medications that can reduce leakage. Some drugs stabilize muscle contractions that cause an overactive bladder. Others relax muscles to allow your bladder to empty completely. If you’re in menopause, local
hormone treatment
, like vaginal estrogen cream, can replace the estrogen your body no longer makes and restore bladder function.
Common incontinence medications include:
Oxybutynin
(Ditropan®), oxybutynin XL (Ditropan XL®) and oxybutynin TDDS (Oxytrol®)
Tolterodine
(Detrol®)
Solifenacin
(VESIcare®)
Fesoterodine
(Toviaz®)
Darifenacin
(Enablex®)
Trospium
(Sanctura®)
Mirabegron
(Myrbetriq®)
Vibegron
(Gemtesa®)
Providers may start you on a low dose of medications and then increase it slowly. This helps reduce your risk of side effects and keeps track of how well the medication works.
Lifestyle changes to treat incontinence
Sometimes, changes to your everyday life can help treat incontinence without additional treatments. These changes may not be able to treat every type of incontinence. Talk to a healthcare provider before you start any of these changes.
Common lifestyle changes may include:
Timed voiding
. Pee according to a schedule instead of whenever you feel the urge to go.
Pee before physical activities
. Peeing before you start an activity can help avoid leaks.
Avoid lifting heavy objects
. Ask for help if you need to move something heavy or large.
Kegel exercises
. Kegel exercises help strengthen your pelvic floor muscles.
Avoid drinking lots of fluids, including caffeine, before starting an activity
. Avoid drinking before bed if you have frequent urination or leak at night.
Wear absorbent urinary pads or underwear
. The products catch any leaked pee. You can usually wear them under your clothes without anyone noticing.
Bladder retraining
. Bladder training helps you stretch out the time between each trip to the bathroom.
Maintain a healthy weight for you
. Losing weight in your abdominal area can help reduce pressure on your bladder and can improve your bladder health.
Vaginal insert
. This is an over-the-counter device that you insert into your
vagina
. It can compress your urethra and help reduce stress incontinence.
Procedures and surgeries to treat incontinence
A provider may suggest surgery to treat your incontinence. These may include:
Bulking agents
. A provider will inject a water-based substance into the lining of your urethra to help increase the size of your urethral lining.
Botulinum toxin
(Botox®) injections
. Botox helps treat urge incontinence by relaxing your bladder muscle. This isn’t a permanent treatment. You’ll need additional injections over time.
Neuromodulation devices
. These devices stimulate
nerves
to your bladder to improve control.
Sling procedures
. A provider uses a human-made (synthetic), mesh-like surgical tape or some of your own body tissue to support your urethra.
Artificial urinary sphincter
. Providers may recommend an artificial urinary sphincter to people who have stress incontinence, usually after surgery to treat
prostate cancer
. It’s an inflatable medical device that holds your pee until you’re ready to use the bathroom.
Does incontinence ever go away?
It depends on what type of incontinence you have. Sometimes, incontinence will go away without treatment once you address the cause, such as a UTI, certain medication or constipation.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Will I have incontinence for my entire life?
Sometimes, urinary incontinence is a short-term issue that goes away once the cause ends, such as a UTI. But incontinence also has long-term causes. You may have incontinence for a long time, maybe even the rest of your life, if you have a chronic condition, such as diabetes or multiple sclerosis. In these cases, it’s important to talk to a healthcare provider. They can help you manage your incontinence so it doesn’t interfere with your life.
Prevention
Can incontinence be prevented?
You can’t prevent all causes of the different types of incontinence. Different things in life can lead to it. But you can lower your risk by keeping your pelvic floor muscles strong with Kegels and maintaining a healthy body weight for you.
Living With
How do you cope with incontinence?
For many people, it’s helpful to talk to a therapist (counselor) or
psychologist
if incontinence causes
stress
,
depression
or
anxiety
. They can help you manage your mental health or prescribe medications.
When should I see a healthcare provider about incontinence?
Talk to a healthcare provider when you first notice leakage or changes to your bathroom habits. They can help determine the cause and type of incontinence and help treat or manage it.
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
What type of incontinence do I have?
What treatment do you recommend?
What are the side effects of urinary incontinence medications?
What are the side effects of procedures or surgeries that treat incontinence?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
For many people, talking about their bathroom habits is embarrassing. Urinary incontinence can make you feel self-conscious or prevent you from enjoying your everyday activities because you’re worried you may leak or can’t get to a bathroom on time when the urge strikes. But a healthcare provider can help figure out the cause of your bladder control issues and help make it better. You don’t need to deal with it alone.
Talk to a provider about the best ways to treat incontinence so you don’t have to worry about leakage.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
It can be stressful (and painful) to have bladder disorders, like urinary incontinence or cystitis. But the urology providers at Cleveland Clinic are here for you.
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment