Atrioventricular (AV) Node Ablation
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
AV Node Ablation
Advertisement
Advertisement
AV Node Ablation
AV node ablation is a minimally invasive treatment for atrial fibrillation and other issues in your heart’s upper chambers. It’s a permanent procedure that can’t be reversed, but it has a high success rate and quick recovery. People who have AV node ablation will always need pacemakers.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
AV node ablation is a procedure to burn your AV node with a catheter to treat certain abnormal heart rhythms.
What is AV node ablation?
Atrioventricular (AV) node
ablation
is a way to treat
atrial fibrillation
by damaging part of your heart’s conduction system with a catheter. This minimally invasive treatment uses heat or cold energy to damage your AV node on purpose. Doing this can prevent abnormal heartbeats.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
After an AV node ablation, you need a
permanent pacemaker
to take over the job of sending electrical signals to tell your heart to beat. The intent is to get your heart beating more in sync, which may improve your symptoms and your heart’s strength. Out-of-sync contraction of your atria can lead to weakness in your lower chambers and your whole heart.
The AV node is a small area of tissue that sends
heartbeat signals
. These signals go from your heart’s upper chambers (atria) to your lower
chambers
(ventricles).
AV node ablation is serious because it’s not reversible. It’s permanent. That’s why people who have it will need pacemakers for the rest of their lives.
What does this procedure treat?
An AV node ablation procedure treats
abnormal heart rhythms
that happen in your heart’s upper chambers. Besides atrial fibrillation, this includes
atrial flutter
and other
SVTs
. A healthcare provider may recommend AV node ablation when AFib is hard to manage.
AV node ablation may be an option for you if:
All the other treatments haven’t worked
You already have a pacemaker
You can’t take medicines to manage an abnormal heart rhythm due to side effects
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for AV node ablation?
If you don’t already have one, you’ll need a permanent pacemaker. You may get it several weeks before your atrioventricular node ablation. Or you may get one in the same procedure or after AV node ablation.
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider will do an
EP study
. This allows them to map your heart’s electrical signals and find the exact location of your AV node.
What happens during an AV node ablation procedure?
The steps of AV node ablation include:
Placing a small IV in your arm and giving you sedatives to make you sleep
Numbing an area on your arm, groin or neck
Placing tiny catheters (long, thin tubes) into the veins in your arm, groin or neck
Monitoring your vital signs and heart rhythm
Using X-ray, ultrasound guidance and electrical mapping to move the catheters to your AV node
Using a special catheter tip that applies heat or cold energy to burn the AV node
The procedure can take less than an hour to several hours.
What are the potential benefits and risks of AV node ablation?
An atrioventricular node ablation has multiple benefits, like:
An improved heart rhythm without drugs to control it (you may need to keep taking
blood thinners
, though)
Improved symptoms and quality of life
Ability to get more physical activity
Fewer hospital stays and emergency visits for
heart failure
A good safety record
Complications are rare, but may include:
Pericardial effusion
Abnormal heart rhythms of a different type
Sudden death
Decreased function of your left ventricle (which an extra lead in a
special pacemaker
can fix)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after AV node ablation?
After atrioventricular node ablation, your healthcare provider will remove the catheters. They’ll press (about 15 minutes) on the areas where catheters went into your skin. You’ll need to lie on your back for a few hours.
What is the recovery time?
The recovery time for an AV node ablation procedure is short. You may spend one night in the hospital and go home the next day.
You’ll probably feel tired for a couple of days after your atrioventricular node ablation. You may also feel sore. After a few days, you’ll be able to go back to doing the things you normally do.
One month after you get a pacemaker, you’ll need a follow-up visit with your provider. After that, they’ll want to see you once or twice a year.
What is the success rate of atrioventricular node ablation?
The
success rate
of AV node ablation is nearly 100%.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you have signs of infection (even months after getting your pacemaker). These include: fever, chills or pain around your pacemaker.
Tell your provider if you think your pacemaker isn’t working after AV node ablation. Signs of a failing pacemaker include:
Dizziness
Fainting
Shortness of breath
Additional Common Questions
Are there alternatives to AV node ablation?
Pulmonary vein isolation
(PVI) is a similar treatment that you may get instead of an AVN ablation. PVI creates scar tissue to disrupt electrical signals that start in your pulmonary veins and cause AFib.
You may not need a pacemaker after PVI.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Deciding to have AV node ablation may not be easy because it’s not reversible. And some people aren’t comfortable with needing a pacemaker for the rest of their lives. Still, the success rate for this procedure is high. Talk with your healthcare provider about your choices and any questions you may have. Once you have the information you need, you can make an informed decision that makes sense for your situation.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment