Wallenberg Syndrome: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Wallenberg Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Wallenberg Syndrome
Wallenberg syndrome is a neurological disorder that happens when something slows or stops blood flow to your brainstem. It causes symptoms like difficulty swallowing, balance issues and vision changes. Early treatment is crucial for the best outcome and can reduce your risk of complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is Wallenberg syndrome?
Wallenberg syndrome is a neurological disorder that happens after an event that affects how blood flows to your brainstem, like a
stroke
or
blood clot
. It leads to symptoms like difficulty swallowing, dizziness and involuntary eye movements. It may make you feel as if everything you see is tilted. This can affect your balance and coordination.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You may hear your healthcare provider refer to Wallenberg syndrome as lateral medullary syndrome or posterior inferior cerebellar artery syndrome, as these are areas where damage can occur.
Treating the cause of Wallenberg syndrome quickly leads to the best outcome and reduces your risk of complications.
How common is Wallenberg syndrome?
Wallenberg syndrome is the most common condition that happens after a posterior
ischemic stroke
.
One study
estimates that there are more than 60,000 new cases of Wallenberg syndrome diagnosed each year in the United States.
Symptoms and Causes
Some common symptoms of Wallenberg syndrome that can happen after a brainstem stroke.
What are the symptoms of Wallenberg syndrome?
Some of the most common symptoms of Wallenberg syndrome include:
Difficulty swallowing
Hoarse voice
Hiccups
Loss of sense of taste
Fast, involuntary eye movements (
nystagmus
)
Double vision
Issues with
balance
and
coordination
Dizziness
and
vertigo
Pain or
numbness
Symptoms may affect only one side of your body. For example, you could lose the feeling of pain or temperature on one side of your face but not the other.
Your symptoms may get worse (progress) over a couple of hours to days. Symptoms vary based on where damage within your brain or brainstem occurred.
What causes Wallenberg syndrome?
A
brainstem
stroke causes Wallenberg syndrome. This can happen after:
Damage to the lateral part (side) of your
medulla oblongata
Blood flow blockages through the posterior inferior cerebellar
artery
(PICA) to your
cerebellum
or the
vertebral artery
in your brainstem
Advertisement
Other less common causes of Wallenberg syndrome include:
Vertebral artery dissection
Arteriovenous malformations
Head injury
Multiple sclerosis
What are the risk factors for Wallenberg syndrome?
You’re more at risk of Wallenberg syndrome if you:
Smoke
or use tobacco products
Have
hypertension
Have
diabetes
Less common conditions that may be a risk factor for Wallenberg syndrome include
connective tissue conditions
like:
Marfan syndrome
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome
Fibromuscular dysplasia
What are the complications of Wallenberg syndrome?
You may experience permanent changes after a post-stroke condition like Wallenberg syndrome, including:
Difficulty walking
Chronic pain
Epilepsy
Learning disabilities
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Wallenberg syndrome diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose Wallenberg syndrome after
a physical exam
,
neurological exam
and testing.
Your provider will look for symptoms that affect only one side of your body to pinpoint where there might be damage. For example, you may lose your sense of taste on the right side of your tongue. This tells your provider that you may have damage to the left side of your brainstem. Your brain works like a mirror, so the right side of your brain regulates the left side of your body and vice versa.
To confirm a diagnosis, your provider will offer testing, which may include:
An
MRI
An
angiogram
Your provider may order other tests, like
blood tests
or an
electrocardiogram
, to rule out other conditions with similar symptoms.
Management and Treatment
How is Wallenberg syndrome treated?
Treatment for Wallenberg syndrome first focuses on removing the obstruction or blockage of blood supply to your brainstem. In the case of a stroke, your provider will quickly offer one or a combination of the following:
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) medication given as an IV (injected into a vein in your arm)
An
anticoagulant
or blood-thinning medicine
A procedure to open up the blocked artery (
thrombectomy
)
After treating the blockage, your provider will manage symptoms and/or complications. This may include:
Inserting and using a
feeding tube
(if swallowing is difficult)
Wearing special lenses (prisms) for visual symptoms
Speech therapy
Physical therapy
Occupational therapy
What medications treat Wallenberg syndrome?
If you experience chronic (long-term) pain with Wallenberg syndrome, your healthcare provider might recommend taking
gabapentin
. This is an
anti-seizure medication
that may help treat this complication.
Talk to your healthcare provider about any medications or supplements you currently take before starting a new medication. They’ll discuss the possible side effects with you so you can make an informed decision about your health.
Is there a cure for Wallenberg syndrome?
There isn’t a cure available for Wallenberg syndrome at this time. With treatment, you can reduce your risk of complications, especially when diagnosed and treated at the first sign of a stroke.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for Wallenberg syndrome?
Your healthcare provider will give you the most accurate information about your outlook. It can vary from person to person, depending on where the damage affects your brainstem and how severe it is.
You may notice your symptoms reduce over several weeks to months and you start to feel more like yourself before the stroke. But a stroke can leave permanent damage and could cause neurological changes that affect your day-to-day functioning. Treatment options are available to help you cope and adapt after a stroke.
Prevention
Can Wallenberg syndrome be prevented?
You can’t prevent all cases of Wallenberg syndrome, but you can reduce your risk by:
Quitting smoking or not using tobacco products.
Managing any underlying health conditions.
Eating well and getting regular physical activity.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Call 911 or your local emergency services number right away if you or a loved one show signs of a stroke like:
Difficulty speaking or swallowing
Problems with balance and coordination
One-sided sensation changes like numbness or weakness
Vertigo and dizziness
Vision changes
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
What caused Wallenberg syndrome?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
Are there side effects of the treatment?
Will there be long-term complications?
What’s my prognosis?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Wallenberg syndrome affects each person differently because the damage of a stroke is unpredictable. This can be a frightening experience for both you and your loved ones. While you might experience a few symptoms that gradually reduce over a few months, sometimes, complications happen. These can change how you feel and function on a daily basis.
Advertisement
It’s important that you contact emergency services right away if you notice signs of a stroke. Your healthcare provider will quickly diagnose and treat Wallenberg syndrome and its cause to prevent damage.
If you have any concerns about your condition, your healthcare provider will have the most accurate and up-to-date information to help you in managing your symptoms.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
After a stroke, it’s essential to get treated right away. Cleveland Clinic’s stroke care specialists can help you manage recovery and improve your quality of life.
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/12/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment