Airway Obstruction: Causes, Signs & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Airway Obstruction
Advertisement
Advertisement
Airway Obstruction
Airway obstruction is a blockage of airflow to your lungs. It makes it hard to breathe, speak and swallow. Treatment depends on the cause — providers may force the blockage out, surgically remove it or reduce swelling with medications. Airway obstruction is an emergency. Call 911 or get immediate medical attention if you can’t breathe or swallow.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Airway Obstruction?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
What Is Airway Obstruction?
Airway obstruction is anything that blocks the flow of air into and out of your lungs. This could be anything from swelling and
mucus
to abnormal growths or foreign objects blocking your airways.
Airway obstruction can come on over time or only happen under certain circumstances. You might not notice symptoms until you’re having difficulty breathing. It can also happen all at once, like if something is stuck in your
windpipe
or if you’re having an allergic reaction.
Call 911 (or your emergency service number) or get emergency medical attention if you’re having trouble breathing or swallowing.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What are the types of airway obstruction?
Obstructions can happen in your upper or lower airways. The three main types of airway obstruction include:
Foreign body obstruction
: This could be things like food or a small household item stuck in your airways.
Dynamic obstruction
: This is a type of blockage caused by conditions that might come and go at different times, like swelling (inflammation) from chronic lung disease.
Static obstruction
: This means something is blocking your airway that won’t get better on its own. Examples include tumors or differences in your airways that you’re born with.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of airway obstruction?
Airway obstruction symptoms include:
Difficulty breathing or speaking
Noises when you breathe, like
wheezing
or whistling (
stridor
)
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
Skin color changes — like bluish skin, lips or fingernails if you have lighter skin, or gray or white lips and gums if you have darker skin (
cyanosis
)
Behavior changes, like agitation or confusion
Daytime sleepiness
What causes airway obstruction?
Body tissue, objects and structural changes can block your airway and make it hard to breathe. Causes of airway blockages can include:
Foreign objects
: Food or foreign objects (like small toys or household items) can get stuck in your airways — or get stuck in your esophagus and push into your windpipe.
Abnormal growths
: Cancerous tumors, noncancerous growths and
granulomas
can block your airways from the inside or push into them from the outside.
Trauma
: Injuries, burns and medical procedures (like
intubation
) can damage your airways and narrow them.
Swelling and inflammation
: Allergic reactions and infections can cause your airways to swell.
Obstructive airway conditions
: These include
COPD
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) and
asthma
.
Structural or functional differences
: Differences in your airways or how they work can block your airways. Examples include
bronchomalacia
and
vocal cord paralysis
.
Thick mucus
: Conditions like
cystic fibrosis
can create thick
mucus
that gets stuck in your airways.
Advertisement
What are the risk factors for airway obstruction?
Anything that makes it easier for food or other substances to go down the wrong way (
aspiration
) can put you at a higher risk for airway obstruction. These include medications that make you calm or sleepy, airway differences and nervous system disorders. Any condition that can cause swelling or growths can also put you at a higher risk.
What are the complications of airway obstruction?
Airway obstruction can be dangerous because it can block your ability to breathe. A person can die if they go too long without oxygen.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is airway obstruction diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose airway obstruction based on your symptoms and a physical exam. They may also use tests and imaging to determine the cause. These include:
Bronchoscopy
to look inside your airways and remove obstructions
Pulmonary function tests
to measure how well you’re breathing
Chest X-rays
and
CT scans
to get images of the inside of your airways
Management and Treatment
How is airway obstruction treated?
Treatment for airway obstruction depends on the cause. A  bronchoscopy can help with diagnosis and treatment, but additional treatments include:
Heimlich maneuver
: This can force food or a foreign object out of your throat or airways.
Surgery
: This removes a blockage.
Intubation
: A provider may need to open your airways with a tube that goes down your throat and into your windpipe. Providers usually use a
ventilator
to breathe for you when you’re intubated.
Tracheostomy
(trach)
: A tracheostomy creates an opening in your airways so you can breathe. This can be temporary or permanent.
Epinephrine
: This treats swelling from
anaphylaxis
.
Corticosteroids
or
bronchodilators
: These medications reduce inflammation.
You may need ongoing treatments for health conditions that can lead to airway obstruction, such as:
Medications that fight infections
: Antivirals, antibiotics and antifungals are good examples.
Medications that block inflammation
: These include antihistamines and leukotriene modifiers.
Inhalers
: Your provider might recommend a daily inhaled bronchodilator and/or steroid. You might also have a fast-acting rescue inhaler for when you need immediate relief.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you notice symptoms of airway obstruction. These might include feeling short of breath more easily or having daytime sleepiness disrupt your day (despite enough sleep).
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room, call 911 (or your local emergency service number) or get help from someone nearby right away if you suddenly can’t breathe or swallow.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Prevention
Can airway obstruction be prevented?
The best way to reduce your risk of airway obstructions is to manage any ongoing health conditions that can cause them. You should also always chew your food well and eat and drink while sitting up. Never let kids put toys with small parts in their mouths. And follow their healthcare providers’ recommendations for what kind of foods are safe to eat.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Airway obstruction can be fatal if not treated right away. If you can’t breathe, get the attention of someone nearby or call 911 (or your local emergency number). Even if you’re not experiencing an emergency, talk to your provider if something about your breathing or swallowing feels off. Many causes of airway obstruction are treatable.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment