Single-Port Surgery: Purpose, Procedure, Risks & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Single-Port Surgery
Advertisement
Advertisement
Single-Port Surgery
Single-port surgery is a procedure in which a surgeon makes one small cut in your abdomen. Surgeons use this minimally invasive approach in many procedures that involve different organ systems. A surgeon has less freedom to move. But you should have less pain and a faster recovery period.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Prostate Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Single-port surgery setup. The single-port robot is connected using one entry.
What is single-port surgery?
Single-port surgery is a form of
minimally invasive surgery
. Surgeons perform surgery through a single cut (incision) in your
skin
, such as your abdomen. But the location may vary depending on the type of surgical procedure you need. A port is a device that surgeons insert through the incision. Surgeons place instruments in and perform surgery through the port.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Surgeons in many specialties conduct single-port surgery. But
urologists
commonly perform single-port abdominal surgery. Urologists specialize in diseases and conditions that affect your
urinary system
and the
male
and
female reproductive systems
.
Healthcare providers sometimes use the terms SP surgery or single-port robotic surgery.
What is single-port robotic surgery?
Single-port
robotic surgery
uses specialized technology (a “surgical robot”) to help surgeons perform procedures through one small incision. The robot allows surgeons to make small, delicate movements and magnify areas with a camera.
Surgeons first used a dedicated single-port robotic surgery platform in a clinical setting in September 2018. It provides excellent results, with faster recovery and increased patient satisfaction.
What is the difference between surgical approaches?
There are different approaches to surgery. Your surgeon will recommend an approach that they believe is best for you, according to their experience, the reason you need surgery and your overall health.
Open surgery
In traditional open surgery, a surgeon creates one large incision. This approach involves cutting more of your tissues. Traditional open surgery usually causes more pain and has a slower recovery.
Minimally invasive surgery
In minimally invasive surgery (MIS), a surgeon makes one or more smaller incisions. In most cases, MIS results in faster recovery and less pain.
Laparoscopic surgery
and robotic surgery are both minimally invasive approaches.
Advertisement
A surgeon usually makes three to five small incisions in laparoscopic or robotic surgery. But you may need six or more incisions, depending on the type of procedure you need. The surgical team uses these ports to insert instruments to perform surgery. For example, they might use laparoscopic surgery to remove your
kidney
.
A surgeon makes only one small incision in single-port robotic surgery. They then connect a single-port robot to the port and perform the entire procedure through this opening.
What procedures are possible using the single-port approach?
Surgeons use the single-port approach for many different types of procedures involving different organ systems. These may include:
Kidney surgeries
, including kidney removal (
nephrectomy
),
kidney donor
nephrectomy,
kidney transplant
and surgery to repair a blockage between your kidney and ureter (
pyeloplasty
)
Prostate
surgeries
, including prostate removal (
prostatectomy
)
Bladder
surgeries
, including bladder removal (
cystectomy
)
Treatment Details
Who can have single-port robotic surgery?
People who are eligible for robotic surgery are generally good candidates for single-port surgery. You may also be a good candidate for single-port surgery if you aren’t eligible for typical robotic surgery using the standard robot. For example, if you:
Have had multiple major abdominal surgeries
Have had severe pulmonary (
lung
) or cardiac (
heart
) diseases that cause positioning problems
A surgeon will consider your overall health and the severity of your condition when determining the best approach.
How should I prepare for single-port surgery?
Before single-port surgery, your surgeon will explain how they’ll use the surgery to treat your condition and ask for your
consent
. They’ll perform a
physical exam
to ensure you’re healthy enough for surgery. They’ll also ask questions about your:
Health history
Any medications you’re taking
Any
allergies
you have
In general, you’ll follow these guidelines before single-port surgery:
Don’t eat or drink (including water) at least eight hours before your surgery. If you must take medications, take them with a small sip of water.
Wear loose-fitting clothing. You’ll feel some abdominal tenderness and cramping after surgery.
Wear comfortable, low-heeled shoes. You might be drowsy or unsteady on your feet after surgery.
Don’t wear jewelry. Jewelry isn’t sterile and may transmit
bacteria
to your incision, causing an
infection
.
Don’t wear nail polish or acrylic (fake) nails. Bacteria can remain in nail polish, even after washing your hands, and cause an infection. Healthcare providers will also monitor your
blood oxygen
level with a
pulse oximeter
on your finger. Nail polish may interfere with a pulse oximeter.
Advertisement
What happens during single-port surgery?
In general, your care team will perform the following during single-port surgery:
Your
anesthesiologist
will give you general
anesthesia
. You’ll be asleep, your muscles will relax and you won’t feel any pain during surgery.
Your surgeon will make a small incision in your belly or near your belly button. The incision location can change according to the type of surgery.
Your team will inflate your belly with carbon dioxide gas, which creates space to perform surgery.
Your surgeon will insert the robot and all necessary instruments through the small incision and perform the surgery.
How long does single-port surgery take?
It depends on the exact type of procedure. Even then, the operating time can vary from person to person. But on average, single-port surgery takes two to four hours to complete.
What happens after single-port surgery?
After surgery, healthcare providers will track your overall health, treat your pain and give you recovery instructions. Be sure to follow these instructions, including those regarding physical activity and follow-up appointments.
Once they determine you’re healthy enough, they’ll let you go home. You won’t be able to drive for at least 24 hours after surgery. You must have someone available to take you home and stay with you for at least a day or two.
Advertisement
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of single-port robotic surgery?
One of the main benefits of single-port surgery is that, because it uses only one small incision, you’ll have little to no
scarring
. You may also have a lower risk of complications that commonly occur after traditional open and even traditional laparoscopic abdominal surgery.
Other single-port surgery advantages include:
You may be a candidate for single-port surgery even if you’re not eligible for traditional laparoscopic or robotic surgery.
Your surgeon can perform multiple procedures at the same time using the same single incision. For example, they can remove your prostate and part of your kidney, which would otherwise require two incisions or two separate surgeries.
People report less pain with single-port surgery.
You may be able to leave the hospital on the same day as your surgery.
Your recovery should be faster. Many people can return to their regular daily routines shortly after the procedure.
What are the disadvantages?
Single-port surgery is more challenging than traditional laparoscopy or robotic surgery because surgeons have less freedom of movement with all instruments using the same entry point. It’s important to make sure your surgeon performs single-port surgery regularly in a hospital that does many of these procedures every year.
Advertisement
All types of surgeries have risks. Other general surgical risks include:
Anesthesia risks
Infection
Organ damage
Healing problems
Fluid buildup at the surgical site (seroma)
Bleeding
Ask your care team about any additional complications for your specific surgery.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time after single-port surgery?
In the skilled hands of an experienced surgeon, you can usually return to your typical activities two to four weeks after single-port surgery. Your surgeon will give you a better estimate of your recovery time.
It’s a good idea to ask a family member or friend to help out with housework, yardwork or other strenuous activities after single-port surgery. Recovery time is less than it would be for an open procedure. But it’s important to allow yourself time to recover.
When can I go back to work or school?
It depends on what you do for work. Most people can return to school or work about a week after single-port surgery. But if you have a more physically demanding job, it’s a good idea to take more time off. You may need to take up to four weeks off to recover.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call a healthcare provider?
Be sure to ask your care team when you should call them and when you should seek emergency care after a single-port surgery.
In general, you should call a healthcare provider if you notice any of the following symptoms after surgery:
Changes in how you pee, including peeing more than usual (
frequent urination
) or changes in the
color of your pee
Swelling (
edema
) in your legs, lower back or face
Increasingly
high blood pressure
Nausea
or
vomiting
Brain fog
Additional Common Questions
Is robotic surgery better than open surgery?
It depends. Robotic surgery can be less painful, reduce your healing time and give your surgeons more control. Your surgeon will always offer you the least invasive treatment option possible. But in some cases, traditional open surgery may be a better option if you:
Have a lot of muscle or tissue damage
Have a lot of scar tissue from previous surgeries
Need treatment on a large or complex organ that’s more difficult to access
What is the difference between single-port surgery and single-site surgery?
Single-site surgery is another name for single-port surgery.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s scary to hear that you or a loved one needs surgery. Some people don’t like the idea of being asleep during the procedure because they feel vulnerable. Others feel nervous about something going wrong or how they’ll manage their pain as they recover. And some people don’t like being away from the comforts of home.
Single-port surgery is a less invasive technique that makes surgery easier on your body. You’ll spend less time at the hospital, and your recovery time should be faster. It can also be less intimidating than open surgery because there are fewer risks. If you’re a good candidate, your surgeon will discuss the advantages of this approach and answer your questions.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A prostate cancer diagnosis can change your life. At Cleveland Clinic, we can help you feel like yourself again with expert treatment and support.
Prostate Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/09/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment