Who Is a Primary Care Physician & How To Find One
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Primary Care Provider
Advertisement
Advertisement
Primary Care Provider
Your primary care provider (PCP) is your go-to healthcare provider whenever you have a question, concern or symptom. They diagnose and treat a wide range of common conditions — like strep throat, prediabetes and high blood pressure. They also help you prevent health issues from starting or getting worse and refer you to specialists as needed.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What is a primary care provider?
A primary care provider (PCP) is a healthcare provider who partners with you to manage your health. Your PCP is the first person you talk to when you have a health issue that’s not an emergency. They’re also the provider you see for
annual checkups
. Your PCP gets to know you over the years and tailors care to your needs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
PCPs are often doctors (commonly called primary care doctors). This means they go to medical school to earn their M.D. or D.O. degree. But
nurse practitioners
and
physician assistants
also serve as primary care providers — typically as part of a
primary care team
. If you live outside the U.S., you may refer to your primary care provider as a general practitioner.
What does a PCP do?
Your PCP helps you stay healthy or get better when you’re sick. Here are some specific things you can expect your PCP to do:
See you for annual checkups to keep an eye on your health
See you when a health problem suddenly pops up
Get to know you — including your medical history, treatment preferences and personality
Answer your questions about
infections
,
chronic conditions
and medicines
Help you prevent health issues by doing things like
quitting smoking
, eating more
nutritious foods
or managing
stress
Make sure your
vaccines
are up to date to prevent illnesses like the
flu
,
tetanus
and
shingles
Suggest screening tests (like
mammograms
and
colonoscopies
) to detect problems before you notice them
Prescribe medicines for you
Help you manage long-term conditions like
diabetes
,
high blood pressure
or
depression
Refer you to other providers, like a heart doctor,
lung doctor
or
orthopedic surgeon
Advertisement
When should I see a PCP?
Ideally, you’ll see your PCP once a year. It can help to schedule your annual checkup around the same time each year (for example, near your birthday). This makes visiting your PCP part of your normal routine.
You should also contact your PCP if you have:
Symptoms of an infection that needs treatment (like
strep throat
,
whooping cough
or a
urinary tract infection
)
New or unexplained
pain
anywhere in your body
Side effects from medication
Questions about your treatment plan
What do primary care providers specialize in?
Primary care physicians typically specialize in one of the following areas:
Family medicine
. These providers are known as
family doctors
. They see babies, children and adults of all ages. You, your kids and your parents all might see the same family doctor.
Internal medicine
. These providers are known as
internists
, or internal medicine doctors. They see people 18 and older.
Pediatrics
. You know these providers as
pediatricians
. They care for infants, children and teens.
Some family doctors and internists further specialize in caring for older adults. These specialists are called
geriatricians
.
How to find a primary care physician
Here’s how to find a PCP to fit your needs:
Check your insurance plan
. Review your plan materials or call customer service. See which PCPs are in your insurance network and near your home. This can help you narrow your search right away.
Ask for recommendations
. Talk to people you trust. Ask if they’d recommend their PCP, and if so, what they like about them.
Search online
. Hospitals in your area may feature PCPs on their website. You can read provider profiles and patient reviews. You may also be able to find video clips or interviews that show a provider’s personality.
Call PCP offices
. Once you have a few possible PCPs in mind, call their offices. Verify they take your insurance and ask if the PCP you want to see is taking new patients. Ask what you should know as a potential new patient. You may also want to visit the office in person to get a feel for the atmosphere.
After your first appointment, give yourself the chance to reflect on how it went. In general, it’s likely a good fit if you:
Felt safe and comfortable
Felt respected
Were invited to ask questions
Received clear and helpful answers
If anything doesn’t feel right to you, start fresh with a new PCP search. It may take a few tries to find the right primary care provider for you — and that’s OK. The more comfortable you feel during your PCP visits, the more likely you’ll return for routine checkups and out-of-the-ordinary concerns. And that can make all the difference in your health.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You’ve woken up with a throat so sore you can barely swallow. Or you develop a rash out of nowhere and it’s only getting worse. Or maybe you just started a new medicine, and you’re feeling a bit dizzy. These are just some examples of the concerns you can take to your primary care provider. Your PCP will also partner with you to manage long-term conditions and connect you with other providers when needed.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider