Nosebleeds (Epistaxis): Causes, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nosebleed (Epistaxis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nosebleed (Epistaxis)
Epistaxis, or a nosebleed, is when you lose blood from the tissue that lines the inside of your nose. Dry air causes nosebleeds. There are simple steps you can take to treat and prevent them. Although annoying, nosebleeds usually aren’t a cause for concern.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is epistaxis?
Epistaxis is the medical term for a nosebleed. A nosebleed — meaning a loss of
blood
from the tissue that lines the inside of your
nose
— can occur in one or both nostrils. Usually, it only affects one nostril.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your nose has many tiny
blood vessels
in it. These vessels help warm and moisten the air you breathe. But they lie close to the inner surface of your nose. When air moves through your nose, it can dry and irritate your blood vessels. This makes them very easy to injure or break, causing a nosebleed.
About
6 in 10 people
will have at least one nosebleed at some point in life. Most nosebleeds are minor and go away with at-home care. But if bleeding is severe or you have other symptoms (like vomiting or trouble breathing), you should go to the emergency room.
Types of nosebleeds
There are two main types of nosebleeds. Healthcare providers describe them by the site of the bleeding.
Anterior nosebleed
An anterior nosebleed starts in the front of your nose on the lower part of the wall that separates the two sides of your nose (septum).
Capillaries
and small blood vessels in this front area of your nose are fragile and can easily break and bleed. This is the most common type of epistaxis and usually isn’t serious. You can usually treat these nosebleeds at home.
Posterior nosebleed
A posterior nosebleed occurs deep inside your nose. A bleed in larger blood vessels in the back part of your nose near your throat causes this type. It can result in heavy bleeding, which may flow down the back of your throat. You may need medical attention right away for this type of nosebleed.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
A nosebleed, or epistaxis, is the loss of blood from the tissue that lines the inside of your nose.
What are the symptoms of a nosebleed?
Usually, you won’t have any symptoms other than blood coming from your nose. If you have a posterior nosebleed, some blood may drain down the back of your throat into your stomach. This can cause a bad taste in the back of your throat and make you feel nauseated.
If you have additional symptoms, it may be a sign of a medical condition.
What causes a nosebleed in one nostril?
Most nosebleeds only affect one nostril, but they can affect both at the same time. Epistaxis has many causes. Fortunately, most aren’t serious.
The most common cause of nosebleeds is dry air. The air is typically drier in:
Hot, low-humidity climates
Areas at high altitudes
Heated indoor spaces
Dry air causes your
nasal membrane
(the delicate tissue inside your nose) to dry out and become crusty or cracked. It’s then more likely to bleed when rubbed or picked or when blowing your nose.
You may also develop a nosebleed if you:
Insert an object in your nose
Injure your nose and/or face
Have a
deviated septum
Have an
upper respiratory infection
or
sinus infection
that makes you keep sneezing, coughing and blowing your nose
Have
allergic
or
nonallergic
rhinitis (inflammation of your nasal lining)
Frequently use
antihistamine
or
decongestant
nasal sprays, which can dry out your nasal membranes
Take blood-thinning medications like aspirin,
NSAIDs
or warfarin
Breathe in chemicals from cleaning supplies, fumes at your workplace or other strong odors
Use recreational drugs (like cocaine) that you inhale through your nose
Less common causes of nosebleeds include:
Alcohol use
Bleeding disorders, like
hemophilia
or
von Willebrand disease
High blood pressure
Atherosclerosis
Facial and nasal surgery
Nasal tumors
Nasal polyps
Immune thrombocytopenia
Leukemia
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Pregnancy
What causes nosebleeds while sleeping?
The reasons for
nosebleeds during sleep
are the same as the reasons why they occur during the day. Dry air, allergies and upper respiratory infections damage the delicate nasal membrane lining your nose. Sleeping with your head to the side may also put direct pressure on your nasal cavity and cause epistaxis at night.
Risk factors
Anyone can get nosebleeds. Most people will have at least one case in their lifetimes. But some people are more likely to have a nosebleed. They include:
Children between the ages of 2 and 10
. Dry air, colds,
allergies
and sticking fingers and objects into their noses make children more prone to nosebleeds.
Adults between the ages of 45 and 80
.
Blood may take longer to clot as you approach the age of 50. Around this age, you’re also more likely to have
high blood pressure
,
atherosclerosis
(hardening of the walls of arteries) or a
bleeding disorder
.
Those who are pregnant
.
Blood vessels in your nose expand while you’re
pregnant
, which puts more pressure on the delicate blood vessels in the lining of your nose.
People taking blood-thinning medications
. These drugs include aspirin and
warfarin
.
People who have blood clotting disorders
. These include hemophilia and von Willebrand disease.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
When should I worry about a nosebleed?
Although seeing blood coming out of your nose can be alarming, most nosebleeds aren’t serious. You can usually manage them at home. But you should
call a healthcare provider
if:
You get nosebleeds often
You have symptoms of
anemia
(feeling weak, faint, tired, cold or short of breath or having pale skin)
You get a nosebleed around the time you start a new medication
You get nosebleeds and also notice unusual bruising all over your body — this combination may indicate a more serious condition such as a blood-clotting disorder (hemophilia or von Willebrand disease), leukemia or a nasal tumor
Call your pediatrician if your child is under age 2 and has a nosebleed. No matter your child’s age, it’s a good idea to mention any nosebleeds at their next
well-check
.
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider asks you questions about your nosebleed, including:
Length (in minutes) of your nosebleed
Approximate amount of blood that came out
How often you get them
If the bleed involved one or both nostrils
They also ask about:
Medications, including over-the-counter (OTC)
blood-thinning medications
like aspirin and drugs for colds and allergies
Your biological family history, including any history of blood disorders
Your use of alcohol and/or any recreational drugs in which you sniffed the drug up your nose
Advertisement
Next, your provider examines your nose to determine the source of the bleeding and what may have caused it. They use a small speculum to hold your nostril open and use various light sources or an
endoscope
(lighted scope) to see inside your nasal passages.
Your provider may use topical medications to numb (anesthetize) the lining of your nose and to narrow blood vessels. Your provider may remove clots and crusts from inside your nose. This can be unpleasant but isn’t painful.
Occasionally, they may order
X-rays
, a
CT scan
or
blood tests
to check for bleeding disorders, blood vessel abnormalities or nasal tumors.
Management and Treatment
What are the treatments for epistaxis?
Nosebleed treatment depends on the cause of the bleeding. Your provider will explain what’s necessary in your situation. Epistaxis treatment may include:
Nasal packing
. Your healthcare provider inserts gauze, special nasal sponges or foam, or an inflatable latex balloon into your nose to create pressure at the site of the bleed. Your provider may want to leave the material in place for 24 to 48 hours before removing it.
Cauterization
. This procedure involves applying a chemical substance (silver nitrate) or heat energy (
electrocautery
) to seal the bleeding blood vessel. Your provider sprays a local anesthetic in your nostril first to numb the inside of your nose.
Medication adjustments/new prescriptions
. Reducing the amount of blood-thinning medications you take — or stopping them — can be helpful. In addition, medications for managing blood pressure may be necessary. Your provider may prescribe
tranexamic
(Lysteda®), a medication to help blood clot.
Foreign body removal
. If the cause of the nosebleed is a foreign object, your provider will remove it.
Surgery
.
Surgery can repair a broken nose or correct a deviated septum (
septoplasty
).
Ligation
. In this procedure, your provider ties off the culprit blood vessel to stop the bleeding.
Advertisement
How can I stop a nosebleed at home?
Follow
these steps
to stop a nosebleed:
Keep calm and breathe through your mouth.
Sit up straight with your head slightly forward.
Use your thumb and index finger to pinch the soft sides of your nose (just above your nostrils).
Wait for the bleeding to stop. Use a tissue or damp washcloth to catch the blood.
At-home care is often enough. But some nosebleeds need medical care at a hospital.
Have someone drive you to the nearest emergency room or call 911 (or your local emergency service number) if:
You can’t stop the bleeding after more than 15 to 20 minutes of pinching your nose
The blood loss is large (more than 1 cup)
You’re taking blood-thinning medications (like aspirin or warfarin) or have a blood-clotting disorder and the bleeding won’t stop
You’re having difficulty breathing
You’ve swallowed blood and can’t stop vomiting
Your nosebleed happened after a blow to your head or a serious injury (fall, car accident or a smash to your face or nose)
Can I drink water after a nosebleed?
Yes, you should drink plenty of fluids after a nosebleed. Good options include water, juice and other non-caffeinated liquids. After you experience epistaxis, some blood may drain down the back of your throat into your stomach. This may make you feel nauseated. But drinking water won’t affect a nosebleed.
Can you die from a nosebleed?
Nosebleeds that occur higher on your septum or deeper in your nose may be harder to control. However, nosebleeds are rarely fatal.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Prevention
What can I do to prevent nosebleeds?
Here are some tips for preventing nosebleeds:
Use a
saline nasal spray
or saline nose drops two to three times a day in each nostril to keep your nasal passages moist. You can purchase these products over the counter or you can make them at home.
Add a humidifier to your furnace or run a humidifier in your bedroom at night to
add moisture to the air
.
Spread a nasal gel or ointment in your nostrils with a cotton swab. Bacitracin®, Vaseline® or Ayr Gel® are examples of over-the-counter ointments you can use. Be sure not to insert the swab more than 1/4 inch into your nose. You can purchase these gels and ointments in most pharmacies.
Avoid blowing your nose too forcefully.
Sneeze
through an open mouth
. Always sneeze into a tissue or your elbow.
Avoid putting anything solid into your nose, including your fingers.
Limit your use of medications that can increase bleeding, like aspirin and ibuprofen. Always check with your healthcare provider before making any changes to your medications. This is especially important for prescribed medications like warfarin (Coumadin®) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
See your provider if you can’t easily control your nasal allergy symptoms with over-the-counter or prescription medications. Make sure you closely follow the directions when using over-the-counter products. Overusing them can cause nosebleeds.
Quit smoking
. Smoking dries out your nose and irritates it.
Wear protective headgear if you do activities that could result in an injury to your face and nose.
To help your child avoid nosebleeds, teach them not to put things up their nose. It’s also a good idea to keep your child’s fingernails short. Your pediatrician can offer more advice, too.
Additional Common Questions
Are blood clots in a nosebleed normal?
Yes.
Blood clots
are clumps of blood that form in reaction to an injured blood vessel. Blood clotting prevents excessive bleeding when a blood vessel is damaged. When you pinch your nose to stop a nosebleed, the blood will begin to clot. It’ll normally remain there until you remove it or gently blow your nose.
Why do I get frequent nosebleeds?
There are many reasons you may be getting frequent nosebleeds. They can affect one or both nostrils. The most common causes are:
You frequently use nasal sprays to treat allergy symptoms or colds/congestion
The air is dry where you live
You snort drugs into your nose
You may need to stop using sprays for a short period or stop them altogether. Talk with your provider if you use these products.
In rare cases, repeated epistaxis could be a sign of a bleeding disorder or other more serious conditions. If you have frequent nosebleeds, see a healthcare provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Epistaxis, or a nosebleed, is a common yet irritating medical condition. Learn the steps for how to stop a nosebleed fast, and you’ll quickly be able to return to whatever you were doing before it started. Most cases of epistaxis aren’t serious. But you should see your healthcare provider if you get them frequently or have a bleeding disorder.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/18/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider