Motor Neuron Disease (MND): Symptoms & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Motor Neuron Disease (MND)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Motor Neuron Disease (MND)
Motor neurons are involved in muscle movements you don’t even think about, like breathing, swallowing, chewing, talking and walking. If you have a motor neuron disease (MND), these motor neurons gradually become damaged over time, leading to disability and eventually death. There’s no cure for MND, but there are treatments to help manage symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is Motor Neuron Disease (MND)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is Motor Neuron Disease (MND)?
Motor neuron disease (MND) is a group of
neurological disorders
that gradually destroy your motor
neurons
. Your motor neurons are nerve cells that control muscle movement involved in activities like breathing, speaking, swallowing and walking.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Messages from neurons in your
brain
(upper motor neurons) are usually transmitted to neurons in your
spinal cord
(lower motor neurons). From there, they move to the
muscles
in your body. Your upper motor neurons tell your lower motor neurons to produce muscle movements.
When your muscles can’t receive these messages from your lower motor neurons, they begin to weaken and shrink in size (
muscle atrophy
). When your lower motor neurons can’t receive signals from your upper motor neurons, it can cause
muscle stiffness
and overactive reflexes (
hyperreflexia
). This can make voluntary movements difficult and slow. Over time, you may lose the ability to walk and control other movements.
There’s no
cure
for motor neuron diseases. They’re progressive diseases that get worse over time. But there are treatments available that can help reduce the impact the condition has on your life.
Motor neuron disease types
Healthcare providers classify MNDs by whether they affect your upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons or both. MND disease types include:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
is the most common MND. It affects both your upper and lower motor neurons. Also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, ALS causes rapid loss of muscle control and eventually
paralysis
. Many healthcare providers use the terms ALS and motor neuron disease interchangeably.
Advertisement
Progressive bulbar palsy (PBP)
Progressive bulbar palsy (PBP) attacks the lower motor neurons connected to your
brainstem
. Your brainstem (bulbar region) controls the muscles you need for speaking, chewing, swallowing and other functions. Another name for PBP is progressive bulbar atrophy.
Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS)
Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS)
affects only your upper motor neurons. The disorder frequently affects your legs first. Then, it affects your arms, hands and torso. Finally, it affects the muscles you use for speaking, swallowing and chewing.
Progressive muscular atrophy (PMA)
Progressive muscular atrophy (PMA) only affects your lower motor neurons. The condition mostly affects
males
, and typically at a younger age than most other adult-onset MNDs. Weakness in your hands is usually the first symptom, and then it spreads to your lower body. It can also affect your torso and breathing.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)
is an inherited condition that affects your lower motor neurons. It’s the most common genetic cause of infant death.
Changes
in the
SMN1
gene cause a loss of the SMN protein. This loss slowly destroys the lower motor neurons, producing muscle wasting and weakness that eventually leads to death.
Kennedy’s disease
Kennedy’s disease is related to a
gene
on the X chromosome in males. Changes in the gene for the
androgen
receptor cause the disease. Over time, people develop weakness in their arms and legs, often starting in their pelvic or shoulder regions. They may also develop pain and
numbness
in their hands and feet.
Post-polio syndrome (PPS)
Post-polio syndrome (PPS)
affects
polio
survivors up to four decades after they’ve recovered from their initial illness, which can cause major damage to motor neurons. Symptoms include muscle and joint weakness, fatigue, pain that gradually gets worse over time, muscle twitches and atrophy, and intolerance to cold.
Symptoms and Causes
Motor neuron disease symptoms
MND symptoms occur gradually and may not be obvious at first. Early MND symptoms may include:
Weakness in your legs or ankles that makes it harder to climb up stairs, or causes you to trip often
Slurred speech (
dysarthria
)
Difficulty swallowing
Weakened grip that makes it hard to button a shirt or open a jar, or you may drop things easily
Muscle twitches
and cramps
Weight loss
due to your arms and legs getting thinner over time
Trouble stopping yourself from laughing or crying in inappropriate situations (
pseudobulbar affect
)
Advertisement
Other MND symptoms may include:
Breathlessness
Trouble
breathing that occurs when lying down
Repeated (recurrent) chest infections
Disturbed sleep
Poor concentration and/or memory
Confusion
Morning
headaches
Fatigue
Causes of MND
Problems with your motor neurons cause motor neuron diseases. These cells slowly stop functioning properly over time. Researchers don’t know why this occurs.
Some cases of MND are inherited, meaning they’re passed on through biological families. In these cases, a single genetic change causes the condition. They’re usually inherited in one of several ways:
Autosomal dominant
means that you only need one copy of a changed gene from one biological parent with the disorder to be at risk of the disease.
Autosomal recessive
means that you must inherit one copy of the changed gene from each parent to be at risk of the disease.
X-linked inheritance
means a female parent carries the gene on one X chromosome and passes the disorder along to male children.
In non-inherited cases, different factors may play a role in the development of MND. These include viral, toxic, genetic and/or environmental factors.
Risk factors
MND most commonly affects people in their 60s and 70s, but it may also affect children and adults of all ages. You’re more likely to develop an MND if you have a close relative with the condition or a close relative with a related condition called
frontotemporal dementia
.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose MND
An MND diagnosis can be difficult to make in the early stages. There’s no single test for the conditions. Your healthcare provider may suspect MND if you have progressive muscle weakness without pain or loss of sensation. They may ask you questions, like:
Which body parts are affected?
When did your symptoms start?
Which symptoms appeared first?
Have the symptoms changed over time?
Your provider may request several tests to help make a diagnosis. These may include:
Electromyography (EMG)
.
Electromyography records electrical activity in your muscles. It can help determine if the problem is in your muscles, nerves or neuromuscular junction.
Nerve conduction studies
.
Nerve conduction studies measure how fast nerves transmit impulses.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
.
A brain MRI and sometimes spinal cord MRI can check for abnormalities that may cause similar symptoms.
To help rule out other conditions, your healthcare provider may request additional tests, including:
Blood tests
Urine tests
Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
Genetic tests
Over time, MND causes symptoms that are so characteristic that the diagnosis is obvious without any testing.
Management and Treatment
How is motor neuron disease treated?
There’s no specific cure or treatment for motor neuron disease. But researchers continue to study safe and effective options to treat the condition.
Advertisement
You may work with a team of healthcare providers to help you manage the symptoms of the disease. Motor neuron disease treatment may include
physical therapy
to help you maintain your muscle strength and keep your joints flexible.
If you have swallowing difficulties, you may receive nutrition through a tube inserted through your abdominal wall into your stomach (
gastrostomy tube
).
Many people with MND find relief from their symptoms by taking certain medications, including:
Baclofen
, to help make muscles less tight and reduce muscle spasms
Phenytoin
or
quinine
, to help decrease muscle cramps
Glycopyrrolate
, to reduce drooling
Antidepressants
, to help with depression
Benzodiazepines
, to help with pain as the disease progresses
In people with ALS, a couple of medications can help prolong life and slow the decline in function, including
riluzole
and
edaravone
.
Many people also participate in
clinical trials
.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see a healthcare provider if you have possible early signs of MND, like muscle weakness. You may not have MND, but it’s important to get a correct diagnosis as early as possible to help get you the care and support you need.
You may also want to see a provider if you have a close relative with MND or frontotemporal dementia and you’re worried you may be at risk of the disease. Your provider may refer you to a
genetic counselor
to talk about your risk.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Motor neuron diseases are progressive diseases that get worse over time. It’s important that you find a healthcare provider who fully understands your condition. They can help you find appropriate treatment to help you manage your disease.
It’s also important to have a support system in place. As your condition progresses, you’ll find that you need help with more and more tasks that become difficult to do. Reach out to friends or loved ones, or ask your provider if they can provide resources for you to get support from your community. Remember, you’re not alone.
What is the life expectancy of a person with motor neuron disease?
Unfortunately, motor neuron diseases significantly shorten your life expectancy. They’re progressive diseases that’ll eventually lead to death. But how long it takes to reach that stage varies. Some people live for a few years or even decades before passing away from the effects of the diseases. Your healthcare provider can help you better understand the specifics of your prognosis (outlook).
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a diagnosis of a motor neuron disease (MND) can be scary and shocking. Remember, it’s not your fault. You didn’t do anything wrong. And it doesn’t change who you are — but life may look different. Although you may experience challenges as the disease progresses, there are treatments available to help you manage its effects. Lean into your friends and loved ones for support. And if you’re struggling to cope and need more support, talk to your healthcare provider. They can help you find resources and make sure you have the help you need as time goes on.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/06/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment