Knee Osteoarthritis: Symptoms, Stages, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Knee Osteoarthritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Knee Osteoarthritis
Osteoarthritis of the knee is a degenerative condition in which the cartilage in your joint slowly breaks down. It’s the most common type of arthritis that affects your knee joint. OA is a lifelong, progressive condition, but treatment can help manage your symptoms. When it becomes severe, your provider might recommend knee replacement surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Osteoarthritis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Overview
When the cartilage in your knee wears down, the bones rub together, causing friction, inflammation and bone spurs.
What is knee osteoarthritis?
Osteoarthritis of the knee happens when the
cartilage
in your
knee joint
breaks down, causing the bones to rub together. This friction causes pain and swelling in your knee, leading to stiffness.
Osteoarthritis
is a degenerative joint disease — a product of wear and tear over time. It’s very common, and the knee, which takes a lot of stress over your lifetime, is one of the most common
joints
affected.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Osteoarthritis (OA) in your knee is a long-term, progressive condition with no cure. There are many treatments available to slow its progress and ease your symptoms, and lifestyle changes can help. But it does tend to worsen with time, and it can eventually lead to disability. Your healthcare provider will monitor your
arthritis
as it progresses. When it starts to really impact your life, surgery is an option.
Stages of knee osteoarthritis
While there aren’t definitive stages of osteoarthritis in your knee, it is a degenerative condition that progresses in a predictable way. (This is different from other types of
arthritis in your knee
.) Your healthcare provider might use stages or levels to explain how advanced your condition is. Understanding how osteoarthritis progresses can help you understand your symptoms and what to expect next.
Stages include:
Stage 1 (Minor).
Stage 1 means that you’ve got some wear and tear in the cartilage in your knee joint. You probably haven’t noticed any pain yet.
Stage 2 (Mild).
The mild stage is when you might start to feel pain and stiffness in your knee joint, but there’s still enough cartilage to keep the bones from grinding together.
Stage 3 (Moderate).
If you’re at the moderate stage, your cartilage has significantly reduced. This causes more pain, especially when running, walking, squatting and kneeling. You might also have more stiffness or difficulty moving your joint, especially after long periods of inactivity.
Stage 4 (Severe).
Severe knee osteoarthritis means that the cartilage in your knee is almost gone, leaving the bones to grind against each other when they move. Your knee is stiff, painful and possibly immobile. At this stage, you might consider knee joint replacement surgery.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of osteoarthritis of the knee
Knee pain
is the most common symptom of knee osteoarthritis. Your knee might hurt when you put pressure on it, when you move it or even when you’re sitting still. Other OA knee symptoms include:
Your knee feels stiff, especially after you first get up or you’ve been sitting for a long time.
Your
knee is swollen
or feels puffy.
You hear a cracking or grinding noise when you move your knee.
Your knee feels wobbly, as if it could buckle or “give out."
Your knee locks up or feels like it’s stuck when you try to move it.
Possible complications of knee osteoarthritis
As knee arthritis progresses, it can cause some additional negative side effects, including:
Joint instability
. As you start to use your knees less, the muscles that support it can become weaker, making the joint less stable. This can affect how you walk and raise your risk of injury.
Bone spurs
. Loss of cartilage in your joint and friction on your bones can cause bony lumps called bone spurs to grow on them. These can cause more friction and irritation in your joint.
Baker’s cyst
. When the
synovial membrane
that lines your joint capsule bulges through a tear in the capsule, it traps joint fluid in the bulge, forming a cyst at the back of your knee joint.
Mood disorders
. Having OA can raise your risk of
anxiety
and
depression
. New limitations, mobility challenges and
chronic pain
can all contribute. Your mood can also make these worse.
Osteoarthritis in your knee causes
Osteoarthritis of the knee happens when the cartilage in your knee joint wears down. Cartilage covers the ends of your bones where they meet in your knee joint. It provides padding that allows the bones to move smoothly against each other. It also absorbs shock when you put weight on your knee. When cartilage breaks down, it can’t grow back. As you lose it, you start to lose mobility in your joint.
OA is usually just the result of gradual wear and tear on your joint over time. Sometimes secondary factors, like an injury or extra stress on your knees, contribute to wearing them down sooner. The cartilage in your knees is like your car’s shock absorber, protecting your car from bumps and jolts. If you drive on rough roads, your shocks wear out faster. If you drive on smooth roads, your shocks last longer.
Risk factors of knee osteoarthritis
You might be more likely to develop OA in your knee if:
You have a
body mass index (BMI)
of 30 or more (
overweight
)
You injure your knee or have an old knee injury
You frequently put stress on your knee at your job or playing sports
You inherited a tendency to develop osteoarthritis of the knee
You have crooked bones or joints, such as having “knock knees”
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose osteoarthritis of the knee
Your healthcare provider will start by asking about your symptoms and physically examining your knee. They’ll check:
Advertisement
If your knee is discolored, swollen or sore
If you feel pain in a specific location on your knee
If there’s any sign you may have injured your knee
How much you can move your knee (range of motion)
If your knee joint feels “loose” or unstable
How you walk on your knee
They’ll follow up with imaging tests. Usually, a
knee X-ray
will show evidence of knee osteoarthritis. In some cases, they might order an
MRI
or
CT
scan if they need to look more closely at tissues in your joint.
Management and Treatment
What is osteoarthritis of the knee treatment?
Knee osteoarthritis treatments include lifestyle changes, nonsurgical treatments and surgery. Typically, healthcare providers try nonsurgical treatments first before recommending surgery for knee OA.
Nonsurgical treatments for knee OA
Nonsurgical osteoarthritis of the knee treatments include:
Using
pain medications
Doing
physical therapy
Sometimes
losing weight
Using a
knee brace
Cortisone (steroid) injections
Knee gel shots (viscosupplementation)
Genicular nerve block injections
Platelet-rich plasma injections
Genicular artery
embolization
(GAE), which decreases blood flow to the inflamed areas of the joint
Surgical treatments for knee OA
Surgical osteoarthritis of the knee treatments include:
Cartilage replacement
Knee bone reshaping (osteotomy)
Partial knee replacement
Total knee replacement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Osteoarthritis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Prevention
Can I prevent osteoarthritis of the knee?
Since there’s usually no single cause of knee osteoarthritis, you can’t entirely prevent it. But you can reduce your risk by reducing stress and strain on your knee joint where possible. For example:
If your job puts strain on your knees, consider ways to modify how you do it.
If you jog or run, seek out soft surfaces rather than pavement.
Vary your fitness routine with low-impact exercises like swimming or cycling.
If you carry extra weight, losing just 10% of it can significantly reduce your risk of knee OA.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Osteoarthritis of the knee develops over time. You might not notice the twinge or ache that could be the first sign of knee osteoarthritis until it worsens. Talk to your healthcare provider if you’ve recently developed knee pain for no apparent reason, and it seems to be getting worse. Early treatment offers the best chance of slowing down osteoarthritis and managing your symptoms without surgery.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stiff, painful joints can make daily life challenging. Cleveland Clinic orthopaedic specialists can help you find relief from osteoarthritis and get you moving again.
Osteoarthritis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment