Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma: Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer. It affects the tubules that filter waste from your blood. The cancer cells look like clear bubbles under a microscope. Treatment commonly involves surgery to remove the tumor or your entire kidney. But you may also need other treatments.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Kidney Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is clear cell renal cell carcinoma?
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is a subtype of
renal cell carcinoma
(RCC), which is a type of
kidney cancer
. It starts in the cells that line the small tubes in your
kidneys
that filter waste from your blood. Clear cell renal cell carcinoma cells rapidly multiply, forming one or more
tumors
. It usually only affects one
kidney
, but can affect both.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of clear cell renal cell carcinoma?
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma usually doesn’t cause any noticeable symptoms during the early stages. But as the condition progresses, you may experience:
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
)
Feeling very tired, even if you get a lot of sleep (
fatigue
)
Fever
A lump on your affected kidney
Flank pain
on the side of your affected kidney
Unexplained weight loss
What causes clear cell renal cell carcinoma?
Most kidney cancers, including ccRCC, develop for no known reason. But certain factors may increase your risk, like:
Using tobacco products, including
smoking
and
vaping
Having a
body mass index
(BMI) greater than 25 (having overweight/
obesity
)
High blood pressure
(hypertension)
Chronic kidney disease
that requires
dialysis
Exposure to workplace toxins, like the solvent trichloroethylene
Long-term use of pain relievers (
analgesics
) like
acetaminophen
(Tylenol®)
Who gets clear cell renal cell carcinoma?
Anyone can get clear cell renal cell carcinoma. But it affects twice as many
men
as women. It also most commonly appears in people between 50 and 70 years old.
According to the
American Cancer Society
, more than 81,000 people in the U.S. get a kidney cancer diagnosis each year. Of these, ccRCC is the most common type.
Is clear cell renal cell carcinoma inherited?
You’re at a greater risk of kidney cancer if you have a biological (blood-related) sibling with renal cell carcinoma. Medical professionals aren’t sure why.
Advertisement
Some people have genetic conditions that make them more likely to have clear cell renal cell carcinoma, such as
Von Hippel-Landau (VHL) disease
.
With these conditions, an inherited gene
variation
causes cysts and tumors to form in different areas of your body. The cysts and tumors usually aren’t cancerous. But ccRCC can occur more often in these biological families, and it often develops at an earlier age than average.
If you receive a ccRCC diagnosis at a young age or have multiple tumors, your healthcare provider may recommend genetic testing.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is clear cell renal cell carcinoma diagnosed?
Kidney cancer doesn’t usually cause symptoms. Healthcare providers discover most kidney tumors while looking for a cause of other conditions. For example, they may see a kidney tumor on imaging tests like an
MRI
or
CT scan
to check for conditions like
kidney stones
.
Imaging tests can detect a tumor. But it can be difficult to determine whether the mass is noncancerous (benign) or cancerous (malignant) according to imaging tests. To make an accurate diagnosis, a provider may recommend a
kidney biopsy
or surgery to remove the tumor.
If a provider surgically removes the tumor, they’ll examine the tumor tissue for cancer. The results can confirm a cancer diagnosis and determine whether it’s the clear cell subtype. As many as 4 in 10 small kidney tumors (less than 4 centimeters) are noncancerous tumors, like
renal oncocytomas
.
After diagnosing ccRCC, a provider will use
cancer staging
to determine the size of the tumor and if it has spread to other areas of your body.
What are the stages of clear cell renal cell carcinoma?
There are four stages of clear cell renal cell carcinoma. The lower the stage, the less aggressive the cancer. A healthcare provider will talk to you about:
Your cancer stage
The risk it’ll spread to other areas of your body
Your next steps
Management and Treatment
How is clear cell renal cell carcinoma treated?
Most treatment options depend on whether the cancer spreads outside of your kidney.
If the cancer hasn’t spread outside your kidney, treatments may include:
Surgery (
nephrectomy
)
. A surgeon removes the cancerous part of your kidney (
partial nephrectomy
) or your entire kidney (
radical nephrectomy
).
Ablative therapies
. These treatments typically use a percutaneous (needle through the skin) approach to kill cancer cells. The different methods include
cryoablation
(which uses cold temperatures) or thermal ablation (which uses hot temperatures) to destroy cancer cells.
If the cancer has spread or is at high risk for spreading, treatment options may include:
Immunotherapy
. Immunotherapy engages your body’s immune system to destroy cancer cells. Medications include
pembrolizumab
(Keytruda®) or
nivolumab
(Opdivo®).
Targeted therapy
. This treatment stops cancer cells from growing and multiplying. Drugs include
axitinib
(Inlyta®) and
cabozantinib
(Cabometyx®).
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Kidney Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is clear cell renal cell carcinoma aggressive?
Like all carcinomas, clear cell renal cell carcinoma can spread (metastasize) to other parts of your body.
Metastatic cancer
is more difficult to treat. Compared to other kidney cancers, ccRCC tends to be more aggressive and spreads faster.
Renal cell carcinoma most commonly spreads to the:
Lymph nodes
Lungs
Adrenal glands
Liver
Brain
Bones
How fast does clear cell renal cell carcinoma grow?
Clear cell renal cell cancer growth rates vary a lot.
One study
noted that they may range from 0.2 to 6.5 centimeters (0.07 to 2.5 inches) per year, with an average growth rate of 2.13 centimeters per year (0.83 inches).
What is the survival rate of clear cell renal cell carcinoma?
The overall five-year ccRCC
survival rate
is 50% to 69%.
But survival rates depend on the size of your tumor. In general, treatment is less effective on large tumors or if ccRCC spreads to other areas of your body. In those cases, the five-year survival rate if you have a large tumor or if ccRCC spreads to other areas of your body is around 10%.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Learning you have clear cell renal cell carcinoma can inspire a lot of different feelings — fear, anger,
depression
,
anxiety
and others. Many people find it helpful to learn as much as they can about ccRCC and ask their loved ones for their
support
. It’s also a good idea to connect with ccRCC support groups who understand exactly what you’re experiencing.
Advertisement
It’s also important to lean on your care team. Ask them any questions that come to mind, including about your treatment options and recovery.
Other ways you can help take care of yourself include:
Taking all medications exactly as your providers prescribe them
Preventing weight loss by eating and drinking foods higher in protein and calories
Sleeping as much as you can
Trying to manage your stress through steps like deep breathing,
meditation
,
yoga
, art therapy or other relaxing activities, like puzzles
Getting as much physical activity as your energy levels allow
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Call a healthcare provider if you experience:
Blood in your pee
A lump or pain in your side that doesn’t go away
Unexplained fever or weight loss
If you’re receiving treatment for ccRCC, call a provider if you experience new or worsening symptoms. They can tell you how to manage the symptoms, change your dosage or even recommend a new type of treatment. Maintaining your well-being as much as possible is an important part of your treatment.
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
What’s the best treatment for me?
What are the side effects of your recommended treatment?
Am I at risk of metastatic cancer?
How can I lower my risk of ccRCC spreading?
Are any of my biological family members at risk for ccRCC?
Should I look out for any specific signs of complications?
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between clear cell renal carcinoma and papillary renal cell carcinoma?
Clear cell and papillary renal cell carcinomas are types of kidney cancer that cause similar symptoms. Treatments are also similar. The main difference between the two is how the kidney cancer cells look under a microscope. Papillary cancer cells look like long, thin, fingerlike growths. ccRCC cancer cells look like clear bubbles. About 1 in 10 people with renal cell carcinoma have the papillary type.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out you have cancer is overwhelming. You might feel scared, sad, confused, lonely or angry. You may even experience all these feelings at once. Or you may feel disconnected from your feelings as you try to process your diagnosis. Whatever you feel is OK.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma is the most common kidney cancer diagnosis. It can grow faster and be more aggressive than other kidney cancers. You’ll likely have a lot of questions and need to vent your thoughts or feelings. Don’t hesitate to reach out to your healthcare providers and lean on your support system for help. It can be difficult, but it’s important to take things one step at a time and be kind to yourself.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you hear that you might have kidney cancer, you may wonder what’s next. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can guide you through the diagnosis and treatment process.
Kidney Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/07/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment