Urologist: What Is It, When To See One & What To Expect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Urologist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Urologist
A urologist is a medical doctor who specializes in conditions that affect the urinary and reproductive systems in adults and children. These conditions range from problems peeing to difficulty getting pregnant. When you meet with a urologist, expect to describe your health history and symptoms and get testing.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
What is a urologist?
A urologist is a physician and surgeon who specializes in diagnosing and treating conditions that affect your
urinary system
. Your urinary system keeps your body healthy by filtering out wastes and toxins and sending them out of your body via urine (pee). Your urinary tract includes your:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Kidneys
Bladder
Ureters
Urethra
A urologist also treats conditions that affect your reproductive organs and
adrenal glands
. Your adrenal glands are on top of your kidneys. The
male reproductive system
and
female reproductive system
link closely to the urinary system. “Genitourinary” is a word that refers to the symptoms, conditions and treatments that affect both systems.
What does a urologist do?
A urologist can diagnose and treat many kinds of issues. Some urologists might practice without performing surgery. But all urologists receive training to be surgeons.
Some urologists concentrate on specific fields (subspecialties). These may include:
Treating infants and children (pediatric urology)
Cancer
(urologic oncology)
Kidney transplantation
Sexual dysfunction conditions, like
erectile dysfunction
and
vaginismus
Infertility
Restoring function and appearance of the genitourinary system (genitourinary reconstruction)
Minimally invasive surgery, including
robotic
,
laparoscopic
and
endoscopic
surgeries
How does someone become a urologist?
To become a urologist in the U.S., you must first get a bachelor’s degree and then pass the Medical College Admissions Test (MCAT) to get into a medical school. Earning a medical degree usually takes about four years.
Advertisement
From there, you spend five to six years in a residency program. During this time, you’ll get training in both surgical and medical treatments of urologic diseases.
After that, if you want to specialize in a narrower field, you must complete a fellowship. A fellowship may last another one to three years.
After residency, you may choose to become board-certified by the American Board of Urology.
Then, in order to practice as a doctor, you must take and pass your state medical examination and meet any guidelines that the medical board issues.
What conditions do urologists treat?
Urologists treat common and rare conditions that can affect anyone. They can also treat conditions that affect only
males or females
. Some of these conditions include:
Frequent
urinary tract infections
(UTIs)
Inability to control when you pee (
urinary incontinence
)
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
)
Enlarged
prostate
(
benign prostatic hyperplasia
)
Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome
Urologists also treat other conditions, like:
Bladder cancer
Kidney cancer
Prostate cancer
Erectile dysfunction
Kidney stones
Bladder stones
Pelvic organ prolapse
Urinary tract problems that are present at birth (
congenital urinary abnormalities
)
When should I see a urologist?
You should schedule an appointment or get a referral to a urologist if you have:
Changes in how you pee, including trouble getting started, a weak pee stream, pain,
cloudy pee
, blood in your pee, peeing more than usual (
frequent urination
) or uncontrollable urges to pee (
urge incontinence
)
Trouble getting or keeping an
erection
firm enough for sexual intercourse
Infertility
A feeling that something is falling down in your
vagina
or heaviness in the area
Pelvic pain
What can you expect during your visit to a urologist?
When you make an appointment with a urologist or when a healthcare provider refers you to a urologist, you should expect to discuss why you’re there. It’s a good idea to bring a list of questions or symptoms that relate to why you made the appointment. You should also expect to answer questions about your medical history and all medications and supplements you take.
A urologist will likely perform a
physical examination
. If you’re male, that may include a
digital rectal exam
. If you’re female, it may include a
pelvic exam
.
They may also recommend tests, including:
Pee test (
urinalysis
)
Blood tests
Semen analysis
Imaging tests, including an
ultrasound
or
CT scan
What is the difference between a nephrologist and a urologist?
A
nephrologist
is a doctor who specializes only in the kidneys. It’s a subspecialty of internal medicine rather than urology. That means nephrologists aren’t surgeons. Nephrologists also manage conditions that happen elsewhere in the body and cause kidney problems, or those that occur because of kidney problems — like
high blood pressure
or
Type 2 diabetes
.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might find it embarrassing or awkward to talk about peeing or other issues “down there.” A healthcare provider may refer you to a urologist if you need care for problems peeing, pelvic pain or sexual issues. The urologist can order tests that help diagnose a condition and identify the best treatment. Genitourinary issues are common, and a urologist will do their best to make you feel comfortable. Answer any questions honestly so they can help you recover.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your urinary system, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/09/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment