Dry Eyes: Types, Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Dry Eyes
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dry Eyes
Dry eyes affect the layers of tears that cover your cornea. It happens when you don’t have enough tears or when your tears evaporate too quickly. Symptoms include burning, itching and a gritty feeling in your eye. You may need to try several different treatments to find a solution that works for you.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Dry Eye?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Dry Eye?
When you have dry eye, symptoms include the feeling that there’s something in your eye that won’t come out.
Dry eye is a condition that affects your tear film, the three layers of
tears
that cover and protect the surface of your
eyes
. You need a smooth and stable tear film to help you see clearly and comfortably. Disruptions to your tear film can cause uncomfortable symptoms, like burning, itching, watering or
blurred vision
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Many different factors can prevent your tear film from working as it should and lead to dry eyes. Its causes and risk factors are numerous and complex. So, it may take a while to get to the root of the problem and figure out what’s causing your symptoms. If you have dry eye syndrome, it’s important to establish care with an
ophthalmologist
or
optometrist
to manage your condition.
Types of dry eye disease
There are a few types of dry eye disease:
Aqueous deficient dry eye
: This is when the
lacrimal glands
of your eyes don’t produce enough aqueous tears. These tears make up the middle, watery layer of your tear film.
Evaporative dry eye
: This is when your tears evaporate too quickly, most commonly because of
meibomian gland dysfunction
.
Mixed dry eye
: Some people have aqueous tear deficiency and tear instability. This means your eyes don’t produce enough tears, plus your tear film is unstable.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of dry eye
When you have dry eye, you may feel like there’s something in your eye that just won’t come out. This can feel like a scratchy, gritty or sandy sensation. Dry eye symptoms may also include:
Blurry or fluctuating
vision
Burning
or stinging
Feeling sensitive to light (
photophobia
)
Mucus
that comes out of your eye (
eye discharge
)
Watery eyes (
epiphora
), with excess tears running down your cheeks
Advertisement
The symptom of watery eyes may seem confusing. But it’s a very common part of dry eye syndrome. It happens when your meibomian glands aren’t making enough oil. So, the watery layer evaporates too quickly. In response, your lacrimal glands compensate by making too much water. This doesn’t solve the underlying problem.
Dry eye causes
Causes of dry eyes include:
Eyes that don’t produce enough tears
Tears that evaporate too quickly
Both of these happen together
Eye dryness may occur on its own or along with other medical conditions. In some cases, dry eye is a sign of:
Blepharitis
Sjögren’s syndrome
Thyroid eye disease
Risk factors for dry eyes
Some risks you can’t control. For example, the older you get, the more likely you are to develop dry eye. But other risks you may be able to manage through lifestyle changes or adjustments to your medications. Risk factors for dry eyes include:
Environment and lifestyle factors
: Things like the weather, how much time you spend looking at screens,
contact lens
use,
smoking
or
allergies
can increase your risk of dry eye.
Medications
: Taking certain medications can increase your risk of dry eye, including some that treat
depression
, allergies,
blood pressure
,
glaucoma
,
menopause
and
pain
.
Medical conditions
: Many different
neurological disorders
,
eye diseases
,
autoimmune diseases
and
endocrine
conditions can raise your risk of dry eye.
Surgeries
: Some eye surgeries increase your risk of dry eye, including
LASIK
,
cataract surgery
and surgery on your
cornea
.
Complications of dry eyes
Complications of dry eyes can range from mild to severe. These may include:
Corneal scarring
Corneal ulcers
Eye irritation
Infection
Vision problems
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose dry eye disease
Your healthcare provider may ask you to fill out a questionnaire to learn about your symptoms and medical history. You should be prepared to provide lots of information, including:
Eye-related symptoms and how long you’ve had them
Environmental factors that make your symptoms worse
Other symptoms, including
dry mouth
,
cavities
,
mouth ulcers
,
fatigue
and
joint pain
History of eye diseases
History of other medical conditions, including allergies and chronic
viral infections
Then, your provider will give you a thorough
eye exam
to assess the quality of your eyes and determine what’s causing your symptoms. During your exam, your provider will look for signs of dry eye disease and check the health of your tear film.
Tests that diagnose dry eye
There’s no single test that diagnoses dry eye syndrome. Rather, your healthcare provider may use many tests, including:
Slit lamp exam
: This test checks for signs of dry eye. Your provider shines a light into each of your eyes and uses a microscope to examine your eyes and
eyelids
.
Schirmer’s test
: Your provider places a tiny piece of paper along the edge of your eyelid to measure the amount of tears produced.
Tear breakup time (TBUT) test
: This test checks how quickly your tears evaporate. Your provider puts dye into your eye and uses a microscope to see how long your tear film remains stable.
Advertisement
Your provider may also order other tests, like
antibody tests
, to check for underlying conditions that could be causing eye dryness.
Management and Treatment
How are dry eyes treated?
Dry eye treatment depends on the severity of your symptoms and any underlying conditions you have. You may need to try many different treatments before finding dry eye relief. Treatment for dry eye may include:
Eye drops
: There are many different types of eye drops.
Artificial tears
lubricate and soothe your eyes, temporarily relieving symptoms. They’re available over the counter.
Ointments
: If your eyes dry out while you sleep, you can use a thicker lubricant at night, like an ointment.
Punctal occlusion
: If your eyes don’t produce enough tears, punctal occlusion (temporary or permanent) may be a helpful option for you.
Scleral lenses
: These contact lenses come into contact with your sclera (the white part of your eye). They protect and lubricate your eyes while also correcting your vision.
Tear stimulation
: A medication called
pilocarpine
can stimulate tear production and may improve symptoms of dry eye disease.
Acupuncture
: Acupuncture may help improve the signs and symptoms of dry eye.
Surgery
: Your provider can surgically correct eyelid misalignment or, in severe cases, perform surgery to reduce tear evaporation.
Advertisement
Dry eye syndrome self-care
Your healthcare provider may suggest you start with home remedies, especially if your symptoms are mild.
Avoid environmental triggers
: These include cigarette smoke, air vents blowing toward your face, wind and allergens. It may help to wear wraparound glasses or sunglasses.
Use a humidifier in your bedroom
: Depending on where you live, your home may have very low humidity levels during the winter when you’re using the heat. A
humidifier
can help.
Place a warm compress over your eyes
: Purchase a heat mask for eyes at any drug store and leave it on your eyes for 10 minutes each evening.
Give your eyes a rest
: Take frequent breaks when you’re reading or using a computer. Also, try to remember to blink often to help your tear production.
Take
omega-3 fatty acid
supplements
: Some research shows these supplements may support tear production and help your symptoms.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your ophthalmologist will tell you how often you need to come in for appointments. If other medical conditions are causing your dry eye, you may need regular follow-ups with other healthcare providers, too. Be sure to go to all of your appointments so your care team can monitor your condition and help you receive treatment.
Advertisement
Call your ophthalmologist if you experience:
New side effects from treatments
New symptoms
Symptoms that get worse
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Does dry eye go away?
Dry eye is a long-term (chronic) condition. It doesn’t have a cure, but treatments can help manage your symptoms.
You may have to try several different treatments to find what works best for you. This can be a stressful process, but it’s worth the effort. Talk to your provider if your current treatments aren’t working or you want to discuss other options.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Dry eye disease can affect much more than the comfort of your eyes. It can affect your ability to work, socialize and enjoy life. Dry eye can take a toll on your emotions and your mental health, too. You may feel isolated, but you’re not alone. Connect with others who have this condition, and share your experiences. It takes patience and perseverance, but it’s definitely possible to find relief.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment