Obstructive Uropathy: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Obstructive Uropathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Obstructive Uropathy
Obstructive uropathy is a blockage in your body that makes it difficult or impossible to pee. It can also cause pain and an infection. Common causes include kidney stones, an enlarged prostate, strictures and cancer. Treatment depends on the cause, but you may need a Foley catheter or nephrostomy tubes to drain your bladder if you can’t pee at all.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Obstructive Uropathy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Obstructive Uropathy?
Obstructive uropathy is a blockage in your
urinary system
. To obstruct means to block or impede, and uropathy means a disease or condition that affects your urinary organs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Obstructive uropathy can make it difficult for pee to leave your body through your
urethra
. As a result, the pee may flow the wrong way back up to your
kidneys
and cause kidney damage. It affects about 2 out of every 1,000 people. It’s responsible for about 10% of all cases of
chronic kidney disease
(CKD).
Another name for obstructive uropathy is urinary blockage.
What are the types of obstructive uropathy?
When obstructive uropathy starts suddenly, healthcare providers call it acute obstructive uropathy. They call it chronic obstructive uropathy when it develops slowly and lasts a long time.
Obstructive uropathy may also affect one kidney (unilateral obstructive uropathy) or both of your kidneys (bilateral obstructive uropathy).
Obstructive uropathy can be partial or complete, as well. Partial obstructive uropathy means the blockage only affects part of your urinary system. Your stream may slow or stop in the middle of peeing. Complete obstructive uropathy fully blocks your urinary system. This means you can’t pee at all.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of obstructive uropathy?
Obstructive uropathy symptoms affect your peeing habits, including:
Inability to completely empty your bladder (
urinary retention
)
A sudden, uncontrollable urge to pee (
urge incontinence
)
Leaking pee (
urinary incontinence
)
Difficulty starting to pee or a slow urine flow (
urinary hesitancy
)
Peeing less than usual
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
)
Advertisement
Other common obstructive uropathy symptoms may include:
Fever
Nausea and vomiting
Flank pain
on one or both sides of your body
What does a urinary blockage feel like?
A urinary blockage may cause discomfort or pain in your abdomen or one or both flanks.
What are the main causes of obstructive uropathy?
Some of the most common causes of obstructive uropathy include:
Kidney stones
Enlarged
prostate
(
benign prostatic hyperplasia
)
Scarring
in your urethra (
urethral stricture
)
Scarring in your
ureters
(ureteral stricture)
Nerve
damage that affects the muscles in and around your bladder
Cancer
that affects your urinary system or areas around your urinary system can also cause obstructive uropathy. This may include:
Bladder cancer
Cervical cancer
Colon cancer
Ovarian cancer
Prostate cancer
Ureteral cancer
Uterine cancer
What are the complications of obstructive uropathy?
Without treatment, pee can build up in your kidneys and cause them to swell (
hydronephrenosis
). Over time, hydronephrosis can cause your kidneys to stop working on their own (
kidney failure
).
Diagnosis and Tests
How is obstructive uropathy diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms, review your health history and perform a
physical exam
. If they suspect you have obstructive uropathy, they’ll order tests to help confirm a diagnosis. These tests may include:
Urodynamic tests
: Urodynamic tests measure how much you pee, the strength and speed of your pee stream and any pressure on your bladder.
Imaging tests
: Imaging tests may include a
CT scan
,
MRI
or
X-ray
.
Cystoscopy
: A provider uses a special instrument (cystoscope) to look through your urethra into your bladder.
Voiding cystourethrogram
(VCUG)
: A VCUG is an imaging test that looks at your bladder as it fills with fluid and drains when you pee.
Renal scan
: A renal scan is a type of
nuclear medicine
test. It uses a small amount of radioactive material to show how blood flows through your kidneys and pee flows through your urinary system.
Management and Treatment
How do you treat obstructive uropathy?
It depends on the exact cause of obstructive uropathy. A healthcare provider will immediately drain your bladder if you have complete obstructive uropathy and are in a lot of pain. Devices they may use include:
Foley catheter
: A provider inserts a thin, flexible tube through your urethra and into your bladder to drain pee into a bag outside your body.
Nephrostomy tubes
: A provider inserts small catheters directly into your kidney through your back.
If scarring causes obstructive uropathy, a provider may use:
Ureteral stents
: Ureteral stents are thin tubes that hold your ureters open.
Urethral dilation
: A surgeon uses thin rods (sounds) or a balloon to widen your urethra gradually.
Medications can treat an enlarged prostate.
In severe cases, a surgeon may remove your kidney (
nephrectomy
) or prostate (
prostatectomy
).
When should I see a healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if you have changes to your peeing habits, especially if they appear along with pain in one or both of your flanks or abdomen.
During your appointment, you may wish to ask the following questions:
How do you know I have obstructive uropathy?
What’s causing obstructive uropathy?
What’s your recommended treatment?
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
Advertisement
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the nearest emergency room if you have any of the following symptoms:
Inability to pee at all
Increasing or unbearable pain while peeing
Blood in your pee
Signs of an infection, including a fever or
chills
, along with any one of the above symptoms
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have obstructive uropathy?
If obstructive uropathy develops suddenly and you get treatment quickly, your outlook is usually good. You likely won’t have permanent kidney damage. You’re also less likely to have long-term kidney problems if obstructive uropathy only affects one of your kidneys — most people can live with one healthy kidney with few or no problems.
You may have permanent kidney damage if obstructive uropathy affects both of your kidneys and there’s a delay in treatment. If your kidneys no longer function well on their own, you’ll need treatment that filters your blood (
dialysis
) or a
kidney transplant
.
Prevention
Can obstructive uropathy be prevented?
You can help prevent obstructive uropathy by getting treatment for any conditions that may cause it. And you can help prevent some of these conditions by:
Avoiding tobacco products
: This includes
smoking
,
vaping
and
smokeless tobacco
. If you currently use tobacco products, it’s a good idea to
quit
.
Cancer screening
: A healthcare provider will look for signs of cancer before you show any symptoms.
Eating healthy foods every day
: Eat lots of fruits and vegetables and cut back on processed foods, red meat, sugar and salt.
Drinking plenty of water
: The average person should drink at least 64 oz. (8 cups) of water each day.
Being active
: You should be active (such as
aerobic exercise
) for at least 30 minutes five days a week.
Taking your medications
: Be sure to take your medications exactly as prescribed by a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between obstructive uropathy and vesicoureteral reflux?
Vesicoureteral reflux
(VUR) is a type of obstructive uropathy. It mostly affects children under the age of 2. Causes may include:
A
congenital condition
that occurs during
fetal development
or very early in infancy
A blockage or narrowing in your child’s bladder or urethra
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Many people find it embarrassing or gross to talk about their bathroom habits. But when you struggle and/or have pain in your flanks or abdomen while you pee, it’s time to look out for “number one” and have a toilet talk with a healthcare provider. They can determine what’s causing obstructive uropathy and treat it quickly to prevent or limit any permanent kidney damage.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment