Strep C: Streptococcus, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Strep C (Group C Strep)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Strep C (Group C Strep)
Group C strep (strep C) is a set of Streptococcus bacteria. It most commonly causes sore throats or skin infections. But it can also infect other parts of your body, like your bones or heart. Infections can range from mild to severe and can sometimes be hard to treat. Healthcare providers treat group C strep infections with antibiotics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Strep C?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Strep C?
Group C strep (strep C) is a set of several types of
Streptococcus
bacteria that can sometimes make you sick. It most commonly causes a sore throat or skin infections. But sometimes, it can cause infections deep in your body, like in your bones or heart.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Group C strep sometimes naturally lives on your skin or in your throat, where it doesn’t usually hurt you. But if it gets inside your body or grows out of control, it can make you sick.
Types
Types of group C strep infections include:
Bacteria in your blood (
bacteremia
)
Bone
and joint infections
Cellulitis
and other skin infections
Kidney infection (
glomerulonephritis
)
Throat infection (
pharyngitis
)
Septic arthritis
Many people have strep C in their throats without getting sick. So, it’s not clear if strep C is the cause of a sore throat, even if you test positive for it.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of strep C
Symptoms depend on where you’re infected. Group C strep symptoms could include:
Sore throat
An area of skin that’s swollen, painful or warm to the touch
An area of skin that’s red, purple or darker than the skin around it
A wound that oozes pus or smells bad
Joint or bone pain
Strep C causes
Streptococcus dysgalactiae
subspecies
equisimilis
(SDSE) is the most common type of group C strep that causes infections. It can naturally live on your skin or in your throat without making you sick. But sometimes, it causes an infection.
You can get it from other people and animals that carry it on their skin or in their throats. Specific ways it can spread include:
Advertisement
Coughing and sneezing
Skin-to-skin contact
Sharing food, drinks, eating utensils or cups
To a baby during childbirth
Through contaminated food
Through surgical wounds
Risk factors
You’re more likely to get a serious strep C infection if you have a long-term medical condition. These include cancer, heart disease, diabetes and conditions that
weaken your immune system
.
Complications
Strep C can travel from where it infects you through your bloodstream. This can lead to:
Inflammation in your heart (endocarditis)
Sepsis
Tissue death (necrotizing fasciitis or gangrene)
Toxic shock syndrome
Some of these conditions can be fatal.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose group C strep infections
How a healthcare provider diagnoses strep C depends on the symptoms you have. For example, you might need a throat swab, skin biopsy or blood tests. In some cases, you might need additional testing or imaging.
Management and Treatment
How is strep C treated?
Antibiotics
treat group C strep infections. Some infections can be
resistant
to certain antibiotics. That means that commonly used medications won’t treat the infection. Your provider may need to try different types of antibiotics or a combination to get rid of the infection.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of a group C strep infection. Go to an emergency room if you have:
Weakness
Chest pain
Shortness of breath
Sudden low blood pressure
Severe pain
A wound that’s warm to the touch, very swollen or painful, or oozing pus
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a group C strep infection?
Strep C infections can be mild or severe. The outcome depends on:
How widespread or severe the infection is
Other medical conditions you have
Whether the bacteria are resistant to antibiotics
Ask your provider what to expect in your specific situation.
Prevention
Can strep C be prevented?
You can reduce your risk of group C strep infections by:
Washing your hands frequently with soap and water.
Not sharing food, drinks, utensils or cups.
Cleaning and covering wounds until they heal.
Caring for surgical wounds as directed by your healthcare provider.
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between group A strep and group C strep?
Group A and group C strep are both types of
Streptococcus
bacteria. Both can cause many kinds of infections. Group A strep is a cause of common infections like strep throat and impetigo. Group C strep infections are uncommon.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Group C strep infections aren’t as common as other types of illnesses. But sometimes, they can be serious. Washing your hands and taking care of wounds can help prevent infections. If you’re at higher risk, talk to your provider about additional steps you can take to protect your health.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment