What Is Assistive Technology (AT)?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Assistive Technology
Advertisement
Advertisement
Assistive Technology
Assistive technology includes things like wheelchairs, reaching aids, stair lifts, hearing aids and speech-generating devices. These technologies help you perform activities of daily living (ADLs), communicate with others and navigate the world around you. Innovations in digital and “smart” devices will shape the future of assistive technology.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What is assistive technology?
Assistive technology is any type of product or service that helps you function in your daily life. Such technologies include:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Physical devices like shower chairs, canes and therapeutic
footwear
Digital services like speech recognition software and screen readers
Things that are accessible to everyone who uses a certain space — like curb cuts (the smooth part of the curb where you cross the road) or doors that open at the push of a button
Assistive technologies (also called adaptive technologies) are often designed for
people with disabilities
. But many of these technologies benefit
everyone
.
For instance, the curb cut that allows a person using a wheelchair to cross the road also helps a parent pushing a stroller or a traveler pulling a rolling suitcase. The jar opener that helps a person with
arthritis in their hand
can easily become a go-to kitchen gadget for anyone.
Who uses assistive technology?
Nearly everyone uses assistive technology at some point during their life. Assistive technology is especially useful for people with conditions that affect how they move, think, learn or interact with the world around them.
For example, you might find assistive technologies helpful — or even liberating — if you have:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (
ALS
)
Arthritis
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (
ADHD
)
Autism
Blindness
or
low vision
Dementia
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Frailty
Hearing loss
Intellectual disability
Learning disability
Muscular dystrophy
Parkinson’s disease
Spinal cord injury
Advertisement
What can assistive technology help me do?
You might use assistive technology to:
Move from place to place
Take a shower
Get dressed
Eat a meal
Self-soothe
Talk or listen to others
See your surroundings
Learn or remember information
Manage symptoms
Take care of a loved one or help keep them safe
In general, assistive technology can help you:
Overcome
ableist
structures
Do the things you want and/or need to do
Be independent and do things on your own terms
Stay safe
Navigate both new and familiar spaces
Gain and keep a job that’s meaningful to you
What are some examples of assistive technologies?
There are
many
examples of assistive technologies — far more than we can list here. And there are many ways to categorize them. The lists below group assistive technologies according to where and when you might use them.
Assistive technology you use at home
Some assistive technologies you use in your home to do
activities of daily living (ADLs)
, manage symptoms or stay safe. Examples include:
Alarm services that detect if you fall
Carbon monoxide
and fire alarms that vibrate (rather than just making sounds) to alert you to danger
Eating utensils and cups that are easy to grip or keep stable
Grab bars you can hold onto for extra support and balance
Massage tools
Ramps into your home or certain areas (like your shower)
Reaching aids like grabbers, sock aids and dressing sticks
Shower seats
Smart home technology
Stair lifts
Weighted blankets
Ordinary objects that can assist you at home
Many things we think of as ordinary objects or services can also function as assistive technologies. An assistive device is what you make it. For example, you might:
Get a new mattress every year or so because your
back
needs the support
Put brightly colored tape along the edges of furniture so you can see them more easily
Use air conditioning to help
regulate your body temperature
Assistive technology you use on the go
Businesses, local governments and others build these devices and services into stores, office buildings, hospitals, recreational spaces and more. These technologies are designed for people with various disabilities, but they make life easier for everyone. Examples include:
Accessible bathrooms
Accessible parking spaces
Elevators
Hallways and aisles that are wide enough to allow easy movement
“Push to open” door buttons
Ramps and curb cuts
Assistive technology you use anywhere
Some assistive technologies are a routine part of life no matter where you’re at. These include mobility aids as well as devices that help you see, hear and communicate. Examples include:
Canes,
walkers
, mobility scooters and wheelchairs
Collapsible stools you can take with you for when you need to sit
Eyeglasses
Fidget toys
Hearing aids
Mindfulness
apps
Orthotics
Prostheses
Screen readers
Speech-generating devices
Advertisement
Assistive technology you use when caregiving
If you’re a caregiver, assistive technologies can help you keep your loved one safe. Many of these technologies also protect you from injury.
Plenty of the technologies in the previous lists can help you when caring for others. But further examples specific to caregiving include:
Alarm systems and sensor maps that alert you when your loved one is no longer where they need to be
Special locks to protect the person you’re caring for if they
wander
or are
prone to falls
Transfer devices that help you move your loved one (for example, from bed to a wheelchair or from a sitting to a standing position)
How can I find assistive technologies?
If you’re looking for assistive technologies for yourself or a loved one, the first thing to do is talk to a healthcare provider. Ideally, this should be a provider who works closely with you or your loved one — for example, a
primary care provider
, specialist,
physical therapist
or
occupational therapist
. They’ll tell you which devices or software might be most helpful.
You can also glean tips from online message boards. People often post about different products and how they help. If you’re part of a support group or online community for people who share your diagnosis, you might be able to get some recommendations for things you wouldn’t have thought of.
Advertisement
If you’re seeking assistive technologies for your child, talk to their pediatrician,
early intervention
providers or school administrators.
Do I need a prescription for assistive technologies?
Some assistive devices require a prescription, while others don’t. You’ll likely need a prescription for your health insurance to contribute toward the cost. Some government programs and community groups may help cover the cost depending on your situation and needs. Your healthcare provider can tell you more and connect you with resources.
Can I travel with assistive devices?
It depends on the device and your mode of transportation. In general, many assistive devices don’t travel well. They can easily get damaged or lost. They may not fit into suitcases or carry-ons.
If you use a device that’s not easily packable, you may want to explore rentable options. Renting a device just for a short time (and leaving your usual one at home) allows you to use a device at your destination without packing worries. This takes some extra planning and may not always be possible. But it’s worth looking into if you’re thinking about travel and concerned about logistics.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Assistive technologies do just what their name promises — they assist you and are designed to serve your needs. Whether the device seems simple — like a cane — or draws on the latest digital technology, you might need some time to get used to it. Be patient and kind to yourself. And don’t hesitate to ask a healthcare provider for guidance or tips.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/06/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider