Shoulder Sprain: Symptoms, Treatment & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Shoulder Sprains
Advertisement
Advertisement
Shoulder Sprains
Shoulders are one of the most commonly injured joints, and sprains are a common injury. They happen when something forces ligaments in your shoulder to stretch too far or tear. Sports injuries and falls cause most sprained shoulders. You’ll probably be able to manage your symptoms with at-home treatments, but you should still visit a healthcare provider to get the injury diagnosed.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Your provider will grade a shoulder sprain based on how much your ligaments are stretched or torn.
What is a shoulder sprain?
Shoulder sprains are injuries that happen when the ligaments in your
shoulder joint
are stretched or torn.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your shoulder is a complex joint where your upper arm bone (
humerus
) connects to your shoulder blade (scapula) and collarbone (
clavicle
). Your shoulder allows you to move your arm.
Ligaments
are bands of tissue, like ropes that hold your
muscles
and bones together and prevent them from moving too far. Ligaments also keep your joints stable and make sure they only move in the direction(s) they’re supposed to.
Visit a healthcare provider if you have pain or swelling or it’s hard to move or use your shoulder — especially if you experience an injury or fall.
How common are shoulder sprains?
Shoulders are one of the most commonly injured joints, and
sprains
are one of the most common injuries (especially among athletes).
Symptoms and Causes
What are shoulder sprain symptoms?
The most common shoulder sprain symptoms include:
Shoulder pain
.
Swelling.
Bruising
or discoloration.
Instability (feeling like your shoulder is weaker than usual or it’s less secure or sliding out of place while you’re using it).
Reduced range of motion (it’s hard or painful to move your shoulder as far as usual).
What causes shoulder sprains?
Anything that forces your shoulder to move farther than its natural range can cause a sprain. The most common causes include:
Sports injuries
.
Falls.
Repetitive strain injuries
(overusing your shoulder or performing a repetitive motion with your arms and shoulder for work, a sport or a hobby).
Advertisement
Shoulder sprain risk factors
Anyone can sprain their shoulder, but athletes and people who do physical work are more likely to. Athletes who play sports that put a lot of stress on their shoulders have a higher risk for shoulder sprains, including:
Swimming.
Baseball.
Football.
Rugby.
Hockey.
Exercise habits that can increase your shoulder sprain risk include:
Suddenly increasing your workout or activity intensity.
Starting a new sport or activity without the proper equipment or training (working out with poor form or starting a new contact sport before you’ve learned the safest way to play, for example).
Playing a sport that stresses your shoulder joint year-round with no off-season or time to rest and recover.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are shoulder sprains diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose a sprained shoulder with a
physical exam
. They’ll examine your injured shoulder and check your range of motion (they might compare it to your other, uninjured shoulder).
Tell your provider when you first noticed symptoms, especially if you know exactly when your injury happened or what caused it.
What tests do providers use to diagnose shoulder sprains?
Your provider might use imaging tests to take pictures of your shoulder joint and the tissue around it. These tests can show damage inside your shoulder and help diagnose other injuries like
bone fractures
or
dislocations
. Your provider might use:
Shoulder X-rays
.
Ultrasound
.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
.
Shoulder sprain grades
Healthcare providers grade shoulder sprains based on how damaged your shoulder ligaments are:
Grade 1 sprain (mild)
: Very little or no tearing in your ligaments.
Grade 2 sprain (moderate)
: Your ligaments are partially torn, but not all the way through.
Grade 3 sprain (severe)
: Your ligaments are completely torn.
Management and Treatment
What are shoulder sprain treatments?
You can probably manage sprained shoulder symptoms at home. But see a healthcare provider first so they can diagnose the injury and make sure nothing else inside your shoulder is damaged.
The most common treatment for shoulder sprains is the
R.I.C.E. method
:
Rest
: Avoid the activity that caused the injury. Try not to use your shoulder while it heals.
Ice
: Apply a cold compress to your shoulder 15 minutes at a time, a few times a day. Wrap ice packs in a towel or thin cloth so they’re not directly touching your skin.
Compression
: Wrap an elastic bandage around your shoulder to help reduce swelling. Your provider can show you how to apply a compression wrap safely.
Elevation
: Keep your shoulder above the level of your heart as often as you can.
Over-the-counter
NSAIDs
(aspirin or ibuprofen) or acetaminophen can reduce pain and inflammation. Talk to your provider before taking over-the-counter pain medication for longer than 10 days.
Advertisement
You might need to wear a sling or brace that supports your shoulder and holds it in place. Your provider might also suggest
physical therapy
to prevent stiffness and improve your range of motion.
Shoulder sprain surgery
It’s rare to need surgery after a shoulder sprain. You may need surgery if you have a severe sprain or other injuries like a
shoulder fracture
or
dislocated shoulder
.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
You should feel better gradually after you start treating a sprained shoulder. It might take a few days for your symptoms to improve, but it also might take longer, depending on the sprain’s severity.
Don’t start using your shoulder again unless your provider says it’s safe, even if it feels better. If you put stress on your shoulder ligaments before they’ve fully healed, there’s an increased chance you’ll re-injure them or make the original sprain worse. Ask your provider how much you can use your shoulder while you’re recovering.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a sprained shoulder?
Shoulder sprains are usually temporary injuries, and you shouldn’t have any long-term effects after your shoulder ligaments have healed. Most sprains don’t affect your ability to play sports or stay active after your provider says it’s safe to resume playing or training.
Spraining a shoulder once might make it more likely to injure that shoulder again in the future (especially if you had a moderate or severe sprain). Ask your provider what you can do to reduce your risk of future sprains.
Advertisement
Shoulder sprain recovery time
It usually takes a few weeks to recover from a shoulder sprain. More severe (grade 3) sprains can take up to a few months to heal. Your healthcare provider will tell you what to expect.
Ask your provider which activities and motions are safe to do while you’re recovering. They’ll let you know when it’s safe to return to intense physical activity using your shoulder.
Prevention
How can I prevent a shoulder sprain?
There might not be any way to prevent a shoulder sprain, especially if you’re an athlete. But there are ways you can reduce your risk. During sports or other physical activities:
Practice sport-specific conditioning exercises that strengthen your shoulder muscles.
Wear the proper protective equipment.
Don’t “play through the pain” if your shoulder hurts during or after physical activity.
Give your shoulder time to rest and recover after intense activity.
Stretch and warm up before playing sports or working out.
Cool down and stretch after physical activity.
Follow these general safety tips to reduce your risk of an injury:
Make sure your home and workspace are free from clutter that could trip you or others.
Always use the proper tools or equipment at home to reach things. Never stand on chairs, tables or countertops.
Use your cane or walker if you have difficulty walking or have an increased risk of falls.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you’ve experienced an injury and have shoulder sprain symptoms. Talk to your provider if your symptoms aren’t improving after a few days of treatment (or if they’re getting worse).
When should I go to the emergency room?
Go to the ER if you experience any of the following:
Extreme pain.
Swelling that’s getting worse.
Discoloration.
You can’t move your arm or shoulder (inability to move your joint).
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Do I have a shoulder sprain or another injury?
What grade is the sprain?
Which treatments will I need?
How long will it take to recover?
When can I resume training or playing sports?
What kinds of exercises are safe to do while I’m recovering?
Additional Common Questions
What are shoulder sprains vs. shoulder strains?
Shoulder sprains and shoulder strains are similar injuries — the difference is what’s damaged.
Shoulder sprains happen when a ligament in your shoulder is torn or damaged.
Shoulder strains are a type of muscle strain.
Muscle strains
happen when one of your muscles is torn. People also sometimes call shoulder strains pulled shoulders.
Shoulder sprains and strains are both common sports injuries. Visit a healthcare provider if you’re experiencing pain, or swelling and can’t move your shoulder as well as you usually can.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Shoulder sprains can be painful, frustrating injuries. That’s extra true if playing your favorite sport or your workout routine causes one. The good news is that most sprained shoulders heal with rest and at-home treatments.
Don’t ignore symptoms like pain and swelling in your shoulder, especially if you took a hard hit or fell on your shoulder. Visit a healthcare provider to get the injury diagnosed. They’ll make sure your shoulder is healing safely in a way that will help you get back out on the field, court or ice as soon as possible.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/02/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment