DHT (Dihydrotestosterone): What It Is, Side Effects & Levels
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
DHT (Dihydrotestosterone)
Advertisement
Advertisement
DHT (Dihydrotestosterone)
DHT is a hormone that contributes to the development of sexual structures and characteristics in males. When DHT levels are too high or too low, it can cause different issues depending on your age and stage of sexual development.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What is DHT (dihydrotestosterone)?
DHT (dihydrotestosterone) is a
hormone
that plays a key role in
male
sexual development. More specifically, DHT is an
androgen
— a hormone that stimulates the development of male characteristics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
DHT affects the sexual development of males throughout their lives, beginning as early as in fetal development. The role of DHT changes as you progress through different life stages. Scientists aren’t sure if and how DHT affects females, but they think it may play a role in body hair and pubic hair growth.
As an adult, your body converts about 10% of your
testosterone
(the main androgen) into DHT each day. This takes place in the genital skin and
prostate
in males and in the skin in females. It also happens in other parts of your body, like your
liver
.
Levels of DHT are naturally much higher in males because they naturally have more testosterone.
What does DHT do to your body?
DHT has different roles in different life stages for males — mainly during
fetal development
and
puberty
.
Unlike testosterone, DHT doesn’t play a significant role in maintaining male physiology in adulthood. Effects mainly include prostate enlargement and male pattern hair loss in adulthood.
DHT and fetal development
During fetal development, a specific and unique environment of hormones results in male or female differentiation of sexual anatomy. In males, DHT acts with other hormones (including testosterone) to block the formation of the female anatomy and to promote the development of the male anatomy.
Advertisement
DHT is essential for the formation of the male external genitalia, including the penis and scrotum, in a fetus. DHT also helps with the formation of the prostate.
DHT and puberty
During male puberty, DHT promotes further growth of the penis and scrotum. It’s also the main androgen that’s responsible for:
Facial hair.
Body hair.
Pubic hair.
Prostate growth.
What happens when DHT levels are high?
Certain health conditions are associated with high levels of DHT, including:
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
.
Prostate cancer
.
Androgenic alopecia (male pattern
hair loss
).
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)
.
DHT and benign prostatic hyperplasia
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a condition in which your prostate grows in size. It’s very common in males over the age of 50.
Your prostate can produce large amounts of DHT. This local DHT production stimulates normal prostate activity but also commonly leads to prostate growth. BPH can cause difficulty with peeing and
sexual dysfunction
.
DHT and prostate cancer
People who have prostate cancer usually have an increase in DHT levels. An increase in DHT activity in your prostate, in addition to certain genetic mutations that cause prostate cells to grow uncontrollably, leads to prostate cancer.
DHT and androgenic alopecia
Androgenic alopecia is commonly known as male pattern hair loss. The hair loss usually happens on the top and frontal regions of your scalp, causing your hairline to recede over time.
Increased DHT activity at your
hair follicles
is partly responsible for this hair loss, in addition to other factors, including genetic ones. High levels of DHT can shrink your hair follicles and shorten the hair growth cycle, resulting in hair loss.
DHT and PCOS
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a
hormonal imbalance
that affects females. It happens when their ovaries create excess androgens, including testosterone, which leads to increased DHT levels. This causes a variety of symptoms, including
irregular periods
, excessive hair growth (
hirsutism
) and
acne
.
What happens when DHT levels are low?
Certain conditions are associated with low levels of DHT, including:
5-alpha reductase deficiency.
Low testosterone (male hypogonadism)
.
Lower-than-normal DHT levels mainly affect males. Some scientists think low DHT levels in female children may delay the start of puberty.
DHT and 5-alpha reductase deficiency
5-alpha reductase is an
enzyme
that helps convert testosterone to DHT. A
genetic mutation
(change) that affects the production of the enzyme can cause low or no levels of DHT. This is called 5-alpha reductase deficiency. People inherit this condition in an
autosomal recessive
pattern.
5-alpha reductase deficiency affects the sexual development of genetically male (XY
chromosomes
) fetuses. Males born with the deficiency typically have:
Advertisement
Underdeveloped external genitalia.
Undescended functional testicles
.
A small or absent prostate.
In cases of severe 5-alpha reductase deficiency, genetically male babies with XY chromosomes have external genitalia that appear female. Low DHT doesn’t affect the development of the testicles (they can still produce sperm) and internal sexual organs and structures. This is different from
androgen insensitivity syndrome
. People with this condition have normal testes with normal to high testosterone levels — they just lack androgen receptors. This causes them to not have secondary sexual characteristics and to have
infertility
.
During puberty, children who are genetically male with 5-alpha reductase deficiency experience a lack of facial hair growth. Because their body still makes testosterone, they still experience voice deepening, muscle mass increase and penis enlargement.
DHT and low testosterone
As your body converts testosterone to DHT, if you have low levels of testosterone, you’ll have lower-than-normal levels of DHT as well. Another name for low testosterone is male hypogonadism.
There are two main types of male hypogonadism: classical (congenital or acquired) and late-onset. Male hypogonadism can cause different issues depending on your age.
Advertisement
When should I see my doctor about my DHT levels?
If you think you or your child may have a condition related to low DHT or excess DHT, talk to your healthcare provider. They can order some tests or refer you to a specialist, such as an
endocrinologist
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) is an essential part of male sexual development. But if levels are too high or low, they can cause certain issues like underdeveloped external genitalia, prostate enlargement and hair loss. If you’re concerned about your DHT levels, talk with your healthcare provider. They can order tests and recommend treatments that may help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/20/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes