Stomach Flu: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Stomach Flu
Advertisement
Advertisement
Stomach Flu
Stomach flu, viral gastroenteritis, is a viral infection in your digestive system. It causes gastrointestinal symptoms like vomiting and diarrhea. It’s usually brief, but can be very contagious.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Learn the difference between the stomach flu and food poisoning.
What is stomach flu?
Stomach flu is a
viral infection
that affects your stomach and intestines. The medical term is viral gastroenteritis. “
Gastro
” means
stomach
and “
enter
” means
small intestine
. “
Itis
” means
inflammation
, which is usually due to an infection. And “viral” means that a
virus
has caused the infection.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Stomach flu causes gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms like diarrhea, abdominal cramps and nausea. You might also call it a “stomach bug.” A stomach bug isn’t always a virus — sometimes it’s bacteria or a parasite — but in any case, the symptoms are similar. You might not be able to tell if your bug is a virus or not.
Why is viral gastroenteritis called “stomach flu?”
Stomach flu isn’t related to
“the flu” (influenza)
, which is a viral infection in your
respiratory system
. Different viruses cause the two conditions, and they affect different body systems. It’s not clear how the nickname “stomach flu” developed or why it’s been associated with influenza, but we can speculate.
Both are common viral infections that circulate during the same “flu season,” so people might use “flu” to simply mean, “I’m sick”. “Stomach flu” might be a way of saying, “I’m sick, and it’s the stomach one”. Even though a stomach bug isn’t always a virus, it’s likely to be, so “stomach flu” is a good guess.
How common is stomach flu?
Viral gastroenteritis is extremely common worldwide, but it’s hard to estimate exactly how many people get it each year. Many different viruses cause it, and most people don’t get clinically tested for it. Experts estimate that
norovirus,
the most common cause, infects 685 million people every year.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
With stomach flu, gastrointestinal symptoms often come on suddenly.
What are stomach flu symptoms?
The most common stomach flu symptoms are:
Diarrhea
.
Nausea
and
vomiting
.
Loss of appetite
.
Abdominal pain and cramping
.
These symptoms come from inflammation in your stomach and intestines. (Although the name,
gastroenteritis
, refers to your stomach and small intestine, inflammation can spread to your
large intestine
, too). Inflammation is your
immune system
activating to fight the virus.
If your infection is more severe, or if your immune system reacts more strongly to it, you may have what are known as systemic symptoms. These symptoms come from inflammation in other body systems outside of your
digestive system
. This is the next level of immune response to the virus.
Systemic symptoms may include:
Fever
.
Chills
.
Fatigue
.
Body aches
.
Headaches
.
Swollen lymph nodes
.
What does the beginning of stomach flu feel like?
For many people, stomach flu symptoms seem to come on suddenly and out of nowhere. You might throw up or have diarrhea many times on that first day. Symptoms occur one to two days after you were exposed to the virus. Fortunately, they’re usually over just as quickly, resolving in one to two days.
What are the stages of stomach flu?
The stages of stomach flu infection are:
Exposure
. You’re most likely to get the stomach flu from someone in your community, especially in a closed environment like a school, nursing home or cruise ship. Since symptoms take some time to develop, you might hear about an outbreak later, after you were exposed.
Incubation
. Once you’ve contracted the virus, it’ll begin replicating inside your body. This is the incubation period. You won’t have symptoms until the virus replicates enough to alert your immune system. This usually takes a few days, depending on the virus.
Acute infection
. Viral gastroenteritis is an acute infection, which means it’s sudden and temporary. When your immune system registers the threat, it activates an inflammatory response to clear the virus. This is what causes symptoms of illness. When it succeeds, the symptoms will stop.
Recovery
. You’ll notice your symptoms lessening when your immune system has won the battle against the virus. Eventually, your symptoms will stop, and you’ll feel better. But you may continue to shed the virus in your poop (stool) for a few days, which means you’re still contagious.
How long does stomach flu last?
Stomach flu usually only lasts a few days, but it may last up to a week or two in severe cases. People with weaker immune systems may have a harder time defeating the virus, and it may take longer.
Is stomach flu contagious?
Yes, it’s very contagious. You should limit your contact with others when you have it. If you live with others, make sure to
wash your hands
often and disinfect shared surfaces, especially in the bathroom.
How long is the stomach flu contagious?
You’re most contagious during the acute phase of the infection (when you have symptoms) and for a few days after. However, you may still be a little contagious for up to two weeks after recovering.
What causes stomach flu?
Many different viruses can infect your gastrointestinal system, causing gastroenteritis.
The most common ones are:
Norovirus
. This is the leading cause of stomach flu in adults, estimated to account for 50% of cases worldwide. It’s more resistant than others to temperature and disinfectants.
Rotavirus
. Rotavirus is the leading cause of stomach flu in children worldwide. Most get it before age 3, which is why most adults are immune. There’s now a
vaccine
.
Astrovirus
. Astroviruses mostly affect children younger than 3. They commonly spread through daycare centers. But they can also spread through elder care homes.
Adenovirus
. Adenoviruses more often cause respiratory infections, but they can cause gastrointestinal infections if you accidentally ingest them. They infect all ages.
Advertisement
How does stomach flu spread?
Stomach flu usually spreads by the “fecal-to-oral route”. The virus lives in the poop — and vomit — of infected people. Microscopic traces of infected poop or vomit may linger on people’s hands or surfaces. These traces can transfer to food and water sources. You might ingest the virus through contaminated food or water, or by touching an infected person or surface and then touching your mouth.
Who gets stomach flu?
Anyone can get stomach flu, but certain people are more vulnerable. If you have a weaker-than-average immune system, you might be more likely to get an infection or get a more severe infection.
You might have a weaker immune system if you have a chronic disease that affects immunity or take
immunosuppressant
medications. Infants and elderly people are also more susceptible to infections.
What are the possible complications of stomach flu?
For most people, stomach flu is uncomplicated and self-limited. It goes away shortly by itself. But those with weaker immune systems may have a more severe infection and be more likely to experience complications.
The most likely complication is
dehydration
. This happens when you lose too many fluids and
electrolytes
from diarrhea or vomiting, and you can’t drink enough or drink fast enough to replace them.
Advertisement
People with weaker immune systems (especially children) are more likely to become dehydrated, and it can be especially dangerous for them. Stay alert for signs of dehydration, such as:
Thirst.
Lack of urine (pee) or dark-colored urine.
Lack of poop or hard, dry poop
.
Weakness or malaise.
Sunken eyes.
Crying without tears.
Dehydration headache
.
Dry lips and tongue.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose stomach flu?
Healthcare providers often diagnose gastroenteritis based on your symptoms. They won’t know if it’s viral or which virus it is without doing a lab test to find out. But most of the time, this isn’t necessary. Since there isn’t any specific medicine for stomach flu, there’s no need to identify it, or the virus.
Management and Treatment
How do you get rid of stomach flu?
Your immune system gets rid of stomach flu through its own natural processes. It just takes a few days to do its work. Your symptoms, while unpleasant, are a sign that your immune system is working. There’s no medicine for stomach flu. Antibiotics don’t work on viruses — they’re for bacterial infections.
The best thing you can do to help your immune system do its work is to stay home and rest, stay hydrated and eat a little if you can. Give your body the energy it needs to fight the infection. To stay hydrated, take small sips throughout the day, before you feel thirsty, or suck on ice chips.
Advertisement
What helps stomach flu go away faster?
Some research shows that taking
probiotics
may help stomach flu go away faster. Probiotics are helpful bacteria that live in your gastrointestinal system. Having enough helpful bacteria in your gut is part of having a healthy immune system. Ask a healthcare provider if probiotics might help you.
What should you eat when you have stomach flu?
What you eat won’t improve stomach flu, but it can make it worse. Foods high in fat, sugar, caffeine or dairy milk might make you more likely to throw up or have diarrhea. You might have little appetite or feel nauseous at the thought of food. Focus on foods that are easy to digest and give you a quick dose of energy, like fruit juice popsicles, broths and saltine crackers. The salt can help replace your electrolytes.
Can healthcare providers treat severe symptoms or complications?
Healthcare providers can treat dehydration with
intravenous fluids
. This is a way of delivering hydration directly to your bloodstream, bypassing your digestive system. In some cases, healthcare providers may prescribe medications to reduce vomiting or diarrhea. They don’t prescribe these for children, though.
When should I see a healthcare provider about stomach flu?
Contact a healthcare provider if:
Your symptoms haven’t improved after four days.
You’ve had a high fever (above 102 degrees Fahrenheit or 39 degrees Celsius) for four days.
You haven’t been able to pee or poop for two days.
You suspect dehydration.
You have
blood in your poop
.
You have severe
abdominal pain
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
When will I feel better?
For most people, symptoms get better in a few days. Contact a healthcare provider if they aren’t improving. People with weaker immune systems may need treatment for dehydration or medications to reduce their symptoms. It’s also possible that you have a different condition if you aren’t improving.
When can I return to work or school?
It’s best to say isolated until two days after your symptoms have stopped. This is the time when you’re most contagious. Even though your body has overcome the infection, you’ll still shed the live virus in your poop. If any trace of that poop comes into contact with another person, they could get sick.
Prevention
How can stomach flu be prevented?
You can
reduce your risk
of getting stomach flu or spreading it to others by practicing good hygiene.
This includes:
Handwashing
. Good handwashing is the most important defense against stomach flu viruses since hand sanitizer isn’t always effective. It’s especially important after going to the bathroom or changing a diaper and before coming into contact with food.
Cleaning
.
Wash and disinfect
any surfaces or materials that you or the infected person has touched. Use bleach and water (up to 25 tablespoons per gallon) to disinfect surfaces, especially in the bathroom. Use the high heat setting on your washing machine for bed linens and clothes.
Safe food handling
. Food may be contaminated with stomach flu viruses, bacteria or other organisms.
Safe food prep
can help reduce this risk. People already infected with stomach flu should avoid handling food for others, if possible.
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between stomach flu and the flu (influenza)?
Stomach flu isn’t related to “the flu” (influenza), which is a viral infection in your respiratory system. The
flu vaccine
won’t protect you from stomach flu. Different viruses cause these two conditions, and they affect different body systems. Most of their symptoms are different, though a few may overlap.
Influenza causes respiratory symptoms like congestion, a sore throat or a runny nose. Stomach flu causes gastrointestinal symptoms, like diarrhea, nausea and vomiting. Both may cause “systemic symptoms” like fever and fatigue. Children may have some gastrointestinal symptoms with both.
What are “flu-like symptoms?”
People probably mean different things when they use this phrase. They might be referring to symptoms of influenza. Or they might be referring to systemic symptoms, which are more common with viral infections in general than with other types. Some people might mean gastrointestinal symptoms.
What's the difference between stomach flu and food poisoning?
Stomach flu and food poisoning are both infections that cause gastroenteritis, with similar symptoms. The different names describe the different origins of the infection. Viral gastroenteritis comes from a virus, while food poisoning comes from eating food that’s contaminated, either by a virus or something else.
Food poisoning
can cause stomach flu if you get the virus from food. This is common, and in this case, both names describe the same condition. But other types of contamination can also cause food poisoning, like bacteria.
Bacterial food poisoning has a few small differences from stomach flu
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Almost everyone gets stomach flu at some point. Since many different viruses can cause it, you may get it more than once. Children in daycare centers and schools and people in care facilities are more at risk of getting it from their communities, and they may experience more severe symptoms with it.
For most people, stomach flu is unpleasant but brief. But for some, it can be dangerous. If you care for a child or older person with stomach flu, watch for signs of dehydration and stay in touch with a healthcare provider. Take steps to protect yourself from the virus and to prevent it from spreading to others.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/10/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us