Tricuspid Valve Replacement & Repair
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Tricuspid Valve Repair and Replacement
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tricuspid Valve Repair and Replacement
Tricuspid valve replacement and repair are surgical procedures that treat diseases affecting one of four heart valves. The procedures can ease symptoms and increase survival in people with tricuspid regurgitation or tricuspid stenosis. Traditional tricuspid valve surgery requires open-heart surgery. Less invasive procedures may also be available.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mitral & Tricuspid Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Tricuspid valve repair and replacement treat a leaky valve or a valve with leaflets that limit blood flow.
What are tricuspid valve replacement and repair?
Tricuspid valve replacement and repair are procedures that fix issues with your heart’s
tricuspid valve
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your tricuspid valve is one of four
valves
that manage blood flow through your heart. It’s on the right side of your heart, between the upper
chamber
(atrium) and lower chamber (ventricle). It ensures that blood flows in the correct direction — from the right atrium down to the right ventricle. A tricuspid valve has three flaps (leaflets) that open and close as
blood
flows through it.
It’s not easy to hear that your heart isn’t working well. But it’s good to know that valve repair or replacement can improve your daily life and help you do the things you want to do.
What does tricuspid valve replacement or repair treat?
Tricuspid valve replacement or repair treats
tricuspid valve disease
conditions. These affect how well your valve works. The main types are:
Tricuspid
regurgitation
. Your valve doesn’t close tightly enough, allowing blood to leak backward.
Tricuspid stenosis
. Your valve’s leaflets (flaps) are too stiff, which can restrict blood from flowing.
When your tricuspid valve doesn’t function correctly, your heart may have to work harder to supply your body with blood. This can cause symptoms like fatigue and
shortness of breath
. It also may lead to complications like
heart failure
.
Is it better to repair or replace the tricuspid valve?
Usually, repairing your tricuspid valve and keeping your own
heart
tissue is best. But you may need a replacement valve if you have too much damage on your valve and surrounding tissue.
Advertisement
There are two types of replacement valves: biological and mechanical. A biological valve may come from an animal or deceased human donor. A mechanical valve is made completely out of synthetic material.
If you receive a valve from an animal or human donor, you may not need to take
blood thinners
afterward. But mechanical valves increase the risk of
blood clots
, so you’ll need to take blood thinners for life.
How common is this procedure?
Tricuspid valve surgery is rare, especially as an isolated surgery. This is an operation where a surgeon doesn’t fix anything else. Surgeons performed about
5,000 isolated tricuspid valve surgeries
in the U.S. from 2004 through 2013. Many people with tricuspid valve issues didn’t receive surgery in the past because of the high risk. That may be changing with newer procedures that offer a minimally invasive option.
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for tricuspid valve replacement or repair?
Before surgery to repair or replace your tricuspid valve, you may:
Learn what to expect before, during and after surgery
Discuss potential risks of the surgery with your healthcare team
Ask questions about the procedure you’re having
Sign a form giving consent for surgery
Plan for your recovery, including medications and any help you’ll need at home
You may need to take certain tests before tricuspid valve surgery. These tests ensure you’re healthy enough for surgery and help your provider plan the procedure. Tests may include:
Blood tests
Electrocardiogram
(EKG)
Imaging tests like a
chest X-ray
or
echocardiogram
to take pictures of the inside of your heart
What happens during tricuspid valve surgery?
Surgeons often perform tricuspid valve surgery with an open-heart approach. This involves an incision either through the middle of your chest or from the side.
The surgical team will:
Give you
anesthesia
to put you to sleep
Make an incision in your chest to gain access to your heart
Give you medication to stop your heart
Connect you to a
heart-lung bypass machine
to keep your blood circulating
Perform the specific type of tricuspid valve replacement or repair
Depending on the valve problem, there are several approaches to tricuspid valve surgery. The surgeon might:
Perform
annuloplasty
to reinforce the annulus, a ring of tissue at the base of the valve’s leaflets
Remove the valve and replace it with a biological or mechanical one
Reshape the valve using sutures (stitches)
Separate the valve’s leaflets if they’re stuck together
Sew or patch any torn leaflets
Can the tricuspid valve be repaired or replaced without open-heart surgery?
There are less invasive options for tricuspid valve surgery that use smaller incisions and may not require a bypass machine. Your surgeon will let you know which type of surgery is best for you. Minimally invasive options include:
Advertisement
Right thoracotomy approach.
Surgeons perform this procedure through a small incision on the right side of your chest (
between ribs
). They often use it for tricuspid valve surgery and
mitral valve repair
.
Robotically assisted surgery
.
Robotically assisted tricuspid valve repair
involves several small incisions in your chest wall. Robotic technology helps your surgeon perform the procedure.
Transcatheter tricuspid valve repair or replacement
.
Your healthcare team uses smaller incisions and threads a thin tube (catheter) through a vein to perform the procedure. This may include widening a valve’s narrow opening with
valvuloplasty
.
Can I have other procedures along with tricuspid valve surgery?
Yes, it’s common for surgeons to perform other procedures at the same time as tricuspid valve repair or replacement. For example:
Catheter ablation
for
arrhythmia
Coronary artery bypass
for
coronary artery disease
Repair or replacement of your
aortic valve
or
mitral valve
What happens after tricuspid valve repair or replacement?
After tricuspid valve surgery, you’ll probably stay in the hospital for a few nights. The length of your stay depends on several factors, including your overall health and the type of procedure you received.
Before you leave the hospital, your healthcare team will monitor you and order imaging tests to ensure the repair or replacement is working.
Advertisement
To prevent complications, you may have to take medications. These may include anticoagulants for blood clots and
antibiotics
for infection.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mitral & Tricuspid Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of tricuspid heart valve replacement and repair?
Tricuspid repair or replacement can:
Correct a tricuspid valve disorder
Help you take part in activities and complete daily tasks
Help you live longer with tricuspid valve disease
Lessen or eliminate symptoms like weakness, fatigue, shortness of breath and swelling in your abdomen, legs or feet
What are the risks or complications of tricuspid valve repair or replacement?
Tricuspid valve repair or replacement is invasive and has several potential risks, including:
Bleeding
Blood clots
Heart rhythm issues (arrhythmia) or the need for a pacemaker
Infection
Stroke
Heart failure
Kidney failure
Valve dysfunction despite replacement
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time for a tricuspid valve replacement?
Recovery time after tricuspid valve repair or replacement depends on several factors, including your overall health. Most people need several months after open-heart surgery to return to normal activities. Recovery from transcatheter procedures is shorter — usually a few weeks.
How long does a replacement valve last?
A biological replacement valve can last 10 to 20 years. A mechanical valve can last indefinitely — possibly the rest of your life.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider after tricuspid heart valve replacement?
After tricuspid valve surgery, report any symptoms that could mean the valve or heart isn’t functioning well, like:
Advertisement
Dizziness
or lightheadedness
Extreme
fatigue
Sudden weight gain
Swelling
in your feet or ankles
Also, call your healthcare provider if you have signs of infection, like:
Chills
Drainage from the incision
Fever
Pain that gets worse
Redness around the incision site
Seek emergency medical help if you have any of these symptoms, which may indicate a life-threatening problem with heart function:
Chest pain
Pressure or tightness in your chest
Sudden, severe shortness of breath
Fainting
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Just getting through the day can be a challenge when a valve in your heart isn’t working well. But you may find relief with tricuspid valve replacement and repair. If you have tricuspid regurgitation or tricuspid stenosis, talk to your cardiologist about whether this type of surgery can help. Don’t be afraid to ask questions about the procedure you’re discussing.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Problems with your heart can be scary. Our experts can diagnose and treat mitral & tricuspid heart valve disease.
Mitral & Tricuspid Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/20/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment