Cholecystectomy (Gallbladder Removal): Surgery & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Procedures
/
Cholecystectomy (Gallbladder Removal)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cholecystectomy (Gallbladder Removal)
You might need to have a cholecystectomy, surgery to remove your gallbladder, if you have a chronic or persistent gallbladder disease. Gallstones are the most common reason. If you have this surgery, you’ll be in good company. It’s one of the most common procedures performed worldwide. In the U.S., most surgeons offer it as a laparoscopic procedure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Recovery and Outlook
Overview
After cholecystectomy, bile flows directly from your liver to your intestine through the common bile duct.
What is a cholecystectomy?
A cholecystectomy is a surgical operation to remove your
gallbladder
— the small, hollow organ that stores bile for your digestive system. Gallbladder removal surgery is a common treatment for
gallbladder disease
because these conditions often cause more problems than the surgery. You can
live a healthy life without a gallbladder
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Why is gallbladder removal needed?
Gallstones
are the most common reason for a cholecystectomy. Some people have no symptoms, but those who do often have repeat issues.
You might need gallbladder removal surgery if gallbladder disease:
Interferes with your quality of life
Poses significant risks to your health
Is expected to continue and/or get worse
That’s often true for conditions like:
Chronic cholecystitis
Gallbladder cancer
How will gallbladder removal affect my body?
Gallbladder removal changes how bile flows in your body. Instead of storing extra bile for digestion, your
liver
sends it straight to your
small intestine
.
Most people experience a temporary adjustment period in their digestive systems after gallbladder removal. For the first month or so, you might have more trouble digesting fats and heavier meals. This should gradually improve over time.
Most people can resume a normal, healthy eating plan after their recovery. But a small number of people develop longer-term digestive difficulties, for unclear reasons.
Procedure Details
Is a cholecystectomy a major operation?
Cholecystectomy is a common procedure with a relatively easy recovery. Surgeons do most
laparoscopically
, using small incisions to reduce pain and speed healing. Sometimes, people need open surgery, but laparoscopic is the standard.
How should I prepare for gallbladder removal surgery?
To get you ready for surgery, your care team will:
Advertisement
Run lab tests to make sure you’re healthy enough for the procedure, and if not, they may suggest a temporary alternative, like a
cholecystostomy
Explain the surgery and get your consent (they’ll let you know if they’re planning an open or laparoscopic operation — though that may change during surgery)
Ask you to avoid eating, smoking and certain medications beforehand to help prevent complications
When it’s time, you’ll get an IV for fluids and medicine. You’ll go under
general anesthesia
. A breathing tube will help keep your airway open during surgery.
What happens during cholecystectomy surgery?
Laparoscopic surgery
:
Your surgeon will:
Make a small incision near your belly button and two to three more in your upper right abdomen
Inflate your abdomen with gas to create space
Insert a laparoscope (camera) to view the area on a monitor
Use thin tools to remove your gallbladder
Release the gas and close the incisions with stitches
Open surgery
:
Your surgeon will:
Make a 4- to 6-inch incision under your right ribs
Remove the gallbladder using standard surgical tools
Place a drain, if needed, and close the incision with stitches
How long does a cholecystectomy take?
A laparoscopic cholecystectomy normally takes about 60 to 90 minutes. An open cholecystectomy takes about one to two hours. It may take longer if your surgeon also checks or clears your bile ducts during surgery.
What are the benefits of gallbladder removal?
Most gallstones develop inside your gallbladder, so removing your gallbladder significantly reduces the chance that you’ll have any more. If gallstones have brought you to the hospital once, they’re likely to do so again. Cholecystectomy is the only treatment that can reliably prevent this. Most people feel it’s easier to have a planned procedure than to expect to have repeat episodes of gallstone emergencies.
What are the risks of gallbladder removal surgery?
There’s always a small risk of complications during surgery.
Specific risks of cholecystectomy include:
Pancreatitis
(irritation of your pancreas)
Bile reflux
(traces of bile escape into your stomach)
Injury to nearby blood vessels, causing excessive bleeding
Bile duct injury, causing bile leakage
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after cholecystectomy surgery?
After surgery, you’ll spend a few hours in a recovery room while you wake up from the anesthesia. You’ll have pain medication as needed. If you had a laparoscopic cholecystectomy, you might be able to go home the same day. If you had an open cholecystectomy, you’ll need to spend a few days recovering in the hospital. Your drain may remain in place for a few days. In some cases, you might go home with it.
What is the recovery time from gallbladder removal surgery?
The recovery time from a laparoscopic cholecystectomy is about two weeks. Recovery from an open cholecystectomy takes six to eight weeks. If you still have a drain in your wound, your healthcare team will remove it at your next appointment. Most people can return to work after one to two weeks. But if you do a lot of physical activity, you might need to modify your routine until you’re fully recovered.
Advertisement
Will I have to change my diet after gallbladder removal?
You may need to
adjust your diet after gallbladder removal
. Surgery and anesthesia can affect your digestive system, and your body will need time to adapt to the change in how it gets bile. Start with simple, bland foods — similar to what you’d eat if you had the flu. You may have trouble digesting high-fiber or high-fat foods at first. Your provider will guide you as you return to a normal, healthy eating pattern.
What are the potential side effects of gallbladder removal?
Most people have only short-term side effects during their recovery from cholecystectomy surgery. These might include:
Diarrhea
: This can happen as your digestive system adjusts to its new structure.
Constipation
: This can occur as a side effect of pain medications.
Gas and gas pain
: This is a side effect of the gas they use in laparoscopic surgery.
Nausea
: This can be an effect of your pain medications.
Your healthcare provider can offer advice on how to manage these short-term conditions.
Long-term effects of gallbladder removal
A small percentage of people experience longer-lasting symptoms after a cholecystectomy. Healthcare providers refer to this as post-cholecystectomy syndrome. But these symptoms, and their possible causes, are wide-ranging and don’t really describe one single condition. Post-cholecystectomy syndrome is usually a temporary diagnosis. It stands in until a provider can make a more specific one.
Advertisement
Symptoms can include:
Nausea
Indigestion
Acid reflux
Gas and bloating
Diarrhea
Abdominal pain
Jaundice
Most people have one or a few of these symptoms, but not all.
Possible contributing causes include:
Preexisting digestive diseases that were previously undiagnosed
Gallstones remaining in your bile ducts, or new ones forming there
Functional disorders of the biliary tract (biliary dyskinesia)
Unexplained pain syndromes (visceral hypersensitivity)
Complications from surgery, like bile leakage or pancreatitis
Healthcare providers treat these symptoms and conditions on a case-by-case basis.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Your healthcare provider will schedule a follow-up appointment with you a few weeks after your surgery. But be sure to contact them sooner if you develop symptoms of illness, like:
A fever (over 101 degrees Fahrenheit or 38 degrees Celsius)
Excessive or increasing pain
Swelling, skin discoloration or discharge from your incision
Persistent nausea and vomiting
Jaundice (a yellow tint to your skin and eyes)
Dark-colored pee (urine) or light-colored poop (stool)
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Thousands of people have successful cholecystectomies each year; most without any complications or side effects. Minimally invasive surgery techniques make recovery easier than ever before. Healthcare providers continue to recommend it as an elective procedure to treat persistent gallbladder diseases, like gallstones. These diseases pose a much higher risk to your health than gallbladder removal does.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have issues with your digestive system, you need a team of experts you can trust. Our gastroenterology specialists at Cleveland Clinic can help.
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us