Uterine Serous Carcinoma (USC): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Uterine Serous Carcinoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Uterine Serous Carcinoma
Uterine serous carcinoma is a rare and aggressive type of uterine cancer. It tends to spread (metastasize) and come back after treatment (recur). Treatment typically includes surgery and adjuvant therapy, like chemotherapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endometrial Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Uterine Serous Carcinoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Uterine Serous Carcinoma?
Uterine serous carcinoma (USC) is a rare type of
cancer in your uterus
. It accounts for about 10% of all uterine cancer cases. It’s a high-grade cancer, which means it’s aggressive.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This information can be difficult to absorb. Researchers are actively working on new ways to treat uterine serous carcinoma. Your healthcare team will walk you through all your options.
Stages
Healthcare providers
stage
uterine cancers, including USC, on a scale that ranges from I to IV. It’s based on if and where the cancer has spread in your body (
metastasized
). You’ll likely need to have surgery so your provider can accurately stage USC. The stages include:
Stage I:
The cancer is just in your uterus.
Stage II:
It’s spread to your cervix.
Stage III:
It’s spread to your vagina, ovaries and/or lymph nodes.
Stage IV cancer:
It’s spread to your bladder or other organs far away from your uterus.
Each of these stages has substages based on the tissues involved and the depth of the cancer cells. Your cancer care team will explain which stage you have in detail.
Almost half of
females
with uterine serous carcinoma have stage II to IV disease at the time of diagnosis.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of uterine serous carcinoma
Symptoms of uterine serous carcinoma may include:
Heavy periods or
vaginal bleeding
between periods before menopause
Vaginal bleeding or spotting
after menopause
— even a slight amount
Thin white or clear vaginal discharge if you’re postmenopausal
Bloating
Feeling pressure in your pelvis
Pelvic pain
Unexplained weight loss
Changes in bowel function
Changes in bladder function
Advertisement
Signs of USC can resemble those of many conditions. If you notice unusual pain or irregular vaginal bleeding, talk to your healthcare provider. An accurate diagnosis is key so you can get the right treatment.
Uterine serous carcinoma causes
Researchers are still learning about the causes of USC. Cells in the uterus develop mutations, or changes in their DNA. The mutated cells grow out of control and form a tumor.
So far, researchers have found several gene mutations linked to USC.
Risk factors
Risk factors for uterine serous carcinoma include:
Being over age 55
History of breast cancer
Tamoxifen
usage (an antiestrogen medication to help treat breast cancer)
Hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC)
Black women are more likely to be diagnosed with USC compared to Hispanic and non-Hispanic white women.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
To start, your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms, medical history and risk factors. They’ll do a physical and pelvic exam. They’ll need to remove a sample of tissue (biopsy) to confirm the diagnosis. Ways to do this include:
Endometrial biopsy
Hysteroscopy
Dilation and curettage (D&C)
Your provider will then send the tissue sample to a lab. A
pathologist
will look at it under a microscope to see whether it’s cancer or not.
Your provider may recommend other tests, like imaging and blood tests.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Treatment for uterine serous carcinoma — regardless of the stage — typically involves surgery and adjuvant (extra) therapy with chemotherapy or radiation. This is to decrease the rate of this cancer coming back (
recurring
).
Surgery
In early-stage USC, surgery is the main treatment. Surgery types include:
Removing your uterus, cervix, fallopian tubes and ovaries
Omental biopsy (taking a small sample of your omentum, a fatty tissue that covers your abdominal organs)
pelvic washings (collecting fluid from your abdominal cavity to check for cancerous cells)
Sentinel node (lymph node) biopsy
In advanced-stage USC, removing as much of the tumor as possible (
debulking
) is the most common surgical approach.
Adjuvant therapy
Adjuvant therapy
targets cancer cells that surgery didn’t destroy. For USC,
chemotherapy
is the most common adjuvant therapy. Other treatments may include:
Targeted therapy
Immunotherapy
Radiation therapy
Your cancer care team will walk you through your treatment options. They’ll make a plan that’s unique to your needs and goals.
They may ask if you want to join a
clinical trial
. These are studies that test out new therapies to treat conditions like cancer. There are ongoing studies to try out combinations of therapies that may treat various stages of USC.
Advertisement
It may be helpful to ask your cancer care team the following questions:
Can I join a clinical trial?
What’s the goal of my treatment?
How will I know if the treatment is working?
What side effects should I expect?
What are the chances that the cancer comes back?
What will my options be if the cancer comes back?
What symptoms should I watch out for?
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Due to the high risk of USC coming back after treatment, you’ll see your healthcare provider often. They’ll likely recommend frequent visits in the first two to three years after treatment. Then, you’ll have twice-yearly exams until five years after treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endometrial Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with uterine serous carcinoma?
Your prognosis (outlook) depends on many factors, including your general health, other medical problems and the stage of the cancer. Compared to other, more common types of endometrial cancer, USC tends to have a more challenging prognosis. It also has a higher chance of coming back (recurring). Researchers estimate the recurrence rate to be
31% to 80%
even in its early stages.
According to
one study
, the estimated five-year
survival rate
for stage I to II USC is 74%. The five-year survival rate for stage III to IV is 33%. It’s important to remember that these are only estimates based on one study of a group of people. You’re not those people — you and your situation are unique. Researchers are currently working on new developments in USC treatments. This will change these survival rates.
Advertisement
Your healthcare team will give you a better idea of what to expect.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A cancer diagnosis — especially a rare one like uterine serous carcinoma — can cause a flood of different emotions. The volume of new information can be overwhelming. An important thing to remember is that statistics can’t tell you how your treatment will go. Your healthcare team will be by your side every step of the way. They’ll tailor your treatment to meet your needs and goals. Lean on loved ones for support, too.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have endometrial cancer, you’ll want the best care. Cleveland Clinic’s experts are here to help with personalized treatment focusing on your needs.
Endometrial Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/09/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment