UCL (Tommy John) Injury: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
UCL (Tommy John) Injury
Advertisement
Advertisement
UCL (Tommy John) Injury
Ulnar collateral ligament injury is an inner elbow injury. It’s mainly an overuse injury and is most famously known as a baseball pitcher’s arm injury. But a UCL can happen to anyone who repeatedly uses strenuous overhead arm movements. Symptoms include pain and tenderness at your elbow. Some might feel a sudden pop at the inner elbow.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Sports Medicine Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a UCL injury?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is a UCL injury?
Repetitive motions like overhand throwing stresses the UCL and can lead to an injury.
A UCL injury (Tommy John injury) is an inner elbow injury. It happens when you stretch or tear your ulnar collateral
ligament
. Your UCL is a strong band of tissue on the pinky finger side of your elbow.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This ligament supports your
elbow joint
. You use it when you raise your arm to throw something overhead. Overuse is the most common reason why people injure their UCLs.
Ulnar collateral ligament injuries are most common in people who play sports that involve repeatedly throwing a ball or another object overhead. Baseball is a prime example. The injury’s nickname refers to a famous baseball player who recovered from a severe UCL tear after surgery. But anyone who repeatedly uses strenuous overhead arm movements can have a UCL injury.
Grades of UCL injuries
Healthcare providers characterize ULC injuries by the amount of damage done to your ligament. The classifications or grades of UCL injuries are:
Grade 1
: Your ligament is stretched but not torn.
Grade 2
: Your ligament is stretched and may have a small tear.
Grade 3
: Your ligament is completely torn.
Very rarely, a UCL injury will pull a small piece of
bone
when the ligament tears away from the bone (
avulsion fracture
).
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a UCL injury
Your symptoms depend on whether you stretch or tear your UCL. They may be mild or moderate (Grades 1 and 2) or severe (Grade 3).
You may have a mild to moderate injury if you:
Can’t throw a ball or object as fast or as hard as you usually do
Have pain and tenderness on the inner side of your elbow, particularly pain you notice during or after activities like throwing balls overhead
Have pain when you quickly move your arm forward to reach for something
Feel like your elbow is unstable or weak
Notice your hand grip seems weak
Advertisement
You may have a severe injury if you:
Feel a sudden pop along the inside of your elbow
Have severe pain
Lose your ability to throw
Feel tingling and numbness in your pinky and ring fingers
Tommy John injury causes
Repetitive stress, falling on your outstretched arm and
traumatic injury
may lead to a Tommy John injury:
Repetitive stress or overuse can happen when you repeatedly raise your arm to throw something.
Traumatic injury
from falling on your outstretched arm can cause a UCL tear.
Dislocating your elbow
or
breaking i
t can damage your UCL.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose ulnar collateral ligament injuries
Your healthcare provider (usually an
orthopedic specialist
or a
sports medicine specialist
) will review your medical and athletic history. They’ll do a
physical examination
. They’ll check to see if it hurts when you move your arm or elbow. During the exam, they’ll check:
How far you can move your arm (range of motion)
Your elbow strength and stability
Your
arm muscle
mass and appearance
They may do a
valgus stress test
to see if your elbow joint is loose.
They may do other imaging tests like:
CT scan
and
X-rays
to check for bone stress fractures and other bone issues that may cause elbow pain or keep you from moving your elbow
MRI scan
that may show injuries to
tendons
and ligaments or small fractures
Arthrogram
, which gives providers a detailed view of what’s going on inside your elbow joint
Management and Treatment
How is a torn UCL treated?
That depends on your situation. A small tear in your UCL may heal on its own or with nonsurgical treatments. But you may need surgery if you have a severe injury.
Your healthcare provider may recommend PRICEMM to support healing. PRICEMM stands for:
Protection
: This could be a hinged-elbow brace that supports your elbow while your ligament heals.
Rest
: This means taking a break from activities where you use overhead throws.
Ice
: Applying ice to your elbow eases pain and swelling.
Medication
: This may be
NSAIDs
like
ibuprofen
(Advil®, Motrin®) and
naproxen
(Aleve®). Ask your provider about a prescription-strength NSAID if you need it.
Modalities
: This is
physical therapy
to strengthen the
muscles
around your elbow.
Your orthopedic specialist may recommend
platelet-rich plasma injections
. This treatment involves injecting platelets from your blood into your ligament. The platelets help your UCL heal.
Surgical treatments are:
UCL direct repair, which reattaches your UCL to your bone
Tommy John surgery
, which fixes torn or unstable UCLs by reinforcing them with a piece of healthy tendon
When should I seek care?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have elbow pain or weakness that affects your ability to make overhead throws. They may refer you to a specialist for tests and treatment. If you’re receiving treatment, let your provider know if your symptoms get worse.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Sports Medicine Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have an ulnar collateral ligament injury?
You should expect to be patient and take it easy while your ligament heals. The time it may take to heal depends on your situation. If you need surgery, recovery may take a year. Recovery time may be shorter if you tear your UCL but don’t need surgery. It may be several weeks or months for your ligament to heal.
Prevention
Can UCL injuries be prevented?
Proper conditioning, proper elbow movement technique and rest when you feel elbow discomfort can help prevent ulnar collateral ligament injury. In athletes, a pitch count limit and required rest can help protect against injury.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ulnar collateral ligament injury is an inner elbow injury. It’s mainly an overuse injury and is most famously known as a baseball pitcher’s arm injury. However, it can happen to anyone who repeatedly uses strenuous overhead arm movements. Symptoms include pain and tenderness at your elbow. Some might feel a sudden pop at the inner elbow.
If you’re not an athlete or using repetitive overhead arm movements, your elbow might heal with simple treatments such as rest, ice, medications and physical therapy. Tommy John surgery uses a tendon from another body area or a donor as a replacement ligament. You and your healthcare provider will decide which treatments are best for you based on how severe your injury is and how much you need to use strenuous overhead arm motions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If an injury puts you on the bench, you want experts by your side. Cleveland Clinic’s sports medicine specialists can get you back in the game.
Schedule Sports Medicine Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment