Urethral Caruncle: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Urethral Caruncle
Advertisement
Advertisement
Urethral Caruncle
A urethral caruncle is a noncancerous growth that forms on your urethral opening. There’s a link between this condition and low levels of estrogen, so it’s most common after menopause. You don’t need treatment unless it causes symptoms. But a proper diagnosis is important because urethral caruncles can resemble other, more serious lesions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Urethral Caruncle?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is a Urethral Caruncle?
A urethral caruncle is a red or dark pink piece of tissue that sticks out on one edge of your urethral opening.
A urethral caruncle (pronounced “yu-REE-threl” “KAR-uhng-kuhl”) is a small, noncancerous (benign) growth. It grows on the outside of your
urethra
. It usually sticks out a little on one side. Urethral caruncles aren’t cancer and usually aren’t dangerous.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
They happen most often in
females
who’ve been through
menopause
. They’re also the most common type of urethral
lesion
that affects females.
Most of the time, they don’t need treatment. But these growths sometimes look like other, more serious lesions. For this reason, it’s a good idea to talk with a healthcare provider. They can rule out other conditions, like cancer.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a urethral caruncle?
In most cases, urethral caruncles don’t cause any symptoms. Most people don’t even know they have one until a healthcare provider finds it during an exam. But sometimes, you may develop symptoms like:
Bleeding, especially while wiping
A burning sensation when peeing
Pain
What does it look like?
Urethral caruncles usually measure 1 to 2 centimeters in diameter. That’s about the size of an aspirin tablet. They also tend to stick out on one edge. They’re usually red or pink. But they can turn black or purple if a
blood clot
forms.
A urethral caruncle looks similar to a
urethral prolapse
. But a urethral prolapse looks more like a tiny pink donut. That’s because the prolapse causes your urethra to stick out on all edges.
What is the most common cause of urethral caruncles?
Medical experts aren’t certain what causes urethral caruncles. But you’re at a higher risk if you’ve gone through menopause. Experts believe low estrogen plays a role.
Advertisement
Estrogen
keeps the skin in your genital area soft and flexible. When estrogen levels drop, you’re more likely to have dry, thin skin that tears easily. Experts think this is why urethral caruncles are more common after menopause.
Risk factors
Urethral caruncles are most common if you’ve been through menopause. They can also occur before menopause, though it’s not very common.
Urethral caruncles in males are extremely rare.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose urethral caruncles
Most of the time, healthcare providers detect urethral caruncles during routine pelvic exams. Urethral caruncles may look like other types of urethral growths. These include certain types of cancer, like:
Lymphoma
Melanoma
Sarcoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Urethral cancer
Urothelial carcinoma
Providers often recommend removing some of the tissue for testing (
biopsy
). They’ll test the sample to rule out cancer or other conditions. They may also recommend a
cystoscopy
to look inside your urethra and urinary bladder.
Management and Treatment
How do you shrink a urethral caruncle?
You don’t need to treat a urethral caruncle unless it’s causing discomfort. Healthcare providers recommend treatment if it affects your quality of life.
The most common urethral caruncle treatments include:
Anti-inflammatory medications:
A provider may recommend creams that you apply to the urethral caruncle. This includes a
corticosteroid
cream. These medications help ease swelling and irritation.
Topical estrogen cream:
This is a type of
hormone replacement therapy
that helps restore your estrogen levels.
Urethral caruncle removal:
If other treatments don’t work, a provider may surgically remove a urethral caruncle. Even after surgery, there’s a chance it can come back.
How do you apply estrogen cream?
Follow these steps to apply estrogen cream to a urethral caruncle:
Wash your hands with soap and water.
Apply a pea-sized amount of estrogen cream to an applicator or a clean finger.
Spread the cream over your vaginal and urethral areas. Use your other hand to spread your labia (lips) and apply cream just inside your vagina. It doesn’t need to go far.
Wash your hands with soap and water again.
Are there home remedies?
Yes. In addition to using topical creams, you can take warm
sitz baths
. A sitz bath can soothe the area and help ease your symptoms.
Some people also apply petroleum jelly to the caruncle. Petroleum jelly acts as a barrier to help alleviate irritation.
How long does it take to go away?
It depends. You may start to see improvements within six weeks of using a topical estrogen cream. But it may take six months or longer for a urethral caruncle to completely go away. And if you stop treatment, it may grow back.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call a healthcare provider right away if you have pain or bleeding around your urethra. You should also reach out if it burns or hurts when you pee.
If a healthcare provider thinks you have a urethral caruncle, you may want to ask:
Do I need a biopsy to confirm the diagnosis?
If I need a biopsy, when will I know the results?
Do you recommend any other types of testing?
What are my treatment options?
Will I need surgery?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a urethral caruncle?
Your healthcare provider may recommend tests if they think you have one. Tests help rule out more serious conditions, like cancer.
You don’t need treatment unless the growth causes pain or other problems. If it does, your provider will likely prescribe a cream or medications. If those treatments don’t work, you may need surgery.
Additional Common Questions
Is a urethral caruncle the same as a polyp?
No. A urethral polyp is a different type of urethral lesion. It most commonly affects females. Urethral caruncles typically develop after menopause. A urethral polyp is present at birth. Urethral polyps consist of tough tissue. They’re more likely to cause blood in your pee and a urinary blockage. Blockages cause a weak pee stream or completely stop you from being able to pee.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be stressful and scary to notice any changes in your body, especially in your more sensitive areas. And it can be easy for your mind to jump to worst-case scenarios when you see a growth. But a urethral caruncle isn’t usually a cause for concern, and treatment is often successful. Still, it’s important to see a healthcare provider as soon as you notice any changes. And if they cause symptoms, that’s your body’s way of telling you something is wrong. A provider can make an official diagnosis and recommend the best therapy for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment