Child Abuse Types, Signs & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Child Abuse
Advertisement
Advertisement
Child Abuse
There are many forms of child abuse. Children can experience physical, emotional or sexual abuse or neglect. Learn the signs of child abuse so you can recognize them. If you suspect a child is experiencing abuse, seek professional help and keep the child away from the abuser.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
What is child abuse?
Child abuse is hurting a child. It occurs when a child experiences harm or neglect. Often, the abuser is someone the child knows. It may be a parent, family member, caregiver or family friend.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most U.S. child abuse laws agree on this definition of child abuse: Any intentional harm or mistreatment of a child under age 18 is abuse and a criminal offense.
Another term for child abuse and neglect is
adverse childhood experiences (ACEs)
. If untreated, these experiences can impact a child’s lifelong health and well-being.
Child abuse statistics
Child abuse and neglect are common. In 2021, an estimated 600,000 U.S. children were victims of child abuse. That same year, 1,820 U.S. children died of abuse and neglect.
Is child abuse a felony?
Prosecutors can charge child abuse as either a misdemeanor or felony, depending on the seriousness of the crime. Most child abuse crimes are felonies.
What are the different types of child abuse?
Child abuse can come in many forms:
Physical child abuse
. Slapping, pushing, punching, kicking,
shaking
or burning a child or not allowing a child to eat, drink or use the bathroom.
Emotional child abuse
. Frequently verbal, involving insults, constant criticism, harsh demands, threats and yelling.
Child sexual abuse
. Rape, incest, fondling, indecent exposure, using a child in pornography or exposing a child to pornographic material.
Medical child abuse
. Intentionally trying to make a child sick or not treating a medical condition.
Child neglect
. Failing to provide a child with food, shelter, education, medical care and emotional support.
Advertisement
Is spanking child abuse?
State laws vary on physical punishment like spanking and when it crosses the line into abuse. If spanking injures your child — resulting in bruises, swelling or broken skin — it’s abuse.
Research indicates that spanking can hinder your child’s social development. Specifically, spanking may increase your child’s risk for low self-esteem, low academic performance and strained family relationships.
Here are some things to ask yourself when deciding whether to spank your child:
Am I doing this to educate my child? Or to instill fear?
Does my child know that I love them?
What lesson am I imparting to my child?
Will I feel good about this decision later?
To learn more about healthy discipline strategies, talk to your child’s
pediatrician
.
How does sexual abuse affect a child?
Researchers have noted certain characteristics in children who’ve experienced abuse. Some behaviors may be more noticeable, like:
Acting out sexually in inappropriate ways
Chronic
belly pain
,
headaches
or other physical complaints
Return to childish behaviors like thumb-sucking and
bedwetting
Running away
Self-destructive behavior like cutting and
self-harm
Severe behavioral changes
Other characteristics may be harder to identify, like:
Anxiety
and
depression
Difficulty learning and concentrating
Evidence of
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Lack of emotional development
Poor self-esteem
Recurring
nightmares
Suicidal thoughts
and/or attempts
Who is more at risk of child abuse and neglect?
Some children are at a higher risk of experiencing abuse and neglect. Risk factors include children who:
Live in poverty (rates of child abuse are five times higher for children in families whose income is below the national poverty level)
Are younger than 4 years of age
Have special needs
What are the signs of child abuse?
Signs of child abuse may not be obvious. You may first notice a shift in the child’s behavior. Or they may react differently to situations. Any change in a child’s behavior or temperament without an obvious trigger can be a
sign of abuse
.
Other signs of child abuse include:
Physical signs:
Looking unclean or neglected
Unexplained bruises, welts, sores or skin issues that don’t seem to heal
Untreated medical or dental conditions
Pain in their genital area
Vaginal bleeding
other than a menstrual cycle (period)
Unusual
discharge
or pain
Emotional signs:
Fear of one or both parents or caregivers (including babysitters, daycare workers, teachers and coaches)
Fear of an activity or place
Crying often or in situations that seem inappropriate
Regression (returning to behaviors typical of a younger child)
Behavioral signs:
Acting differently from other children, especially if it’s a sudden change
Frequent absences from school
Being withdrawn
Bullying peers or younger children or being bullied themselves
Trouble learning and paying attention
Avoiding physical contact with adults, peers or older youth
Overachievement or being overly eager to please
Unusual, sexualized behaviors or comments, especially ones that seem more mature or pornographic
Advertisement
Who can be an abuser?
Frequently, the abuser is someone the child knows and is close to, like:
A parent or other family member
A family friend
A caregiver
Anyone close to the child (teacher, coach, religious leader)
Peers or older children who’ve experienced abuse themselves and are re-enacting what happened to them
Why do people abuse children?
Several situations can result in a person abusing a child:
History of abuse
. Parents or other adults who hurt children may have experienced abuse themselves. Experiencing abuse can also lead an adult to look the other way if their child is in an abusive situation. But not all people who experienced abuse will abuse others. Most survivors of child abuse don’t harm children.
Difficulty caring for children
. Some adults hurt children because they don’t know how to discipline them. Or they have unrealistic expectations for the child’s behavior.
Feelings of anger
. Some people who abuse have overwhelming feelings of anger when faced with an obstacle. They may have issues with family, money, work or relationships. Their frustration and anger can result in abusive actions. In some cases, the person sees the child as the source of the issue, causing them to act out against the child.
Untreated mental health conditions
. People who have depression,
substance use disorder
or
personality disorders
are at a higher risk for abusing children.
Advertisement
If you’ve abused or neglected a child or witnessed signs of child abuse, seek help from a local mental health agency. Getting help can prevent or reduce the child’s long-term trauma.
How does a healthcare provider detect child abuse?
The healthcare provider will carefully evaluate the child, looking for physical and behavioral signs of abuse. County or state authorities may also take part in the investigation.
The diagnosis may involve:
Physical exam
Lab tests
X-rays
or other imaging tests
The diagnostic team will also:
Ask about the child’s medical and developmental history
Observe the child’s behavior and interactions with parents or caregivers
Talk to parents or caregivers
Talk to the child, if possible
What are the treatments for a child who has been abused?
Children may need immediate medical treatment if they have physical injuries, seem dazed or lose consciousness. Follow your healthcare provider’s recommendations for follow-up visits or visits to specialists as needed.
Children who experience abuse most likely need ongoing behavioral health care. Counseling and therapy can help prevent future abuse and reduce long-term damage. During psychotherapy sessions, a mental health professional helps the child learn to trust and boosts their self-esteem. They also teach children about healthy relationships and conflict management strategies.
Advertisement
Therapy is beneficial for parents, too. It can help cope with the situation, uncover the roots of abuse and learn healthy parenting strategies.
How do I report child abuse?
Take action if you notice signs of child abuse or if abuse is happening in your house.
Talk to the child
. Talk to the child if you notice a change in their behavior or if they start reacting in worrisome new ways. Having open, friendly conversations (within healthy boundaries) allows the child to trust you and feel comfortable telling you if they don’t feel safe. Let children know it’s OK to tell you something even if it might upset someone.
Seek help
. Don’t let fear or embarrassment prevent you from seeking help. When you contact authorities to report abuse, your name isn’t released to the family or person involved. If you suspect that a child is experiencing abuse, call or contact:
911 if the child is in immediate danger
Your local child protective agency, police or hospital
The Childhelp National Child Abuse Hotline (1-800-422-4453), open 24/7
A pediatrician, who can also help direct you in cases of child abuse
A religious or spiritual advisor, who can provide counseling and support
You should also:
Keep the child away from the abuser until authorities are notified
Supervise any future contact with the person
Never threaten the suspected abuser or take the law into your own hands
If you think you’ve abused a child
or are at risk for committing abuse:
Reach out to a friend, family member and health professional
Make sure the child is safe and away from you during this time
Seek a counselor who can help you understand and work through your feelings
What is child abuse clearance?
Child abuse clearance is a process a person goes through to show that they aren’t a perpetrator. Foster parents need this type of clearance. You’ll also need child abuse clearance if you want to work or volunteer with children. It’s part of the application process to help employers select potential employees. Child abuse clearance laws vary from state to state.
What’s the outlook for children who’ve been abused?
Children who experience abuse may have:
Immediate injuries, including cuts, bruises and broken bones
Frequent injuries
Learning challenges
Emotional, psychological and behavioral issues, including depression
Anxiety and difficulty with social skills
Fear of certain adults or places
Child abuse can leave a lasting impact on children if left untreated. Adult survivors of child abuse are more likely to have social and emotional issues. They may:
Abuse others or accept abuse
Attempt suicide
Care for others at the expense of their own well-being
Have sexual issues, including engaging in risky sexual behavior, becoming sexually promiscuous or avoiding sex entirely
Have trouble trusting people
Adult survivors may also have medical and behavioral issues like:
Chronic pain, daily headaches,
fibromyalgia
and abdominal pain
Depression
Low self-esteem
Substance use disorder or
alcohol use disorder
Toxic stress, which can affect brain development and increase the risk for PTSD and learning, attention and memory issues
How can I improve the long-term health of a child who has experienced abuse?
Seek out a mental health professional. Therapy can help the child process what happened to them, learn to build healthy relationships and reduce the lasting effects of the abuse. Managing the emotional impact of abuse can improve children’s long-term physical health, too.
How do I help a child who confided in me about abuse?
If a child confides about abuse, take the child seriously. Don’t brush it off or assume they’re being dramatic or making things up. To keep the child safe:
Encourage open discussion, listen as the child talks and allow them to explain what happened in their words, comfort them and remind them you’re available to talk or listen
Remind the child that it isn’t their fault; they aren’t responsible for the abuse
Ensure the child stays safe by separating the child from the abuser
Contact a healthcare provider who can guide you on next steps
Get additional support like counseling, therapy or support groups
Be patient — children recover at different rates; support the child during the recovery process
What questions should I ask my child’s pediatrician?
If your child has experienced abuse, talk to your child’s pediatrician. Ask:
What physical medical care does my child need now?
What type of therapy will help my child?
Will family therapy be beneficial to us?
How can I help my child recover?
Is there anything we should avoid doing or saying?
How else can I keep my child safe?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Unfortunately, child abuse is common. Children who experience abuse are at risk for health issues both now and in the future, but there’s hope for recovery. Learn to recognize the signs of child abuse, like a child acting strangely or differently. If you suspect abuse, keep the child safe from the abuser and seek professional help. Physical and mental health care can help reduce the lasting effects of child abuse. Talk to your healthcare provider (or your child’s) about ways to stop and prevent child abuse.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/09/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us