Osteoblastoma: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Osteoblastoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Osteoblastoma
Osteoblastoma is a type of bone tumor. It’s not cancerous, but it can grow large and may cause pain or swelling. It also weakens your bone and increases your risk of fractures. Orthopaedists treat osteoblastoma with surgery to remove it. This usually cures it, but sometimes, it comes back.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Osteoblastoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Osteoblastoma?
Osteoblastoma is a benign (noncancerous) bone tumor, but it can grow quickly and cause side effects, such as compressing a nerve, causing neuropathy.
Osteoblastoma is a type of
benign bone tumor
. It’s not cancerous, but it can cause changes in your
bones
. The tumor attacks your healthy bone tissue and creates a new kind of tissue called osteoid. Osteoid is weaker than healthy bone tissue, so it weakens your bones and makes them more prone to
fractures
. Osteoblastomas may also cause symptoms as they grow bigger, like pain or swelling.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Where does osteoblastoma occur?
Osteoblastoma can grow in any bone, but it's most common in your
spine
. Up to 40% occur there.
It may also occur in your:
Legs or feet
Arms or hands
Jawbone
Ribcage
Collarbone
Breastbone
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of osteoblastoma
The most common symptom of osteoblastoma is
bone pain
— a dull, aching type of pain that seems to come from deep in your body. You might also see a lump or swelling under your skin that’s tender to touch. An osteoblastoma in one of your legs or feet might cause a
limp
or change the way you walk.
As the tumor grows bigger, it might cause additional symptoms. The average size of an osteoblastoma is 4 centimeters (cm), which is about the size of a cherry tomato. But some have been known to grow twice or even three times as big. A larger tumor might
compress a nearby nerve
, causing
nerve
-related symptoms, like:
Nerve pain
Numbness
, weakness or
tingling
in your limbs
Back pain
or
neck pain
(from a spinal osteoblastoma)
Muscle spasms
Complications of this condition
An osteoblastoma that grows too much may cause complications, including:
Bone destruction
. It can weaken and destroy healthy bone tissue, making it easy to injure.
Secondary tumors
. Sometimes,
aneurysmal bone cysts
occur as a side effect of osteoblastoma.
Nerve compression
. An osteoblastoma that compresses a nerve may cause
neuropathy
.
Scoliosis
. An osteoblastoma in your spine can cause temporary curvature (
scoliosis
).
Advertisement
Other rare complications of osteoblastoma might include:
Toxic osteoblastoma
. Very rarely, osteoblastoma appears to have caused a widespread inflammatory reaction in some people. This is called toxic osteoblastoma. It causes
inflammation
in the membrane around your bones (
periosteum
), along with
fever
and
weight loss
.
Malignant transformation
. Although osteoblastoma is a
benign tumor
, it has very rarely been reported to transform into a
cancerous one
. However, this possibility is controversial. Some experts argue that when this happens, the tumor was actually
osteosarcoma
all along.
Risk factors
Healthcare providers don’t know what causes osteoblastoma. But they have observed that it tends to occur in younger adults (under age 30). It’s also twice as common in
males as it is in females
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will start by discussing your symptoms and health history. Then, they’ll physically examine the sore or swollen spot. They’ll follow up with imaging tests, starting with
X-rays
. Depending on what the X-rays show, they might want to order more detailed imaging tests, like a
CT scan
or
MRI
. These can help locate the tumor and show how it’s affecting your surrounding tissues.
Your provider will often recognize osteoblastoma by its appearance on imaging tests. But they may need to take a tissue sample (
biopsy
) to confirm it. Once they’ve located the tumor, they can take the sample with a
biopsy needle
or with a small incision. They’ll send it to a pathology lab to analyze. A process called
immunostaining
helps
pathologists
distinguish between osteoblastoma and osteosarcoma.
Management and Treatment
How is osteoblastoma treated?
Treatment for osteoblastoma usually means
surgery
to remove the tumor. The only exception is if the tumor is located in a tricky place on your spine that’s too risky to operate on. In this case, your
orthopaedic surgeon
will use other methods to try to destroy the tumor and stop it from growing.
Procedures to treat osteoblastoma may include:
Curettage and bone grafting
. Curettage means scraping out the abnormal tissue. After scraping it out, your surgeon may fill in the hole with a
bone graft
from your own body or a donor bone.
En bloc resection
. For a large or aggressive tumor, or one that’s come back after being removed, your surgeon might choose to remove the whole section of bone containing the tumor.
Ablation therapy
. If your surgeon can’t safely remove the tumor, they may attempt to destroy it with freezing temperatures (
cryoablation
) or by burning it out (
radiofrequency ablation
).
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have osteoblastoma?
Osteoblastoma usually has a good outlook. Most people are
cured
after surgery to remove the tumor. Most bones will repair themselves from the damage. But sometimes, the tumors can grow back again. This is more common after curettage than after resection. It might be because some tumor cells were left behind. If your tumor comes back after curettage, your surgeon might do a resection next time.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Osteoblastoma isn’t cancerous or life-threatening, but it’s fast-growing and can be destructive. This means it’s best to treat it sooner than later. Many people don’t take their bone pain seriously enough to seek a diagnosis until after they’ve lived with it for several years. But it’s always worth finding out what’s causing your pain. Osteoblastoma is very treatable, and treating it can prevent it from worsening.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment