Deductive Reasoning: What It Is, Uses & Examples
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Deductive Reasoning
Advertisement
Advertisement
Deductive Reasoning
Deductive reasoning is a psychological process that helps you make decisions and solve problems. In deductive reasoning, you use general ideas or premises to come to a specific conclusion. Your brain drives deductive reasoning. Medical conditions and injuries that affect your brain may make it hard for you to process information and make decisions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is deductive reasoning?
Deductive reasoning is a psychological process that people use to make decisions and solve problems. It’s a cognitive function, meaning it’s a conscious intellectual activity like thinking and understanding. In deductive reasoning, you use general ideas or premises to come to a specific conclusion.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you’re like most people, you use deductive reasoning daily, without thinking about the process. But deductive reasoning is a complex process that:
Researchers study to understand how people learn, think and make decisions
Healthcare providers like
psychologists
and
neurologists
consider when they assess cognitive abilities
Employers may evaluate as part of pre-employment testing
Your ability to use deductive reasoning relies on a healthy
brain.
Medical conditions and injuries that affect the parts of your brain that drive deductive reasoning may make it hard for you to process information and make decisions.
While healthcare providers can’t restore deductive reasoning, there are treatments that may help reduce the impact of losing some of your ability to use deductive reasoning and help you maintain quality of life.
What are examples of deductive reasoning?
Using deductive reasoning is a bit like using mental building blocks to create a solid structure. In deductive reasoning, your building blocks are ideas or premises you believe to be true. By these using ideas, you develop a conclusion that you also believe is true.
There are many examples of deductive reasoning, but one of the best known comes from Aristotle, considered the father of deductive reasoning. Here’s the process:
Advertisement
First premise: All men are mortals.
Second premise: Socrates is a man.
Conclusion: Therefore, Socrates is a mortal.
A modern example could be:
First premise: The overhead light in this room is out.
Second premise: The light switch turns on a different overhead light.
Conclusion: There’s something wrong with the first overhead light.
How does my brain manage deductive reasoning?
Neuroscientists are still unraveling exactly what goes on in your brain when you use deductive reasoning. But most agree that the
frontal lobe
in the left hemisphere of your brain plays an active role.
Research shows that different sections of your left frontal lobe support deductive reasoning at separate times. Deductive reasoning happens in stages, with specific sections of your frontal lobe becoming active depending on the specific deductive reasoning task.
What conditions affect the part of my brain that manages deductive reasoning?
There’s a very long list of conditions and factors that may affect your frontal lobe and your ability to use deductive reasoning. Some examples include:
Alzheimer’s disease
and other
neurodegenerative disorders
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Brain lesions
Brain tumors
Concussions
and other
traumatic brain injuries
Developmental delay
Frontotemporal dementia
Genetic conditions (such as
Huntington’s disease
or
Wilson’s disease
)
Intellectual disability
Learning disabilities and disorders
Lewy body dementia
Mental health disorders
, including
mood disorders
Seizure
s (especially
frontal lobe seizures
) and seizure-related conditions such as
epilepsy
Sleep disorders
Stroke
and
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
Does growing older affect deductive reasoning?
Changes in your brain as you get older may affect deductive reasoning. For example, your frontal lobe shrinks as you get older, which may affect cognitive functions like deductive reasoning.
How are conditions that affect deductive reasoning diagnosed?
Healthcare providers may do several tests to diagnose these conditions, including:
Blood tests
Brain MRI
Cognitive tests
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Electromyogram
Evoked potentials
Neuropsychological testing
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
What are tests to evaluate deductive reasoning?
Healthcare providers typically rely on neuropsychological testing to evaluate deductive reasoning. Employers, teachers and others may use different aptitude tests.
What are treatments for conditions that may affect deductive reasoning?
Treatments vary depending on the specific condition, but specific treatments may include:
Cognitive rehabilitation
. This treatment focuses on tactics, like using organization strategies, which help you manage day-to-day activities.
Cognitive behavioral therapy (
CBT
)
. This and other treatments like
light therapy
, help with sleep disorders.
Medication and
psychotherapy
.
Providers may combine these treatments to help people with mood disorders.
Occupational therapy
. In this treatment, an occupational therapist helps you overcome physical, mental and social challenges.
Physical therapy
.
Physical therapy is treatment that helps you improve how your body performs physical movements.
Speech and language therapy
. This treatment involves exercises and other steps that help improve your ability to talk and use language skills.
Treatment for neurodegenerative disorders
.
Treatments vary depending on the disorder.
Advertisement
What can I do to maintain my deductive reasoning?
The best way to keep your reasoning skills sharp is to take care of your brain. Here are some lifestyle suggestions that may help:
Drink in moderation
. If you drink beverages containing alcohol, limit drinks to two a day if you’re
male
and one a day if you’re female.
Eat well
. Fill your plate with vegetables, fruits, whole grains, lean protein and healthy fats.
Exercise your brain
. Practicing puzzles, such as jigsaw puzzles, crosswords or word searches, is an easy way to keep your brain engaged.
Get moving
. Consistent exercise is one way to keep your brain in good shape.
Get your rest
. Sleep at least seven to eight hours each night.
Protect your brain
. Use protective gear (like wearing seatbelts when you’re in a vehicle), especially while playing contact sports or on the job.
Quit smoking
. Smoking increases your risk of having an ischemic stroke.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Whenever you assemble information to make a decision or solve a problem, you’re using deductive reasoning. It’s an important cognitive function that your brain manages. Deductive reasoning is one of the factors healthcare providers consider when they’re checking on your neurological well-being. You can keep your deductive reasoning up to speed by keeping your brain healthy.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/02/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment