Cardiac (Heart) Ablation: Procedure Details & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Cardiac Ablation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cardiac Ablation
Cardiac ablation (catheter ablation) is a minimally invasive procedure that creates scars to stop the electrical impulses that cause irregular heart rhythms. Healthcare providers can use cardiac ablation to manage abnormal heart rhythms that don’t respond to medication. They move catheters (tubes) through blood vessels to reach your heart.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Providers treat abnormal heart rhythms by using cardiac ablation to create scar tissue that stops abnormal signals.
What is cardiac ablation?
Cardiac ablation (or catheter ablation) is a minimally invasive treatment for abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmias
). Healthcare providers use this procedure to find and treat abnormal tissue in your
heart
. This can correct your heart rhythm.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A
cardiologist
(heart specialist) performs a cardiac ablation procedure by inserting a catheter (tube) through a
blood vessel
to your heart. They use heat (radiofrequency ablation), cold (cryoablation) or short bursts of energy (pulsed field) to create scars in areas where the arrhythmia starts. These scars help block abnormal
electrical impulses
and prevent abnormal rhythms.
During heart ablation, you’ll generally receive
sedation
or possibly general
anesthesia
. The scars are meant to only affect tissue involved with faulty heart rhythms. They don’t cause any residual pain in your heart or create problems with your heart’s function.
What does cardiac ablation treat?
Cardiac ablation treats most types of fast heart arrhythmias, but it’s not usually the first treatment providers try. Your cardiologist may suggest this procedure if you have an abnormal heart rhythm that medication can’t treat. Your provider will evaluate your heart and overall health to choose the best procedure to treat the arrhythmia that affects you.
A heart ablation procedure can treat these types of arrhythmias:
Atrial fibrillation (Afib)
and
atrial flutter
. These cause the upper
chambers
of your heart (called the atria) to beat irregularly and ineffectively. AFib can cause clots that increase your risk of
stroke
because the blood becomes stagnant.
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT)
. People with SVT experience episodes of fast, irregular heartbeats (up to 300 beats per minute). Your heart can still pump
blood
normally, but repeated or long-lasting bouts of SVT can damage your heart.
Ventricular tachycardia (VT)
. With VT, your lower chambers (ventricles) can start to beat too rapidly. This is a potentially dangerous arrhythmia that can lead to cardiac arrest.
Advertisement
Healthcare providers may also recommend a cardiac ablation procedure if you’re at high risk of:
Ventricular fibrillation
(V-Fib):
An ineffective and irregular heartbeat that starts in your ventricles (lower heart chambers)
Sudden
cardiac arrest
:
When your heart stops without warning
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for this procedure?
Before a cardiac ablation procedure, you may need to:
Stop taking blood-thinning medications like aspirin or
warfarin
(follow your provider’s guidance and stop these medications only as directed)
Stop eating or drinking for several hours (usually after midnight) before your procedure (your provider will give you exact instructions)
Arrange for someone to pick you up and take you home from the hospital after the procedure
Wear comfortable clothing and leave jewelry and valuables at home
Get an intravenous (IV) line in your arm so you can receive medicine, including sedation or anesthesia (you’ll be relaxed, even if you’re awake)
What happens during cardiac ablation?
A provider will:
Shave, clean and numb the area where they’ll be working
Insert a small tube (sheath) through your skin and into a vein or artery to create an opening (providers use a blood vessel in your groin, arm, leg or neck)
Insert the electrode catheters (thin tubes with wires) into the sheath — they thread the catheters through your
vein
or
artery
and up to your heart (using
X-rays
to guide them)
Map out the problem area so they know which tissue to treat
Use the catheter to treat the abnormal heart tissue and block irregular rhythms
Remove the catheter and sheath from your vein or artery
How long does a heart ablation take?
A cardiac ablation can take two to four hours to complete, but often longer. The exact length of time it takes is different from person to person.
What happens afterward?
After a cardiac ablation procedure, you move to a recovery room and stay there for several hours. A nurse monitors your condition while you recover. You’ll need to stay at the hospital for six to eight hours after the procedure. Depending on your condition, you may go home that day or spend the night at the hospital.
When it’s time to go home, you’ll receive detailed instructions about at-home care. Your provider may prescribe aspirin or other blood-thinning medication to help prevent
blood clots
. You may take this medicine for several months or longer after the procedure, depending on your medical history.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of cardiac ablation?
Cardiac ablation is a minimally invasive procedure that usually doesn’t require a prolonged hospital stay. A cardiac ablation procedure can restore a normal heart rhythm when medications fail. This procedure can even be lifesaving in some cases.
How successful is heart ablation?
The cardiac ablation success rate varies by the type of abnormal heart rhythm you have. People with SVT may see a 90% to 95% success rate. But the success rate is only 60% to 80% for:
Afib
Atrial tachycardia
Ventricular tachycardia
Advertisement
What are the risks or complications of cardiac ablation?
Cardiac ablation risks are low. People rarely have complications, especially at hospitals that perform a lot of cardiac ablations. Possible risks include:
Blood clots
Damage to your blood vessel from the sheath or catheter
Damage to your heart tissue or
heart valves
Infection or bleeding
Stroke
The need for a
permanent pacemaker
You do receive some radiation during radiofrequency catheter ablation. If you’re pregnant, ask your provider if you can safely wait to have the procedure after delivering your baby.
What is the downside of cardiac ablation?
Depending on the type of abnormal heart rhythm you have, a cardiac ablation may not work. And when the procedure works, the effect isn’t always immediate. You may have symptoms for several weeks before they improve, or you may need another ablation procedure in the future.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time for a catheter ablation?
It can take several weeks to heal completely. During cardiac ablation recovery, you may continue to have arrhythmias while your heart tissue heals. This is normal.
Follow-up appointments
You’ll likely have follow-up visits with your provider for a year after your cardiac ablation. If your symptoms come back during that time, you may need to repeat the procedure.
When can I go back to work?
Unless your job involves heavy lifting or other physical labor, you’ll likely feel ready to return to work five to seven days after your catheter ablation procedure.
Advertisement
You should avoid heavy lifting (more than 10 pounds) and strenuous exercise for at least a week. Consult with your provider about when it’s safe to return to physical activity or driving.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if you experience:
Bleeding or a lump at the puncture site
Chest pain
Dizziness
or lightheadedness
Nausea
or
vomiting
Numbness
or tingling in your leg (if the puncture site is in your groin)
Drooping in your face or weakness in your arm (you should get emergency care if you have these stroke symptoms)
Racing
heart rate
Swelling (
edema
) or pain at the puncture site
Contact your provider if you have any questions or concerns about anything you’re feeling after a heart ablation.
Additional Common Questions
Is a catheter ablation major surgery?
No, a cardiac ablation isn’t major surgery. Providers perform this procedure through your blood vessels. They don’t open your chest. The only incision you’ll have is the one where they puncture your skin to go through your blood vessel.
Is catheter ablation painful?
Generally, cardiac ablation gives people mild discomfort for a short time. Many people have little or no discomfort from the ablation at all. Afterward, the site where the catheter went into your vein may be sore and have a bruise. The puncture is very small and should heal quickly.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The thought of a procedure on your heart can make you anxious. But a cardiac ablation generally has a low level of risk and helps many people with heart rhythm issues. It’s natural to have questions about a cardiac ablation, so don’t be afraid to ask. Understanding what the procedure involves can help put your mind at ease.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart rhythm is out of sync, the experts at Cleveland Clinic can find out why. We offer personalized care for all types of arrhythmias.
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/07/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment