Ischemic Stroke (Clot): What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ischemic Stroke
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ischemic Stroke
Ischemic strokes happen when a blood clot blocks a blood vessel in your brain. They are medical emergencies and can be fatal. Call emergency services right away if you think you or someone you’re with is experiencing stroke symptoms. The sooner you get treatment, the better your chances of survival.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Blood clots are the most common ischemic stroke cause.
What is an ischemic stroke?
An ischemic stroke happens when something blocks blood flow from getting to your
brain
. It’s a life-threatening medical emergency.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Ischemic strokes can cause permanent brain damage and death. If enough brain cells die, you can lose the abilities or body functions those cells control. They’re the most common type of
stroke
— around 80% of all strokes.
If you think you or someone you’re with is having a stroke,
immediately call 911 (or your local emergency services number)
. The sooner someone is diagnosed and treated, the more likely they’ll survive a stroke. Every second counts.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of an ischemic stroke?
The ischemic stroke symptoms you experience will depend on which area of your brain it affects. Some of the most common symptoms include:
Weakness or
paralysis
on one side of your face and body
Aphasia
(trouble speaking or a complete loss of speech)
Slurred or garbled speaking (dysarthria)
Loss of muscle control on one side of your face
Sudden worsening or loss of your senses (including
vision
,
hearing
,
smell
,
taste
and touch)
Blurry vision
or
double vision (diplopia)
Loss of coordination or clumsiness (ataxia)
Dizziness
or
vertigo
Nausea
and
vomiting
Neck stiffness
Mood swings
or sudden personality changes
Confusion
or agitation
Seizures
Memory loss (amnesia)
Headaches (usually sudden and severe)
Passing out or fainting
Coma
What are the warning signs of an ischemic stroke?
Ischemic strokes can cause lots of different symptoms. To recognize the warning signs in yourself or a loved one, remember the acronym
BE
FAST
:
Advertisement
Balance.
Watch for a sudden loss of balance.
Eyes.
Look out for
sudden vision loss
or changes in one or both
eyes
.
Face.
Smile. Look for a droop on one or both sides of your face.
Arms.
Raise both arms. If you’re having a stroke, one arm will sag or drop in a way that it usually doesn’t.
Speech.
You might slur your speech or have trouble choosing the right words.
Time.
Time is critical — call for help immediately. If possible, look at your watch, phone or a clock to track when symptoms start. Telling a healthcare provider when symptoms began can help them know which treatment options are best for you.
What causes ischemic strokes?
Ischemic strokes happen when something causes ischemia in your brain.
Ischemia
(pronounced “iss-KEY-me-uh”) is the medical term for cells not getting enough
blood
and dying.
Blood clots
are the most common cause.
Many health conditions can cause blood clots, such as:
Atherosclerosis (hardened arteries)
Clotting disorders
Atrial fibrillation
Heart defects (
atrial septal defects
or
ventricular septal defects
)
Microvascular ischemic disease
(which can block smaller blood vessels in your brain)
Types of ischemic strokes
There are two types of ischemic strokes:
Thrombotic strokes
.
These happen when a blood clot forms in your brain. The medical name for this process is
thrombosis
.
Embolic strokes
.
These happen when a clot called an
embolism
forms somewhere else in your body, travels to your brain and gets stuck in a
blood vessel
.
Transient ischemic attack
A
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
— sometimes called a “mini-stroke” — is like a stroke, but the effects are temporary. These are often warning signs that a person has a very high risk of having a true permanent stroke soon. A person who has a TIA needs emergency medical care as quickly as possible.
Ischemic stroke risk factors
Anybody can experience an ischemic stroke, but some groups have a higher risk, including people who:
Are older than 65
Are Black
Smoke
or use other forms of tobacco or nicotine (like
vaping
)
Use recreational or nonprescription drugs
Having certain health conditions can increase your risk, including:
High blood pressure (hypertension)
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
Alcohol use disorder
Type 2 diabetes
COVID-19
Diagnosis and Tests
How are ischemic strokes diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose an ischemic stroke with a
neurological exam
and some tests. Providers in the emergency room may diagnose it if emergency services transport you to the ER.
Your provider will use some of the following tests to confirm that you’ve had an ischemic stroke:
CT scan
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
MRI
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Blood tests
Management and Treatment
What are ischemic stroke treatments?
The most important part of treating an ischemic stroke is restoring blood flow to your brain. Healthcare providers will do this as fast as possible to reduce your risk of permanent brain damage and death.
Advertisement
The two most common treatments include:
Thrombolytic therapy
.
These are medications that dissolve clots. Providers will usually only use them if it’s been fewer than four hours since you started having stroke symptoms because they can increase your risk of dangerous internal bleeding.
Thrombectomy
.
This is surgery to remove a blood clot. Your surgeon will insert a small, thin tube (a catheter) into a
blood vessel
somewhere else in your body. Then, they’ll thread the catheter up to the clot in your brain. They’ll either vacuum the clot up in one piece or break it apart and suck up the pieces.
You may need other treatments, including:
Blood thinners.
Anticoagulant medications
thin your blood to prevent it from clotting too easily. Your providers may put you on blood thinners after thrombolytic therapy.
Oxygen therapy
.
Your brain doesn’t get enough oxygen during a stroke. Your providers may have you wear a nosepiece that gives you extra oxygen. This will make it easier to breathe and help your body restore oxygen to your brain.
Blood sugar management.
Your providers will monitor your blood glucose (blood sugar) levels to help your brain recover.
Mild intentional
hypothermia
.
Your providers might safely lower your body temperature. This can slow down brain damage during and after a stroke. But this is rare.
Advertisement
Stroke rehabilitation
Stroke rehab is an important part of treating an ischemic stroke. You’ll need stroke rehab to help you adjust to changes in your brain and body after a stroke. You may need to regain abilities you had before or adjust to new or different disabilities. You might need a combination of:
Speech therapy
to regain or improve your language and speaking abilities and control the muscles that help you talk, breathe, eat and swallow.
Physical therapy
to strengthen your muscles, improve your balance and regain the use of your arms and legs.
Occupational therapy
to help you safely complete your daily tasks, especially chores or activities that need precise body movements.
Cognitive therapy
to help improve your memory, concentration and other mental abilities.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the ischemic stroke survival rate?
It’s hard for experts to estimate a survival rate that applies to everyone. Ischemic strokes can be fatal and can cause permanent disabilities. But there’s no one set recovery timeline or outlook that’s accurate for everyone.
Ischemic strokes usually have better outcomes than
hemorrhagic strokes
, but that doesn’t mean your recovery will be automatically easier, faster or better.
Stroke recovery time
Everyone’s body responds differently to a stroke. What you can expect (the prognosis) after a stroke depends on a few factors, including:
Advertisement
Which type of ischemic stroke you had
Which areas of your brain it affected
How quickly it was treated
Your overall health
Most people take a few months to recover after a stroke. The most recovery usually happens in the first three to six months after a stroke. But it’s possible that symptoms and after-effects can linger for a year or longer. A stroke can also cause permanent disabilities and other changes in how you can use your body.
Your provider will tell you what to expect. They’ll help you set recovery goals and expectations that fit your unique health and situation.
Prevention
How can you prevent an ischemic stroke?
Maintaining your overall health is the best way to reduce your ischemic stroke risk. Try to:
Manage your blood pressure, cholesterol and any health conditions you have.
Eat plenty of healthy foods (like following the
Mediterranean diet
) and maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Quit smoking
.
Get regular physical activity.
Visit a healthcare provider for a checkup every year (or as often as they suggest). Many of the health conditions and issues that can cause ischemic strokes develop and build up over time, and may not cause symptoms you can notice. Lots of people with high blood pressure or high cholesterol never feel or sense anything wrong. Your provider can help you catch and manage any warning signs before they increase your risk of a stroke later on.
Living With
How do I take care of myself after an ischemic stroke?
Recovering and rehabbing after a stroke is hard work. Once you and your provider finalize your treatment plan, follow it as closely as possible. In general, you should:
Take your medications.
This is especially true while you’re taking blood thinners. Reducing the risk of future blood clots is important, and taking your medicine as often as your provider suggests will help your body heal.
Go to your rehab and other therapy appointments.
Tell your therapists if anything makes you feel unsafe or uncomfortable. Rehab is hard work, but you shouldn’t be in constant pain or discomfort.
Remember your mental health.
Depression
and
anxiety
are extremely common after a stroke. You’re not weak or a quitter for feeling sad or upset. Your emotional health can be just as important as how your physical body is doing. Talk to your provider or a mental health professional if you feel like you need help processing anything during your recovery.
Which foods or drinks should I avoid?
Your provider may suggest you add or remove some foods and drinks to your eating plan. They might suggest tweaks to your routine to help you manage health conditions you have and/or to lower your risk of future blood clots after an ischemic stroke.
Common foods you might need to avoid include:
Foods that have a lot of salt (sodium)
Foods high in sugar
Highly processed foods (like deli meat)
Fried foods
Alcohol
Caffeine
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) if you think you’re experiencing stroke symptoms again. Another stroke has an even higher risk of causing severe complications and being fatal. Don’t wait to call for help or go to the emergency room.
People who’ve had an ischemic stroke have an increased risk of other potentially serious complications, including:
Pneumonia
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Pulmonary embolism
Heart attack
Seizures
Call emergency services or go to the ER if you think you’re experiencing any symptoms of these complications.
Which questions should I ask my doctor?
What caused the stroke?
What’s the best way to reduce my risk of another stroke?
Will I have any long-term effects?
How long will I need stroke rehab?
Which changes to my daily routine will I need to make?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A stroke can be a scary, life-changing event. The best way to prevent an ischemic stroke is to catch the warning signs of a clot before they cause a stroke. See a healthcare provider at least every year, and ask them for help managing any conditions you have that increase your stroke risk.
If you’ve had a stroke, it can feel like your world is changed forever. But you’re still you. Recovery and rehab are hard work. Some days may be harder than others, but remember to stop and celebrate your successes and milestones.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
After a stroke, it’s essential to get treated right away. Cleveland Clinic’s stroke care specialists can help you manage recovery and improve your quality of life.
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/14/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment