Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a condition that can affect babies born preterm. If your baby has underdeveloped lungs, they may need oxygen therapy to help them breathe. Pressure from the oxygen they receive can cause lung tissue damage over time. Treatment helps your baby’s lungs grow and allows them to breathe on their own.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia (BPD)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia (BPD)?
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a lung disorder that can affect
preterm babies
. When a baby is born early, their
lungs
are underdeveloped. Because of this, they may need long-term
oxygen therapy
or
mechanical ventilation
to help them breathe.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
While these therapies can save your infant’s life, they can also overstretch the tiny air sacs (alveoli) in their lung tissue. This can damage your infant’s lungs and airways (
bronchi
) over time, causing tissue destruction (dysplasia).
The earlier your baby is born, the greater their risk of developing bronchopulmonary dysplasia. The severity of the condition can vary. While most babies recover from BPD, some may have a lifetime of breathing difficulties and other complications.
Symptoms and Causes
Signs and symptoms of bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Signs and symptoms of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) vary widely but can include:
A blue tone of a white baby’s skin and lips, or a yellow-gray, gray or white tone in newborns of color (
cyanosis
)
Difficulty breathing (
respiratory distress
)
Low oxygen levels in your baby’s blood
Pauses in breathing (
apnea
)
Rapid breathing (
tachypnea
)
Wheezing
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia causes
When your baby is born early, they sometimes need help breathing because their lungs are underdeveloped. This means your baby may need to be on a ventilator. The ventilator provides oxygen and pressure to help your baby’s lungs expand and support their breathing.
Your baby’s lungs are vulnerable right after birth, and the delivery of oxygen and pressure can overstretch their fragile air sacs (alveoli). This can lead to
inflammation
and damage to their lung tissue over time.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Newborns who are especially at risk of developing bronchopulmonary dysplasia include:
Babies born more than 10 weeks early
Babies who weigh less than 2 pounds at birth
Babies with underdeveloped lungs or breathing problems
It’s rare for babies born after 32 weeks to develop BPD.
Complications of bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Most infants recover from BPD by the time they’re 5 years old. But they’re at risk of developing other health conditions, including:
Feeding difficulties
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
Learning disabilities and disorders
Neurological disorders
Problems with
hearing
or
vision
Pulmonary hypertension
Some children and adults who had the condition as newborns are at risk of developing certain lung complications. These include:
Asthma
Bronchitis
Obstructive sleep apnea
Pneumonia
Reactive airway disease
Severe
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
infections
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose bronchopulmonary dysplasia
If your baby is born preterm and needs help breathing for the first 28 days of their life, their healthcare provider will likely diagnose them with BPD. There are no specific tests to diagnose the condition. But some tests that can suggest and help manage the diagnosis include:
Blood tests
to identify how much oxygen is in your baby’s blood
Imaging tests, like a
chest X-ray
, to look at your baby’s lungs
Management and Treatment
Is there a cure for bronchopulmonary dysplasia?
There’s no cure for bronchopulmonary dysplasia. But treatment reduces the risk of further lung damage and helps your baby’s lungs grow and heal.
How is bronchopulmonary dysplasia treated?
The goal of bronchopulmonary dysplasia treatment is to wean your baby off supplemental oxygen as soon as possible. Treatment improves your baby’s lung function and their ability to breathe on their own. Treatment may include:
Nutrition.
Increasing the amount of calories your baby takes in can help their lungs grow.
Diuretics
.
Diuretics help reduce the amount of fluid in and around your baby’s lungs.
Bronchodilators
.
Bronchodilators help relax the muscles around your baby’s airways, making breathing easier.
Corticosteroids
.
Corticosteroids help reduce or prevent inflammation in and around your baby’s lungs.
Nirsevimab.
Nirsevimab (or
palivizumab
) helps prevent viral infections like
RSV in babies
.
Nasal
continuous positive airway pressure
(nCPAP).
An nCPAP machine gently pushes air into your baby’s lungs through special prongs placed in their nose.
Tracheostomy
.
If your baby has a severe case of BPD, their provider may surgically insert this tube into your baby’s windpipe to help them breathe.
How soon after treatment will my baby be able to breathe on their own?
After treatment, your baby’s health will gradually improve over several months. During this time, their lungs will continue to heal and grow, with the goal of breathing on their own.
Advertisement
When should my baby see their healthcare provider?
After treatment, your baby should see their healthcare provider if they have:
Chronic cough
Chronic snoring
Difficulty eating
Flaring nostrils during each breath
Heavy, quick breathing
Symptoms of a
viral illness
, like fever, sneezing or coughing
Wheezing
Visit the emergency room or call 911 immediately if your baby stops breathing, has trouble breathing or if their skin or lips become discolored.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my baby has bronchopulmonary dysplasia?
Your baby’s lungs will continue to develop after they leave the hospital. Their lungs will still be vulnerable, and it’s important to keep them as healthy as possible. You can do this by:
Avoiding people who have respiratory tract infections, including RSV
Getting all family members
vaccinated against the flu
Keeping your baby away from
secondhand smoke
and fumes (especially from cigarettes)
Your baby may experience feeding difficulties, which could lead to
growth faltering
. Taking your baby to all scheduled appointments is very important to address these issues sooner.
Because babies with bronchopulmonary dysplasia are born early, they can experience a delay in their
developmental milestones
. Most babies will catch up with various therapies, including
physical therapy
,
speech therapy
and
occupational therapy
. Severe cases of bronchopulmonary dysplasia can be life-threatening. But most babies survive, with their health gradually improving as they get older and gain weight.
Advertisement
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk of having a baby with bronchopulmonary dysplasia?
If you’re
pregnant
, it’s important to keep yourself healthy and take steps to avoid
preterm labor
. The risk of having a baby with BPD significantly reduces if the fetus’s lungs have enough time to develop. You can reduce your risk of having your baby preterm by:
Avoiding tobacco, recreational drugs and alcohol while you’re pregnant
Eating healthy and nutritious foods
Getting regular prenatal check-ups throughout your pregnancy
Minimizing
stress
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Seeing your baby struggling to breathe is heartbreaking. All you want to do is hold your precious newborn. But instead, they’re hooked up to monitors and respiratory support, and you’re worried about their health. You would do anything to take their place. Be assured that your baby’s healthcare providers are doing everything they can to get your baby breathing on their own. While it may take some time, your baby will eventually be breathing on their own, and you’ll be able to take them home.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breathing problems can make it hard for your child to enjoy just being a kid. Cleveland Clinic Children’s offers respiratory care for sudden and long-term conditions.
Respiratory Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us