Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) causes your heart muscle to enlarge. It’s often genetic. Most people who have it don’t develop complications. But it can be serious for some people. If this is the case for you, there are several treatment options.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy?
Thick heart muscle reduces blood flow to the aorta.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a complex type of
heart disease
that thickens your
heart
muscle. “Hypertrophic” means something is bigger than it should be. “
Cardiomyopathy
” represents a group of conditions that affect your heart muscle.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The thickening HCM causes can affect any area of your heart’s muscle tissue (myocardium). But HCM most commonly affects the septum — the middle wall that divides your heart into two sides. This makes your heart’s left
ventricle
have less space to pump
blood
.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy affects about 1 in 500 people in the U.S. But many people don’t know they have it. It’s a lifelong condition that can get worse over time, leading to serious complications. The good news is that early diagnosis and treatment can help prevent complications. Lifestyle changes can also help you stay healthy.
Types of this condition
There are two main types of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
Obstructive HCM
. The thickened part of your heart muscle is in the septal wall. This blocks or reduces blood flow from your left ventricle to your
aorta
.
Nonobstructive HCM
. Your heart muscle is thickened in other areas, like the bottom of your heart, right ventricle or entire left ventricle. This thickening doesn’t block blood flow out of your heart.
About 2 in 3 people with HCM have the obstructive type.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Common symptoms of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy include:
Chest pain
— usually with physical activity
Dizziness
Shortness of breath
and
fatigue
, especially with physical activity
Fainting
Feeling like your heart’s beating too fast or a fluttering in your chest (
palpitations
)
Swelling (
edema
) in the lower part of your body or in
neck veins
Advertisement
You may have several of these symptoms or none at all. If you have them, it’s crucial to see your healthcare provider.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy causes
Gene changes
cause about 3 in 5 cases of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Healthcare providers call this familial HCM. The changes are to
genes
that are responsible for controlling heart muscle growth. Familial HCM has an
autosomal dominant inheritance
. This means only one biological parent needs to have an altered gene to pass it on.
Many gene changes can cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Because of this, the severity of HCM can vary widely — even within the same biological family. Some people who have the changed gene may never develop the disease.
Up to 2 in 5 cases of HCM have no known cause. These cases don’t have a gene change that explains the condition. Researchers are currently studying other possible causes of HCM.
HCM can develop at any age. But most people with the condition receive a diagnosis around 40 years of age.
Complications of this condition
Complications of HCM can include:
Atrial fibrillation (Afib)
, which can lead to
blood clots
and
stroke
Congestive heart failure
Infective endocarditis
Ventricular arrhythmias
Sudden cardiac arrest
and death
Most people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy don’t experience complications. But because HCM can cause life-threatening health issues, it’s essential to see your cardiologist regularly if you have the condition. It’s also important to get screened for HCM if you have a family history of it.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers can typically diagnose hypertrophic cardiomyopathy based on the following:
Medical history
: Your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and family history, like a history of heart disease or sudden death.
Physical exam
: Your provider will listen to your heart and lungs with a
stethoscope
. If you have hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM), they may hear a
heart murmur
.
Tests
: Providers most often start with an
electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG)
, which usually shows abnormal results with HCM. They’ll then likely recommend an
echocardiogram
to diagnose HCM. It can show the thickening of your heart walls.
Your provider may recommend other tests to help confirm the diagnosis and check for complications. These tests include:
Blood tests
Cardiac catheterization
Cardiac MRI
Holter monitor
and/or
cardiac event monitor
Exercise stress echo test
Genetic testing
Your provider will also recommend that your first-degree biological family members (parents, siblings and children) get screened for HCM.
Management and Treatment
How is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy treated?
Together, you and your
cardiologist
will decide on a treatment plan based on how HCM is affecting you and your health.
The goal of treatment is to minimize or prevent symptoms and reduce the risk of complications. HCM treatment can include:
Advertisement
Monitoring and lifestyle changes
Medications
Procedures
If possible, it’s best to receive care through a hospital system that’s experienced in treating hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Monitoring and lifestyle changes
Your cardiologist will assess your risk for complications. If your risk is low and you don’t have symptoms, they may recommend just monitoring your heart and health over time.
Regardless of your risk, your cardiologist will likely recommend a heart-healthy lifestyle. This includes:
Avoiding or quitting
smoking
Eating
heart-healthy foods
Getting enough quality
sleep
Getting regular mild to moderate physical activity
Maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you
Managing other health conditions, like
high blood pressure
or
diabetes
Medications
Medications that may help improve HCM symptoms include:
Beta-blockers
Calcium channel blockers
Diuretics
A myosin inhibitor (
mavacamten
) can help improve symptoms and heart function in adults with obstructive HCM. This is the first medication that directly targets the underlying cause of HCM. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved it in 2022.
Like all medications, these may have certain side effects. Your cardiologist will discuss the risks and benefits with you.
You may also need to take
prophylactic
(preventive)
antibiotics
for dental procedures to reduce the risk of bacterial endocarditis.
Advertisement
Procedures
Procedures that can help treat obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or prevent complications include:
Septal myectomy
:
Your surgeon removes a small amount of your thickened septal wall. This widens the path your blood takes from your left ventricle to your aorta. It’s an open-heart surgery.
Alcohol septal ablation
: This is a minimally invasive procedure. A provider injects isopropyl alcohol into an artery that supplies blood to the area of thickened heart muscle. The alcohol kills the thickened tissue. This procedure is for people who can’t have a septal myectomy.
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
:
An ICD is a small device placed just under your skin that constantly monitors your heart rhythm. ICDs can help if you’re at risk for life-threatening arrhythmias or sudden cardiac death.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll need to see your cardiologist regularly so they can check on your heart’s health. HCM is a lifelong condition. They’ll let you know how often you’ll need follow-up appointments based on the severity of HCM and your treatment plan.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy?
If you have HCM, you’ll want to do what you can to protect your heart and overall health. The
prognosis
(outlook) for HCM varies considerably based on:
Advertisement
The age of onset
The severity
If you have symptoms and/or complications
Your cardiologist can give you a better idea of what to expect based on your unique situation. Lean on them for guidance and support.
What is the life expectancy of someone with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy?
For most people, HCM doesn’t limit their life expectancy. Years ago, mortality (death) rates for people with HCM were 1% to 4%. With treatment, these numbers are now closer to 0.5%.
Most people with HCM have a low risk for complications and an even lower risk for sudden cardiac death. But hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in athletes under age 35.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
There’s nothing you can do to prevent hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. But because HCM is often genetic, screening can help catch it early and prevent complications.
It’s important to have screening if you have a biological parent, sibling or child (first-degree relative) with the condition.
The first step is to have an electrocardiogram (EKG) and echocardiogram (echo) to check your heart. If the test results show signs of HCM, you’ll need to see a cardiologist.
It’s possible to have normal test results even if hypertrophic cardiomyopathy runs in your family. In this case, you should have a follow-up echo and EKG every three years until you’re 30 years old, and then every five years after that.
Additional Common Questions
What medications should I avoid if I have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy?
Your cardiologist may tell you to avoid certain medications, like:
Nitrates (because they lower blood pressure)
Digoxin
(because it increases the force of your heart’s contraction)
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a heart disease diagnosis like hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can be overwhelming. Try to take a deep breath. There are ways to manage the condition and protect your health. Your cardiologist will guide you through a thorough management plan. Lean on loved ones for help, too, especially when it comes to lifestyle changes you may have to make.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic offers personalized diagnosis and the latest treatments for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment