What Is Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocyte (TIL) Therapy?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocyte therapy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocyte therapy
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) therapy removes some of your most powerful cancer-fighting cells, increases them and then gives them back to you. It’s used to treat some forms of advanced melanoma. But doctors are researching other uses, too. There are several steps involved. Treatment time from start to finish is around 10 weeks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Immunotherapy for Cancer Treatment
Request an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Overview
Learn how TIL therapy is used to treat metastatic melanoma.
What is tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) therapy?
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte therapy is a new form of immunotherapy that treats cancerous
tumors
.
Immunotherapy
is cancer treatment that helps your
immune system
identify and fight cancer cells. TIL therapy works by boosting some of your most powerful immune cells: tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Here’s what makes TILs special.
While you have several immune cell types that patrol your body for threats, TILs invade (infiltrate) tumors directly. TILs learn tumors’ weaknesses and how to best destroy them. The problem is that your immune system doesn’t make enough TILs to fight the tumors.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte therapy works by boosting your TIL count. A surgeon removes your tumor. The TILs are expanded in a lab — growing your attack force by the billions. Then, you get the TILs as an infusion (IV).
Cancers that TIL therapy treats
As of 2024, lifileucel (Amtagvi®) is the first TIL therapy treatment approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It treats
melanoma
that can’t be treated with surgery alone or that has spread (
metastatic cancer
). If you have this diagnosis, and the cancer hasn’t responded to the standard treatments
oncologists
prescribe first, you may be a candidate for this treatment.
Healthcare providers are also studying the effectiveness of TIL therapy in treating:
Breast cancer
Cervical cancer
Colon cancer
Head and neck cancer
Non-small cell lung cancer
Treatment Details
What happens during TIL therapy?
The primary treatment involves getting an infusion of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. But there are lots of steps involved before this can happen. It may be helpful to think of treatment as a series of key steps:
Advertisement
Removal
. A surgeon will remove part of the tumor and send it to a lab. You’ll receive
anesthesia
for the procedure, so you won’t feel any pain. The sample will be about the size of a grape.
TIL-harvesting and expansion
. The lab will harvest TILs from the tumor and make more of them. This should take about five weeks. Then, the lab will send the TILs to your healthcare provider.
Chemotherapy infusion
. You’ll be admitted to the hospital, where you’ll receive regular infusions of
chemotherapy
for five to seven days. Each infusion lasts about two hours. This treatment makes room in your body for the new TILs you’ll get during the transfusion.
TIL transfusion
. You’ll receive a one-time infusion of TILs. The process takes about two hours.
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) infusion
. For three to five days, you’ll receive infusions of interleukin-2. The process takes about two hours per dose. This immunotherapy treatment activates the TILs to fight the cancer.
You’ll stay in the hospital for a few days after treatment so your care team can monitor your response. For the next several weeks, you’ll stay within driving distance of the hospital while your body adjusts to treatment. That way, you can receive care immediately if you experience side effects that require your provider’s care.
How long will I need this treatment?
TIL therapy is a one-time treatment that takes about 10 weeks from tissue removal to recovery. This includes the waiting period, where the lab prepares the TILs, and your recovery timeline. Your hospital stay will be closer to two weeks.
What are the potential benefits and risks of this treatment?
TIL therapy is a powerful, personalized treatment that targets cancer cells while sparing your healthy cells. This reduces your risk of side effects. Also, it’s long-lasting. The TILs remain in your body for years. The cells keep fighting tumors long after your infusion.
Perhaps most importantly, TIL therapy is helping people whose melanoma was previously untreatable. According to a 2023
study
following the effects of TIL treatment at four years, 7 out of 10 people experienced improvements or no cancer progression. Three out of 10 had tumors that got smaller or disappeared.
Still, all steps in the treatment process involve some risk. These include
chemotherapy side effects
and
immunotherapy side effects
. The immunotherapy side effects are usually from the IL-2 infusions and not the TIL-infusion. The most common side effects include:
Diarrhea
Fatigue
Fever
and
chills
Irregular heartbeat (
arrhythmia
)
Low blood pressure
Nausea and vomiting
Rash
Advertisement
Although it’s rare, IL-2 therapy can cause a serious complication called
capillary leak syndrome
. Your healthcare provider will review all potential risks before you start treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Immunotherapy for Cancer Treatment
Request an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
How long will it take for me to feel better?
It’ll take about two weeks or more after your last IL-2 infusion before you start feeling better. This is because it will take some time for your body to recover from all the treatments involved in TIL therapy.
Is there anything I can do to make this treatment easier on me?
Your care team will work with you closely during your hospital stay to keep you comfortable. They’ll do regular exams and
blood tests
to ensure you can receive treatment safely. They’ll give you medications to reduce the risk of side effects and monitor you for complications.
Treatment is an involved process. This is why your providers will go to great lengths to care for you throughout treatment and keep tabs on you during recovery.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you experience signs of an
infection
or unexpected or severe side effects. Don’t second-guess yourself. If something feels “off” after TIL therapy, let your provider know.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) therapy may be right for you if you have melanoma that hasn’t responded to other treatments. Don’t hesitate to ask your healthcare provider about your treatment timeline if they recommend this therapy. Have them explain how it will potentially impact your outlook. They’re your best resource for explaining potential treatment risks and benefits.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Immunotherapy can take cancer treatments to new, powerful heights. And Cleveland Clinic is here to help with the latest advances.
Immunotherapy for Cancer Treatment
Request an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials