Paraneoplastic Syndrome: Symptom, Causes and Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Paraneoplastic Syndromes
Advertisement
Advertisement
Paraneoplastic Syndromes
Paraneoplastic syndromes are disorders that can occur alongside cancerous tumors. Sometimes, tumors release substances that cause your body’s organs and body systems to behave abnormally. Or your body’s attempt to destroy a tumor can cause unintended damage to healthy tissue. The damage can cause symptoms of a paraneoplastic syndrome.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Paraneoplastic Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is a Paraneoplastic Syndrome?
A paraneoplastic syndrome is a set of signs and symptoms that can occur when you have
cancer
. The symptoms develop when a malignant tumor causes changes in your body that aren’t directly caused by the cancer itself. Usually, they occur when your
immune system
releases antibodies to destroy the tumor. In the process, the antibodies also damage healthy cells, causing symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Sometimes, the symptoms of a paraneoplastic syndrome are the first signs of cancer.
Types of paraneoplastic syndromes
The different types of paraneoplastic syndromes affect various body systems and parts. The most common ones involve your:
Nervous system (brain, spinal cord and nerves)
Endocrine system (hormones)
Connective tissue (bones and joints)
Blood
Skin
Nervous system paraneoplastic syndromes
Paraneoplastic syndromes that affect your nervous system include:
Cerebellar degeneration
Dysautonomia
Encephalitis
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome
Myasthenia gravis
Myelopathy
Neuromyotonia
Peripheral neuropathy
Stiff person syndrome
Endocrine system paraneoplastic syndromes
Paraneoplastic syndromes that impact how your hormones work include:
Carcinoid syndrome
Cushing syndrome
Hypercalcemia
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
Rheumatologic paraneoplastic syndromes
Examples of paraneoplastic syndromes that affect your bones, joints and muscles include:
Dermatomyositis
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Erythromelalgia
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Palmar fasciitis
Paraneoplastic
polyarthritis
Blood paraneoplastic syndromes
Syndromes that impact your blood cells include:
Anemia of chronic disease
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Paraneoplastic
erythrocytosis
Paraneoplastic
thrombocytosis
Skin paraneoplastic syndromes
Examples include:
Acanthosis nigricans
Dermatomyositis
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis
Paraneoplastic
pemphigus
Sweet syndrome
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of paraneoplastic syndromes
Common symptoms include:
Fever
Loss of appetite
Night sweats
Unexplained weight loss
Syndromes that affect particular organs or systems can cause symptoms specific to those body parts. Here’s a snapshot of possible signs and symptoms:
Nervous system
: Double vision, memory loss, confusion and trouble coordinating your muscles
Endocrine system
: High blood pressure and unexplained weight gain
Connective tissue
: Joint pain, swelling and weakness
Blood
: Having too few or too many blood cells
Skin
: Benign (noncancerous) growths, flushing and itching
Paraneoplastic syndrome causes
With a paraneoplastic syndrome, cancer leads to changes in your body that happen
secondary
to cancer instead of
directly
. The differences can be confusing, so try thinking of it this way:
You may have pain if a tumor grows so big that it puts pressure on an organ. Related, an organ may stop functioning correctly if cancer spreads to the area and damages it. In these cases, the cancer causes symptoms directly.
But paraneoplastic syndromes happen because the tumor’s presence in your body causes things to go wrong. To destroy the tumor, your body’s defense system may misfire and harm healthy tissue. This is called an
autoimmune response
. Some tumors release hormones that cause organs to work improperly. The hormones — not the tumor itself — can cause damage without treatment.
Risk factors
Anyone with cancer can develop a paraneoplastic syndrome. Experts estimate that about
8 out of every 100 people
(8%) with cancer develop one. The types of cancer most commonly associated with paraneoplastic syndromes are:
Lung cancer (most common)
Breast cancer
Blood cancer
Ovarian cancer
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers diagnose paraneoplastic syndromes with a medical history, physical exam and several tests:
Blood tests
: Routine blood work can help rule out benign conditions that may be causing your symptoms.
Blood tests for cancer
can reveal substances that may be a sign of a paraneoplastic syndrome.
Imaging
: Your provider may use a CT scan, MRI or ultrasound to look for a tumor.
Neurological exam
: Your provider may ask you to perform tasks to check your nervous system. They’ll look for changes related to your strength, memory and coordination.
Spinal tap
: A spinal tap tests the fluid surrounding your spinal cord for signs of antibodies attacking healthy cells.
Management and Treatment
How are paraneoplastic syndromes treated?
Most importantly, your healthcare provider will treat the cancer. They’ll also work to manage your symptoms. Most treatments calm your immune system so it doesn’t attack healthy cells.
Therapies that manage paraneoplastic syndromes include:
Advertisement
Corticosteroids
: Medicines like cortisone and prednisone reduce inflammation and swelling.
Immunosuppressants
: These drugs decrease your body’s immune response.
Intravenous immunoglobulin
: This treatment destroys harmful antibodies.
Plasmapheresis
: This procedure decreases your antibodies by removing plasma (the liquid part of your blood). They filter the antibodies that damage tissue out of the plasma.
Physical, occupational and speech therapy
: You may need therapy to help with your movement or speech if you have a neurological paraneoplastic syndrome.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if you have unusual symptoms that are severe or that last for two weeks or more.
Remember that many conditions have the same symptoms of paraneoplastic syndromes. And most aren’t as serious as cancer. So, don’t assume the worst. But you should still see a provider to get checked out.
If you’re experiencing symptoms and have received cancer treatment within the last five years, it’s a good idea to get re-screened. Re-screening can alert your provider if the cancer has returned.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Your outlook (prognosis) depends on the cancer. Paraneoplastic syndromes may cause mild, temporary symptoms. Other times, they cause severe symptoms that need long-term management.
Advertisement
Your provider will explain how your diagnosis may impact your health.
Additional Common Questions
What is the most common paraneoplastic syndrome?
One of the most common paraneoplastic syndromes is peripheral neuropathy. It involves nerve damage that can make it harder to use your muscles. It can cause unusual tingling sensations and numbness. It can also disrupt your sense of touch.
What is the best treatment for paraneoplastic syndrome?
The best treatment for a paraneoplastic syndrome is the one that’s best at treating the cancer. Your healthcare provider can recommend therapies to manage symptoms while you’re getting cancer treatment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having a paraneoplastic syndrome on top of a cancer diagnosis can feel as if the bad luck is just piling on. But the reality is that cancer leads to major changes in your body. And not all of them are predictable.
The thing to keep in mind is that the best treatments for a paraneoplastic syndrome and the cancer are one in the same. Doing everything you can to follow your cancer treatment plan can also help you manage symptoms of a paraneoplastic syndrome. There are several options available to help you feel better. Ask your healthcare provider to walk you through them.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials