Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplant: Procedure & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplant
Advertisement
Advertisement
Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplant
An allogeneic stem cell transplant uses donated stem cells to treat certain blood cancers, blood disorders and immune system disorders. Healthcare providers typically recommend stem cell transplants if initial treatments don’t work or if conditions have come back. About 40% of people who need a stem cell transplant receive donated stem cells.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood and Marrow Transplant and Cellular Therapies
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Details
Overview
What is an allogeneic stem cell transplant?
An allogeneic (pronounced “a-loh-jeh-NAY-ik”) stem cell transplant replaces unhealthy
stem cells
in your
bone marrow
with donated healthy cells. About 40% of all
stem cell transplants
use donated stem cells. The donated cells may be blood stem cells or bone marrow stem cells.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Allogeneic stem cell transplants work by producing new healthy cells. These cells go on to make new blood cells.
This procedure is treatment for some types of
blood cancer
,
blood disorders
and
immune system
disorders. It may cure certain disorders. You may have an allogeneic stem cell transplant when other treatments aren’t effective or when a condition comes back.
What conditions do allogeneic stem cell transplants treat?
It’s treatment for several conditions, including:
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL)
Acute myeloid leukemia
(AML)
Aplastic anemia
Lymphoma
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPN)
Sickle cell disease
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for an allogeneic stem cell transplant?
Your transplant team will do several tests before the procedure. They do tests to confirm you’re able to manage side effects of pre-transplant conditioning. Tests may include:
Complete blood count
(CBC) to check your
red blood cells
,
white blood cells
and
platelets
Echocardiogram
to see how well your heart pumps
Electrocardiogram
(EKG) to check your heart’s rhythm
Liver function
or
kidney function
tests
If you have cancer, your transplant team may do a
bone marrow biopsy
to remove a sample of your bone marrow. They may have done this kind of biopsy to confirm a blood cancer or blood disorder diagnosis. In this case, a medical
pathologist
will examine your bone marrow cells for signs of new changes. The biopsy results also help your team understand the risk that a condition could come back (recur) after transplant.
Advertisement
The next step is pre-transplant conditioning. This treatment uses
chemotherapy
and/or full-body
radiation therapy
. The treatment(s):
Kills cancer cells in your body
Makes room in your bone marrow for new blood stem cells to grow
Suppresses your immune system to reduce the chance your body will reject the donated stem cells
You’ll stay in the hospital for conditioning. The process typically takes one to two weeks to complete.
What happens during allogeneic stem cell transplantation?
The actual procedure is painless. Your transplant care team will place a
central venous catheter
(CVC) in one of the large veins in your upper chest. The CVC is a tube that will deliver the new stem cells to your bone marrow.
The infusion process is like a
blood transfusion
: healthy stem cells flow from a bag through the CVC into your bone marrow. Infusion typically takes 30 minutes to an hour. Your transplant team will be with you throughout the infusion. They’ll check your
vital signs
. They’ll also watch for any symptoms of infusion side effects.
Side effects are rare and often mild. Some common potential side effects include:
Chills
Feeling
short of breath
Fever
Complications of allogeneic stem cell transplants
Allogeneic stem cell transplants can result in
graft vs. host disease
. This condition can happen if the donated stem cells attack other cells in your body.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood and Marrow Transplant and Cellular Therapies
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after an allogeneic stem cell transplant?
You’ll stay in or close to the hospital so your transplant care team can oversee your recovery and provide any treatment you may need. For example, you’ll continue to receive
immunosuppressants
so your body won’t reject the new stem cells. You may need blood transfusions while the new stem cells make new red blood cells and platelets.
It can take several weeks for the new stem cells to multiply and make new blood cells. You’ll see your transplant team for follow-up appointments so they can check your health and watch for issues like
bacterial
or
viral infections
.
What is the recovery time?
All told, it can take more than two years to completely recover from an allogeneic stem cell transplant. For example, it can take 10 days to two weeks for the new stem cells to start making new blood cells in your bone marrow. Your care team may call this process engraftment. And it may take up to a year for your immune system to recover from the transplant.
What’s the success rate of allogeneic stem cell transplant?
This procedure is treatment for many diseases. That makes it hard to give an overall success rate. But research shows long-term survival rates for specific diseases. For example, one
study
found the 10-year survival rate for people with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) was 81%, and 76% for people with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). These two diseases are among the most common conditions that providers treat with allogeneic stem cell transplant.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should contact your transplant care team right away if you notice the following symptoms. The symptoms could mean you have graft vs. host disease. These symptoms may include:
Abdominal cramps
Diarrhea
Itchy
skin rash
Nausea
and
vomiting
Your skin and/or eyes are turning yellow (
jaundice
)
And contact them if you have infection symptoms like:
Chills
Coughing,
sneezing
or
runny nose
Dizziness
or feeling lightheaded
Feeling short of breath
Fever that’s 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius) or higher
Frequent urination
or
painful urination
(dysuria)
Additional Details
What’s the difference between allogeneic and autologous stem cell transplants?
An allogeneic stem cell transplant uses donated stem cells. An autologous stem cell transplant uses your own stem cells. The Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research reports that 40% of stem cell transplants are allogeneic.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
An allogeneic stem cell transplant can cure some life-threatening disorders. Frequently, the kindness of strangers makes this possible. These are people who donate stem cells. Other times, the donors are family members. There are risks involved when you receive donated stem cells. Take time to understand the benefits and risks of this procedure. Your oncologist will help you weigh the risks and benefits so you feel confident about your decision.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood cancers and conditions can be complicated. Cleveland Clinic experts offer the latest therapies and personalized treatment plans.
Blood and Marrow Transplant and Cellular Therapies
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials