Opportunistic Infections (OIs): Causes, Transmission & Examples
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Opportunistic Infection
Advertisement
Advertisement
Opportunistic Infection
Opportunistic infections are when germs cause an infection in people with weakened immune systems. There are many different causes of opportunistic infections, including consuming contaminated foods and beverages or coming into contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person. Medications can help prevent and treat opportunistic infections.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is an Opportunistic Infection?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is an Opportunistic Infection?
An opportunistic infection happens when pathogens (germs) affect people whose immune systems aren’t working as well as they should (
immunocompromised
). If your immune system was healthy, the infection would be mild, or you wouldn’t have one at all. Examples of opportunistic pathogens include:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Bacteria
Fungi
Parasites
Viruses
You may have a weakened immune system for many reasons. Some conditions you have at birth (congenital conditions) may affect your immune system. But medications/therapies or conditions you get later in life can also harm it.
Opportunistic infections (OIs) are serious and even life-threatening. If you have a compromised immune system and show symptoms of an OI, don’t wait — get in touch with a healthcare provider.
What is an example of an opportunistic infection?
Common examples of opportunistic infections include:
Bacterial infections
Mycobacterium avium
complex
(MAC)
Salmonella
Tuberculosis
(TB)
Fungal infections
Candidiasis
Histoplasmosis
Valley fever
(coccidioidomycosis)
Parasitic infections
Cryptosporidiosis
Cystoisosporiasis
Toxoplasmosis
Viral infections
Cytomegalovirus
(CMV)
Herpes simplex virus 1
(HSV-1)
Kaposi’s sarcoma
(caused by the Kaposi’s sarcoma herpesvirus or human herpesvirus 8)
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of opportunistic infections?
There is a wide range of opportunistic infections, so symptoms vary. But some of the most common opportunistic infection symptoms include:
Body aches
Chills
Fever
Headache
Loss of appetite
Night sweats
Swollen lymph nodes
Unexplained weight loss
How does a person get an opportunistic disease?
There are many ways in which you can come across germs that cause opportunistic infections. You might inhale germs from the air around you, or eat or drink a contaminated food or drink. Some of the most common sources of opportunistic germs include:
Advertisement
Drinking unpasteurized juices or dairy
Drinking untreated water
Eating unwashed fruits and vegetables
Eating undercooked eggs and meat
Encountering animal poop (feces)
Encountering the bodily fluids (blood, pee, saliva) of an infected person
Risk factors
You’re at greater risk of an opportunistic infection if you:
Have
cancer
or a personal history of cancer
. Some types of cancer, like
leukemia
and
lymphoma
, can affect your
white blood cells
(
lymphocytes
). These cells help your immune system fight viruses and bacteria.
Have
HIV or AIDS
. These conditions infect and destroy
T cells
in your immune system, increasing the risk of opportunistic infections.
Have
primary immunodeficiency
. This is when you have a
genetic variation
at birth that weakens your immune system. It may also occur later in life, when your immune system gets weaker with age.
Take certain medications or use certain therapies
. A weakened immune system is a side effect of
chemotherapy
,
corticosteroids
,
immunomodulators
,
immunosuppressants
and
radiation therapy
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose opportunistic infections
A healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history, then do a
physical exam
. To help confirm their diagnosis, they may recommend testing. These tests may include:
Analysis of the fluid around your brain and spinal cord (
lumbar puncture
)
Blood tests
Imaging tests, including a
CT scan
,
MRI
or
X-ray
Sputum culture
Throat culture
Pee tests (
urinalysis
)
Management and Treatment
How do you treat opportunistic infections?
It depends on the type of infection you have. Possible treatments include:
Antibiotics
Antifungals
Antiparasitic drugs
Antivirals
Antiretroviral therapy
Even after you feel better, a healthcare provider may recommend staying on the same medicine or taking something else to keep the infection from coming back (
prophylaxis
).
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider right away if you have a compromised immune system and develop symptoms of an infection. Let them know:
About any animal exposure, including animal poop
About any recent
bug bites or stings
If you ate or drank anything that may have been contaminated
Of any recent travels
You may also wish to ask a provider questions to help understand your condition and learn how to get and stay healthy. These may include:
What type of opportunistic infection do I have?
What treatment do you recommend?
How long will it take to feel better?
What should I do if my symptoms don’t get better?
What new symptoms should I be aware of?
What can I do to protect myself from future infections?
How often should I schedule follow-up appointments?
How do I prevent spreading an infection to someone with a compromised immune system?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have an opportunistic infection?
Opportunistic infections are serious and can be hard to treat. But healthcare providers can help you stay healthy with regular checkups and preventive care.
Prevention
Can opportunistic infections be prevented?
The following tips can help you prevent OIs:
Prevent infections
Food and water safety
General wellness
Reduce risks
Prevent infections
Avoid bodily fluids
Avoid others who are sick
Regularly wash your hands, especially after using the bathroom and encountering animals
Wear a mask in crowded areas
Food and water safety
Don’t consume undercooked eggs or meat, raw seed sprouts and unpasteurized dairy products and juices
Drink bottled water or boil water before drinking it in areas where the water supply may not be safe
Eat healthy food every day
Thoroughly wash fruits and veggies before you eat them
General wellness
Get regular physical activity
Schedule regular visits with a healthcare provider
Talk to a provider about what medications and vaccines they recommend to help keep you healthy
Talk to a provider about
whether you should take vitamins
Reduce risks
Manage anxiety and stress
Use condoms every time you have sexual intercourse
Never share needles, syringes or other equipment that can inject drugs
Wear long sleeves and pants, and use bug spray to protect yourself from insect bites
Additional Common Questions
Is pneumonia an opportunistic infection?
Healthcare providers don’t usually consider
pneumonia
an opportunistic infection because anyone can get it. Many kinds of bacteria and viruses can cause pneumonia. But certain fungi — like
Cryptococcus
,
Pneumocystis jirovecii
and
Coccidioides
— are more likely to cause pneumonia in people with compromised immune systems. Healthcare providers consider pneumonia from these causes to be opportunistic infections.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having a compromised immune system can be challenging in many ways. There’s a lot of stress and uncertainty about your health. It’s easy to feel overwhelmed by the precautions you must take to prevent opportunistic infections. And you might worry whether your body can manage one. But many people with compromised immune systems work and have active social lives. Healthcare providers will work with you to lower your risk of an opportunistic infection and help you educate yourself and others on how to keep yourself safe.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment