Hyperprolactinemia: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hyperprolactinemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hyperprolactinemia
Hyperprolactinemia means you have high levels of prolactin in your blood. The most common cause is a prolactinoma, a benign (noncancerous) tumor in your pituitary gland. Certain health conditions and medications can also cause hyperprolactinemia.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
What is hyperprolactinemia?
Hyperprolactinemia happens when you have high levels of
prolactin
in your blood. Prolactin is a
hormone
that’s responsible for
breast
tissue development and
lactation
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hyperprolactinemia isn’t life-threatening. But it can cause
infertility
and other issues that can impact your quality of life. The good news is that it’s treatable.
How common is hyperprolactinemia?
Hyperprolactinemia affects less than 1% of the general population.
Women
are more likely to have the condition than men.
Symptoms and Causes
Hyperprolactinemia happens when you have high levels of prolactin in your blood. It isn’t life-threatening, but it can cause issues that can impact your quality of life.
What are the symptoms of hyperprolactinemia?
Some people who have hyperprolactinemia have very mild or no symptoms (are asymptomatic).
For anyone, hyperprolactinemia can cause the following symptoms:
Infertility
Loss of interest in sex (
low libido
)
Low bone mass (
osteopenia
)
Milky
discharge from your nipples
when not pregnant or
breastfeeding
(
galactorrhea
)
For women, symptoms of hyperprolactinemia include:
Changes in
menstruation
not related to
menopause
, like
irregular periods
or
no periods
Pain during penetrative sex
due to
vaginal dryness
For men, common symptoms of hyperprolactinemia include:
Erectile dysfunction
(ED)
Low levels of testosterone
Enlarged breast tissue (
gynecomastia
)
What causes hyperprolactinemia?
Several factors and conditions can cause hyperprolactinemia, including:
Prolactinoma (a
pituitary gland tumor
)
Other pituitary gland tumors
Certain medications
Certain health conditions
Sometimes, healthcare providers can’t find the cause. They call this idiopathic hyperprolactinemia. It usually goes away without treatment after several months.
Advertisement
Prolactinomas
A
prolactinoma
is the most common cause of hyperprolactinemia. A prolactinoma is a benign (noncancerous) tumor (
adenoma
). It forms in your
pituitary gland
. It causes excess production of prolactin.
Other pituitary gland tumors
Large tumors (other than prolactinomas) in or near your pituitary gland may cause hyperprolactinemia. This is usually because the tumor prevents dopamine from reaching your pituitary gland. Dopamine stops prolactin production.
Radiation therapy
for tumors on or near your pituitary gland may also cause hyperprolactinemia.
Medications
The brain chemical
dopamine
helps suppress (stop) prolactin production. Any medication that affects dopamine production can make your prolactin levels rise.
Medications that can cause hyperprolactinemia include:
Birth control pills
Certain
antipsychotic medications
, like
risperidone
and
haloperidol
High blood pressure
medications, like
methyldopa
and verapamil
Medications that treat
heartburn
and
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
(
H2 antihistamines
)
Medications that treat
depression
, like
tricyclic antidepressants
and
SSRIs
Medications that treat menopause symptoms, like
estrogen
therapy
Medications that treat
nausea
and
vomiting
(antiemetics)
Pain relievers
that contain
opioids
Your prolactin levels will usually return to normal three to four days after you stop taking the medication.
Never stop taking a prescribed medication unless your healthcare provider tells you to.
Health conditions
Health conditions other than a prolactinoma that may cause hyperprolactinemia include:
Chest wall injuries, like
fractured ribs
or
sternum
(breastbone)
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic
liver disease
Cushing disease
Hypothyroidism
(underactive thyroid)
Shingles
, especially if the rash or blisters are on your chest
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
What are the risk factors for hyperprolactinemia?
The only known risk factor for hyperprolactinemia is having
multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)
type 1 (MEN1). MEN1 is an inherited condition that can cause prolactinoma.
If you have a first-degree relative (biological sibling or parent) who has MEN1, you may want to get
genetic testing
. It might help screen for and catch a prolactinoma in its early phase.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hyperprolactinemia diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will start with a prolactin (PRL) blood test.
If your results show that you have hyperprolactinemia, the next step will be to determine the cause. Your provider may recommend additional testing, like other
blood tests
and imaging tests.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for hyperprolactinemia?
The treatment for hyperprolactinemia depends on its cause. If you have high prolactin levels but have few or no symptoms, you may not need treatment.
Advertisement
Treatment options for prolactinomas (the most common cause of hyperprolactinemia) include:
Medication
. Medications called
dopamine agonists
regulate your prolactin levels. They’re very effective in shrinking prolactinoma tumors. This is the most common form of treatment for prolactinomas.
Surgery
. If medication isn’t working to shrink your prolactinoma, you may need to have surgery to remove it.
Radiation therapy
. This is a rare third option for treating prolactinomas if other methods don’t work.
If a medication is causing hyperprolactinemia, your healthcare provider may prescribe a different one that doesn’t affect your prolactin levels as much.
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for hyperprolactinemia?
The prognosis (outlook) for hyperprolactinemia is generally good. Treatment for its most common cause is usually effective.
Although hyperprolactinemia isn’t life-threatening, it can cause certain issues like infertility and irregular periods. Because of this, it’s important to receive treatment if you have hyperprolactinemia.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you have hyperprolactinemia, it may be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:
What caused my case of hyperprolactinemia?
What tests do I need?
What are my options for treatment?
What are the benefits and risks of each treatment option?
Will my infertility go away after treatment for my hyperprolactinemia?
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hyperprolactinemia can affect your quality of life and cause infertility. The good news is that it’s highly treatable. If you’re experiencing symptoms of hyperprolactinemia, talk to your healthcare provider. They can run a simple blood test to see if your prolactin levels are elevated.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/24/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes