Epidural: What It Is, Side Effects, Risks & Procedure
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Epidural
Advertisement
Advertisement
Epidural
Epidurals are injections near your spinal cord to relieve pain or deliver anesthesia. There are two types of epidural injections. Both are safe and effective. Your healthcare provider will tell you which kind you’ll need and what you can expect. Side effects and complications can happen, but they’re rare.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Childbirth Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
An epidural can be an injection of medications to manage pain or give you anesthesia during labor or before a surgery
What is an epidural?
An epidural is an injection into the space around your spinal
nerves
that’s used for pain management. This area is the epidural space. That’s where epidurals get their name.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Epidurals can be used to manage a variety of issues, including:
Labor pain relief
Before surgery, as an anesthetic
Pain relief after surgery
To treat
back pain
from issues like
herniated disks
Chronic pain
management
Types of epidurals
There are two types of epidurals healthcare providers use for different situations:
Epidural anesthesia.
Anesthesia
blocks feeling and pain. Epidural anesthesia is an injection of anesthetic medication into your epidural space.
Epidural steroid injections (ESI)
.
ESIs manage chronic pain and
inflammation
. A healthcare provider will inject a
steroid (corticosteroid)
into your epidural space. ESIs last longer than anesthetic epidurals. They manage pain for weeks or months.
How does an epidural work?
How an epidural works depends on which type you need.
An epidural anesthesia stops pain signals from traveling from your spinal nerves to your
brain
. It safely and temporarily turns off the nerves. How long the effect lasts depends on how much medication your healthcare provider gives you.
Epidural steroid injections coat the irritated nerves that are causing pain. This reduces swelling and pressure on your affected nerves.
There are a few ways your provider can inject medication with an epidural, including:
Advertisement
Single-injection epidurals.
These are one-time injections of either anesthesia or a steroid. This is how providers give most epidural steroid injections.
Epidurals with a catheter.
A catheter is a small, flexible tube that your provider will place into your epidural space. This lets them give you multiple doses of medication in the same place. These are most commonly used for anesthesia during longer surgeries and for labor pain relief.
Epidural with a patient-controlled analgesia (PCA).
These are special catheters your provider will leave in your epidural space after a surgery. You’ll be able to use a handheld device to control when you get pain medication. The pump will let you choose when to have safe, controlled doses of pain medication.
Combined spinal-epidural (CSE).
A CSE is a mix of both anesthesia and a steroid delivered through a catheter. CSEs are usually for labor pain relief. This type of epidural is often called a “walking” epidural, but most people aren’t able to fully walk. Instead, you’ll probably have some feeling in your lower body and be able to move or change positions.
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for an epidural?
What you need to do ahead of time can vary depending on which type of epidural you’re getting and why you need it. Your healthcare provider will give you specific prep instructions.
In general, you might have to:
Fast (avoid eating and drinking) for several hours before your procedure.
Stop taking medications or over-the-counter supplements (especially if you take
blood thinners
).
Plan ahead for someone to drive you home.
What happens during an epidural?
What happens during an epidural depends on which type you need.
If you need a single-injection epidural, you’ll lie face down (on your stomach). Your provider will:
Inject a small amount of local anesthetic to numb the area around where you need the epidural
Use
fluoroscopy
to guide them while they inject the epidural
Insert a needle into your epidural space near your affected nerves and inject the medication
Remove the needle and put a dressing and bandage over the injection site
If you need an epidural with a catheter, the procedure will be a little different. For these, your provider will:
Insert a port for intravenous (IV) fluids into a vein in your arm
Have you lie on your side or sit up with your chin tucked in toward your chest
Inject local anesthetic near the epidural site
Insert the epidural needle
Thread a catheter through the needle into your epidural space
Remove the needle, leaving the catheter in place
Begin injecting medication through the catheter
Remove the catheter once you no longer need medication (this might be several hours or days later)
Advertisement
What will I feel during my epidural procedure?
You’ll likely experience a minor pinch when your provider injects the local anesthetic to numb the area before the epidural procedure.
You may feel pressure, tingling, a burning sensation or momentary shooting pain when your provider injects the epidural. Or you may not feel anything. If you have any discomfort during the injection, it usually disappears once the injection is finished.
Tell your provider immediately if you feel intense, sharp pain during or after your epidural procedure.
What happens after an epidural?
Epidurals with anesthetic take 20 to 30 minutes to start working. Your provider will tell you what comes next if you’re having surgery or are in labor.
Epidural steroid injections start working in a few days. The pain relief should last a few months.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Childbirth Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of having an epidural?
Epidurals are a safe, effective way to manage pain or give anesthesia.
Anesthetic epidurals are more flexible than other types of anesthesia, especially during labor. You can usually get an epidural any time during your labor if you need one. They often have milder side effects than other types of anesthesia.
Epidural steroid injections can help you resume daily activities that pain made you avoid. If it manages the pain well enough, you might avoid surgery or other invasive treatments.
Advertisement
What are the risks of getting an epidural?
Epidurals are usually safe, but there are risks of certain side effects and complications. Although rare, risks and complications can include:
Bleeding at the injection site
Cerebrospinal fluid leaks
(this is very rare)
Infections at the injection site
Nerve damage that may lead to chronic pain
Side effects or reactions to the anesthesia or steroid
Spinal cord injuries
Can getting an epidural cause back problems?
There’s a common belief that getting an epidural will lead to back pain, but it’s very rare for an epidural to cause long-term or chronic back problems.
It’s normal to experience temporary back pain or tenderness at the site of your epidural. This usually goes away within a few days.
Many people who give birth experience back pain after labor and delivery — whether they’ve had an epidural or not. This is because the
bones
and
ligaments
in your
pelvis
shift back into their original positions from before your pregnancy. This can cause temporary back pain and discomfort.
Recovery and Outlook
How long does an epidural last?
How long the effects of an epidural last depends on which type you had and the exact medicine your healthcare provider injected. Your provider will let you know what to expect.
Single-injection epidurals
usually last a few hours before you regain feeling in the area that was numb. Epidural steroid injections usually manage pain for three to six months.
Epidurals with a catheter
typically make you feel numb for a few hours after your last dose before they wear off. You’ll probably have to rest without moving until you have full feeling in your legs again. You may feel a slight tingling sensation while you’re waiting.
Advertisement
When can I resume my normal activities?
Don’t drive, operate machinery or drink alcohol for at least 24 hours after having an epidural. You might have to avoid certain physical activities and exercises for a day or two after an epidural.
Your healthcare provider will give you specific instructions about when you can return to your usual routine.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your healthcare provider or go to the emergency room if you experience any of the following symptoms after an epidural:
Fever
Losing control of your pee (
urinary incontinence
) or poop (
fecal incontinence
)
Numbness and/or weakness in your legs that lasts longer than your provider says it should
Severe
headache
while you’re standing up or sitting that feels better after lying down
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It might sound intimidating to have an injection near your spinal cord. But epidurals are a common, effective and safe way to deliver anesthesia or pain relief.
Don’t be afraid to ask your healthcare provider any questions you might have. They can tell you everything you need to know. They’ll explain which type of epidural is best for you, which medication they want to give you and how long you’ll feel the effects.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic childbirth experts coach you through every step — from labor to delivery to what to expect when you and your newborn head home.
Childbirth Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7246
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment