Strangulated Hernia: Signs & Symptoms, Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Strangulated Hernia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Strangulated Hernia
A strangulated hernia is a medical emergency. It happens when blood flow to the tissue or intestine in the hernia is cut off. Blood loss causes the tissue or intestine to die. A strangulated hernia can be fatal if gangrene or sepsis sets in. Treatment is surgery to repair the hernia.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Strangulated hernias are rare. They happen when blood flow to the intestine in a hernia is cut off so the intestine dies.
What is a strangulated hernia?
A strangulated
hernia
is a life-threatening condition that happens when blood supply is cut off to the pieces of tissue or intestine inside the hernia.
Blood
carries oxygen. Without oxygen, the intestine or tissue in the hernia starts to die (
necrosis
). Necrosis may lead to potentially fatal conditions like gangrene and sepsis. Strangulated hernias don’t happen very often. It takes time for them to develop. Understanding how that happens may reduce your risk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
How do you know a hernia is strangulated?
You may have a strangulated hernia if you have symptoms like a painful bulge or lump in your abdomen along with:
Nausea
and
vomiting
Severe pain in your
abdomen
or groin that doesn’t go away and gets worse
Skin color changes (the skin around the bulge or lump may be reddish or darker than usual)
How long does it take for a hernia to become strangulated?
The intestine trapped in the hernia could begin to die in as little as four hours after blood supply is reduced.
What causes a strangulated hernia?
Hernias develop when pieces of tissue, organs or your intestine in your abdomen push through a weak spot in the
muscles
that make up your abdominal wall. The hernia makes a bump or lump that you can see and feel. Often the bump or lump will come and go as the hernia goes back through the weak spot.
But hernias can get stuck in your abdominal wall (
incarcerated hernia
). Blood still flows to the hernia’s contents. Over time, an incarcerated hernia may get large enough that pressure from your abdominal muscles cuts off blood flow to the hernia’s contents.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a strangulated hernia diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
. They’ll ask about your symptoms and your medical history. They may do tests like:
Complete blood count (
CBC
) and basic metabolic (
BMP
) panel to check your white blood cell count and other issues with your blood cells
Computed tomography (
CT
) scan
Abdominal ultrasound
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How do you treat a strangulated hernia?
Open
hernia repair surgery
is the most common treatment. In open hernia surgery, your surgeon makes a single incision (cut) to move the hernia and its contents back in place. They’ll use stitches to close the gap in your abdominal muscles. They may sew a piece of mesh material to your muscles to support them.
Your surgeon may do a
small bowel resection
or
colon resection surgery
to treat a strangulated hernia. That may be the case if blood loss damages a piece of intestine in the hernia.
Complications of hernia surgery
Open surgery to fix a strangulated surgery does come with some risks. Complications may include:
Damage to nearby blood vessels, organs or tissues
Hematoma
(blood collecting under your skin at the surgery site)
Seroma (fluid collecting under your skin)
Surgical site infection
How long does it take to recover from this surgery?
You may need to stay in the hospital for several nights after your surgery. It takes time to recover from surgery to repair a strangulated hernia. How much time depends on your situation.
For example, most people who have hernia surgery can return to their daily routines within a few days but with lifting restrictions. But talk to your surgeon if your daily routine involves lifting heavy objects. They’ll explain how long you should wait to start that kind of activity.
Your recovery time will be longer if you had surgery to remove a damaged intestine. It can take six weeks to recover from surgery to remove a part of your intestine. Your surgeon will explain what you can expect during your recovery.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a strangulated hernia?
Surgery to repair the hernia typically solves the issue. But hernias can happen again. If you’ve had hernia surgery, talk to your healthcare provider if you think you might have a new hernia. You may need surgery to repair the new hernia. Repairing the new hernia reduces the risk that it’ll become strangulated.
What’s the survival rate for someone with a strangulated hernia?
The overall survival rate is good. But survival rate depends on factors like your health, age and whether you have surgery to remove part of your intestine.
Strangulated hernias can lead to life-threatening sepsis or gangrene. Without treatment, gangrene and sepsis can be fatal:
Gangrene
that causes a bacterial infection can lead to death within 48 hours.
Sepsis
is your body’s overwhelming response to an infection. Without treatment, severe sepsis (septic shock) can lead to death within 12 hours.
Prevention
Can a strangulated hernia be prevented?
Yes, it can. Talk to a healthcare provider if you think you have a hernia. They’ll let you know if you need surgery to repair the hernia and keep it from becoming incarcerated or strangulated.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have a hernia, talk to your provider about treatment. If you think you may have a strangulated hernia, go the emergency room right away. Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have symptoms like:
Sudden, severe pain
The skin around the bulge or lump in your abdomen or groin becomes paler than usual, then turns darker than usual
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hernias are common and mostly harmless. A strangulated hernia, on the other hand, is rare and a serious medical issue. If you think you have a hernia, don’t hesitate to talk to a healthcare provider. Your provider will explain your risk of developing a strangulated hernia. They’ll recommend treatment to keep that from happening.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us