Kegel Exercises for Men: Benefits & How To Do Them
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Kegel Exercises for Men
Advertisement
Advertisement
Kegel Exercises for Men
Kegel exercises help strengthen your pelvic floor muscles. Your pelvic floor muscles run from your tailbone to your pubic bone and support your bladder and bowels. Strengthening these muscles helps prevent or improve urinary or fecal incontinence. It can also give you greater control of when you ejaculate.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Kegels have many benefits for men, including strengthening your pelvic floor muscles and controlling blood flow to the penis.
What are Kegel exercises for men?
Kegel exercises (often shortened to Kegels) are exercises that strengthen your
pelvic floor muscles
. These
muscles
are important for helping control your urinary (peeing) and bowel (pooping) functions. They also help control sexual function by helping to control blood flow to your penis, creating an
erection
and controlling
ejaculation
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your pelvic floor muscles, along with other tissues, stretch from your
tailbone
in the back to your pubic bone in the front. They support your bladder and bowels. Your
urethra
(where pee leaves your body) and
rectum
(where poop leaves your body) pass through the muscles and tissues of your pelvic floor.
Why would men do Kegel exercises?
When many people think of Kegel exercises, they think of how they benefit
women
. This is because Kegels are a popular way for women to strengthen their pelvic floor muscles, which can weaken with age or due to
pregnancy
or childbirth.
But men with certain health conditions can also benefit from Kegel exercises. Kegels can help men:
Improve pee leakage (
urinary incontinence
)
Improve poop leakage (
fecal incontinence
)
Manage
prostate
pain and swelling that occurs with
prostatitis
and
benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH)
Increase sexual pleasure through greater control of your ejaculation and improved
orgasm
You may hear people call Kegel exercises for men by other terms, including:
Pelvic floor exercises for men
Men’s pelvic floor exercises
Pelvic floor exercises for males
Male pelvic floor exercises
Male Kegel exercises
Treatment Details
What happens before you can do Kegel exercises?
To perform Kegel exercises, you must find the right muscles to work out. The common name for these muscles is the
pelvic floor muscles
. To engage these muscles, imagine that you’re trying to close the openings to stop yourself from peeing or
passing gas
(farting). You can also activate your pelvic floor muscles by using the muscles that pull your scrotum up toward your body.
Advertisement
If you’re not sure if you’re using the right muscles, you can insert a finger into your rectum, try to flex these muscles and erect them. If you’re performing Kegels correctly, you should feel the muscles tighten, relax and move up around your finger.
What happens while you’re doing Kegel exercises?
You can do Kegel exercises anywhere. But you may wish to start in a seated position with your feet flat on the floor and support for your back. You may also try performing a Kegel exercise lying down on your back or lying on your side.
To perform a Kegel, you should:
Squeeze your pelvic floor muscles for about five seconds. Try counting out loud to prevent yourself from holding your breath. Once you finish, relax for five seconds.
Do this 10 times per session. Try to do three sessions per day. If you get tired, stop.
Try to reach a point where you’re squeezing your pelvic floor muscles for 10 seconds and relaxing for 10 seconds.
You shouldn’t feel pain while you’re doing Kegels. If you have pain, you may be performing the exercise incorrectly or they’re not appropriate for you at this time, and you should talk to a healthcare provider. They may have suggestions about how you can improve your technique or recommend a
physical therapy
program specifically for pelvic floor exercises that may include relaxation strategies,
biofeedback
or manual therapy.
Can I do Kegel exercises with a catheter in?
You should never perform Kegel exercises with a
Foley catheter
in place. Performing Kegels with a catheter in place may cause bleeding or bladder
muscle spasms
.
How many Kegels should a man do a day?
You should strive to perform 10 Kegels three times per day — 30 total. It’s a good idea to perform them in the morning, afternoon and evening.
How do I know if I’m doing male Kegels correctly?
When correctly performing a Kegel, you shouldn’t notice any movement of your body other than your pelvic floor muscles. For example, if you’re in a sitting position, you shouldn’t notice your butt cheeks squeezing or inner thighs moving together. A Kegel is a small, isolated squeezing (contraction) of only your pelvic muscles. This exercise should become easier to perform over several weeks, and your symptoms should gradually improve. For example, you should have fewer instances of incontinence. If your lower back, stomach or head hurt after performing Kegels, you’re likely engaging the wrong muscles or holding your breath. Contact a healthcare provider for help if you experience any of these symptoms after Kegels.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What will Kegel exercises do for men?
Kegel exercises can help improve your bladder and bowel health. They can be beneficial for people who are preparing for prostate cancer surgery (
prostatectomy
) or after prostate-altering procedures to improve incontinence or loss of pee or bladder control.
Advertisement
They can also possibly help improve your sexual performance by giving you greater control of when you ejaculate.
What are the disadvantages of Kegel exercises for men?
When you perform Kegel exercises properly, there aren’t many risks or complications. They shouldn’t damage any muscles or cause any side effects.
Never perform Kegels with a catheter in place. It may cause bleeding or affect your bladder muscle.
What happens if men overdo Kegels?
Doing too many Kegel exercises can increase muscle tension or make your symptoms worse. If you feel pain after doing Kegels, stop. It’s better to do fewer Kegels properly than to perform lots of Kegels incorrectly.
Recovery and Outlook
How long does it take to notice changes?
It depends on many factors, including how weak your pelvic floor muscles are and whether you maintain a consistent Kegel exercise routine. But with regular practice, most people usually notice changes after six to eight weeks.
You may need to make Kegels a permanent part of your routine to continue getting the benefits.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
It’s a good idea to have a healthcare provider teach you how to perform a proper Kegel before you start the exercise.
Reach out to a healthcare provider if Kegels cause pain or your symptoms don’t start to improve after six to eight weeks
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Many women are aware of the importance of Kegel exercises in strengthening their pelvic floor muscles. But Kegels can benefit everyone. Muscles need exercise to stay strong, and this includes the muscles in your pelvic floor.
Advertisement
It can be embarrassing to talk to about, especially to a healthcare provider, but Kegels can help stop pee or poop leaks. They may even improve your sexual performance and enjoyment. Talk to a provider if you can’t quite grasp how to perform Kegels or want to make sure you’re doing them right.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment