Diabetes-Related Neuropathy: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Diabetes-Related Neuropathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Diabetes-Related Neuropathy
Diabetes-related neuropathy is nerve damage that affects people with diabetes. The most common type is peripheral neuropathy, which often affects your feet. There’s no cure for diabetes-related neuropathy. But you can manage it with medication, therapies and tighter blood sugar management.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Diabetes Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is diabetes-related neuropathy?
Diabetes-related neuropathy happens when you experience
nerve
damage due to
high blood sugar (hyperglycemia)
that lasts a long time. It can affect people with long-term
diabetes
, like
Type 1 diabetes
and
Type 2 diabetes
. But not everyone with diabetes develops it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Neuropathy can develop from other causes, too, like
pinched nerves
,
inflammation
, nutrient deficiencies and injuries affecting your nerves. Healthcare providers diagnose neuropathy as diabetes-related if you have diabetes and they can’t find another cause for it.
Types of diabetes-related neuropathy
Diabetes-related neuropathy can damage different nerves throughout your body. Types of diabetes-related neuropathy include:
Peripheral neuropathy
: This is the most common type of neuropathy. “
Peripheral
” refers to any of the nerves outside of your
spinal cord
. It often affects your feet and legs and sometimes your hands.
Autonomic neuropathy
: This type of neuropathy happens when you have damage to
autonomic nerves
, which control your involuntary body processes. They control things like your
bladder
, intestinal tract, blood pressure,
heart
and sex organs. Another name for autonomic neuropathy is
dysautonomia
.
Proximal neuropathy
: This is a rare type of neuropathy that affects nerves in your hip, thigh or buttock. It typically only affects one side of your body.
How common is diabetes-related neuropathy?
Overall, diabetes-related neuropathy is fairly common. Studies show that up to 50% of people with diabetes have peripheral neuropathy. More than 30% of people with diabetes have autonomic neuropathy.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Peripheral neuropathy is the most common type of diabetes-related neuropathy.
What are the symptoms of diabetes-related neuropathy?
Your symptoms will depend on which type of diabetes-related neuropathy you have.
Symptoms of diabetes-related peripheral neuropathy
Diabetes-related peripheral neuropathy commonly affects your feet. Symptoms include:
Numbness
, tingling and/or pins and needles sensations (
paresthesia
).
Pain
, which may be burning, stabbing or shooting.
Unusual touch-based sensations (
dysesthesia
).
Muscle weakness.
Slow-healing leg or
foot sores (ulcers)
.
Total loss of sensation in your feet, like not feeling pain from foot injuries.
Nerve damage that causes peripheral neuropathy typically develops over many years. You may not notice symptoms of mild nerve damage for a long time.
Symptoms of diabetes-related autonomic neuropathy
Autonomic neuropathy can have many different symptoms because it can affect several body systems. Examples include:
Digestive system
: Indigestion,
heartburn
,
nausea
and
vomiting
,
gas
,
diarrhea
and constipation.
Gastroparesis
is a type of digestive system neuropathy.
Urinary system
:
Urinary incontinence
,
urinary retention
and frequent
UTIs
.
Sex organs
:
Sexual dysfunction
,
erectile dysfunction
,
retrograde ejaculation
,
vaginal dryness
and
anorgasmia
.
Cardiovascular system
:
Low blood pressure
, irregular
heart rate
,
dizziness
and
fainting
.
Sweat glands
: Excessive sweating or a lack of sweat.
Eyes
: Difficult for your
pupils
to adjust to changes in light.
Autonomic neuropathy can also cause
hypoglycemia
unawareness. This means you don’t experience the typical warning signs of low blood sugar, like shakiness, confusion and intense hunger.
Symptoms of diabetes-related proximal neuropathy
Symptoms of proximal neuropathy include:
Sudden and severe pain in your hip, buttock or thigh.
Weakness in your leg that makes it difficult to stand up.
Loss of reflexes, like the knee-jerk reflex.
Loss of muscle tissue (
atrophy
) in the affected area.
Unexplained weight loss
.
What causes diabetes-related neuropathy?
Perpetually high blood sugar levels can damage small
blood vessels
that provide oxygen and nutrients to your nerves. Without enough oxygen and nutrients, nerve cells can die, affecting the function of your nerve. This causes neuropathy.
Each person is different, so it’s almost impossible to predict how high blood sugar levels have to be — and for how long — to cause neuropathy.
One study
of people with Type 2 diabetes shows that having an A1C over 7% for at least three years increases your risk of diabetes-related neuropathy. An
A1C
of 7% means your blood sugar is 154 mg/dL on average.
What are the risk factors for diabetes-related neuropathy?
If you have diabetes, your chance of developing diabetes-related neuropathy increases the older you get and the longer you’ve had diabetes.
Studies show that peripheral neuropathy affects at least 20% of people with Type 1 diabetes who’ve had diabetes for at least 20 years. It affects 15% to 50% of people with Type 2 diabetes who’ve had diabetes for at least 10 years.
Advertisement
You’re also more likely to develop neuropathy if you have diabetes along with:
High blood pressure (hypertension)
.
High
body mass index (BMI)
.
High cholesterol
.
Kidney disease
.
Alcohol use disorder
.
Smoking
.
Studies show that genetics may also increase your risk of diabetes-related neuropathy.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is diabetes-related neuropathy diagnosed?
To start, a healthcare provider will ask detailed questions about your medical history and diabetes management. They’ll ask about your symptoms and do a
physical exam
. Tests that help confirm a diabetes-related neuropathy diagnosis include:
Diabetes foot exam
: Your provider will visually assess your feet for any injuries or issues. They’ll then touch your toes and feet with various tools to check if you have numbness. This exam helps diagnose peripheral neuropathy.
NCS
(nerve conduction studies)
: This test checks how fast electrical signals move through your peripheral nerves in different parts of your body. It helps diagnose peripheral and proximal neuropathies.
EMG (electromyography)
: This test evaluates the health and function of your skeletal muscles and the nerves that control them. It helps diagnose peripheral and proximal neuropathies.
Tests to diagnose autonomic neuropathy vary depending on which body system is affected. For example, an
ultrasound
can show how well your bladder empties when you pee. Tests like
gastric emptying scintigraphy (GES)
can help diagnose digestive system issues.
Advertisement
It may take more time to get an autonomic neuropathy diagnosis, as many other conditions can cause the same symptoms.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for diabetes-related neuropathy?
Diabetes-related neuropathy treatment involves carefully
managing your blood sugar
. This is the most important step to prevent nerve damage from getting worse. Your healthcare provider and other diabetes specialists — like a
CDCES
(Certified Diabetes Care and Education Specialist) — will work with you to achieve realistic blood sugar goals.
Treatment for the symptoms of neuropathy varies depending on the type you have. The following medications can help treat painful symptoms that disturb your sleep or daily activities:
Pregabalin
.
Gabapentin
.
Capsaicin patches
.
Antidepressants
.
Therapies are also helpful, including:
Physical therapy
: This therapy helps improve how you do physical movements. It’s essential if you have peripheral neuropathy, especially if you have
muscle pain
and weakness.
Occupational therapy
: This therapy helps improve your ability to perform daily tasks.
Speech therapy
: If you have nerve damage that affects your ability to swallow (
dysphagia
), speech therapy can help.
Acupuncture
: This therapy uses thin needles to stimulate specific points in your body
Nutrition consult
: This can help you learn how to plan, shop for and prepare healthy meals.
Advertisement
Treatments for autonomic neuropathy vary based on the specific issue. Your provider will work with you to find the best option for you.
Can diabetes-related neuropathy be reversed?
With improved blood sugar management, symptoms of diabetes-related neuropathy like numbness and other abnormal sensations may fade within one year. The more severe neuropathy is, the less likely it is that it’ll be reversible.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Diabetes Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with diabetes-related neuropathy?
If you have diabetes-related neuropathy, your prognosis (outlook) depends on several factors, like:
The type of neuropathy.
The severity of neuropathy.
Your age and overall health.
Your healthcare provider will be able to give you a better idea of what to expect.
Without proper treatment, peripheral neuropathy can affect your quality of life. This is why it’s essential to seek medical help as soon as you notice signs of it.
Autonomic neuropathy can be serious because it involves your body’s vital functions. When those don’t work correctly, it can have very severe — and sometimes, life-threatening — effects.
What are the complications of diabetes-related neuropathy?
Possible complications of peripheral neuropathy include:
Skin breakdown.
Infection.
Ulceration.
Charcot foot
.
Difficulty with mobility.
Increased risk of falls and
bone fractures
.
Amputation
.
Complications of autonomic neuropathy vary depending on the affected body system(s).
Prevention
How can I prevent diabetes-related neuropathy?
You can decrease your risk of diabetes-related neuropathy by:
Maintaining an A1C under 7%.
Keeping your blood pressure below 140/90 mmHg or within the target your provider sets.
Following a healthy meal and exercise plan.
Maintaining a healthy weight.
Avoiding or limiting alcohol.
Avoiding or
quitting smoking
.
Visiting your healthcare provider for a checkup and foot exam at least once per year.
It’s also important to do self-examinations of your feet every day to look for blisters, wounds or broken skin. This can help you catch signs of neuropathy — or complications from it — quickly.
Living With
How do I take care of myself if I have diabetes-related neuropathy?
Reversing nerve damage is difficult, so diabetes-related neuropathy may affect your day-to-day life. Besides working with your healthcare provider to carefully manage diabetes and getting treatment for neuropathy, you can make the following adjustments to take care of yourself:
Use a
cane
or other mobility device to help you move more easily.
Wear special shoes to protect your feet from injuries.
Self-check and identify foot and leg wounds early. Get help from a wound clinic when you find them — don’t wait!
Removing throw rugs and other tripping hazards in your home to prevent falls.
Seek help from a
psychologist
or therapist if living with neuropathy is affecting your mental health.
Educate loved ones about neuropathy and what they can do to help you.
Join a support group to relate to others going through similar experiences.
When should I see my healthcare provider if I have diabetes-related neuropathy?
You’ll need to see your healthcare provider regularly if you have diabetes-related neuropathy. This is so they can monitor your symptoms and see if they’re getting worse or better. You’ll also need to see your diabetes provider (like an
endocrinologist
) regularly to make adjustments to your diabetes management plan.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you have diabetes-related neuropathy or are at risk for developing it, it may be helpful to ask your healthcare provider the following questions:
What are the warning signs of diabetes-related neuropathy?
Can I reverse neuropathy?
How can I keep neuropathy from getting worse?
How can I better manage my blood sugar levels?
Which treatments do you recommend?
Should I see specialists for neuropathy?
How will neuropathy affect my day-to-day life?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be difficult and feel defeating to come face-to-face with diabetes complications. But it’s important to listen to what your body is telling you. See your healthcare provider as soon as possible if you notice signs of neuropathy. Tighter management of your blood sugar along with other chronic issues like obesity, high cholesterol, high blood pressure and nutrition deficiencies can improve your symptoms — and prevent neuropathy from getting worse.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you’ve been living with diabetes for years or you’re newly diagnosed, you want experts you can trust. Our team at Cleveland Clinic is here to help.
Diabetes Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/28/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes