Synovial Sarcoma: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Synovial Sarcoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Synovial Sarcoma
Synovial sarcoma is a rare, slow-growing soft tissue cancer. It doesn’t always cause pain, and symptoms can resemble those of other, more common health conditions like arthritis or bursitis. The outlook is more favorable if a surgeon can remove the entire tumor before it spreads.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Synovial sarcoma often occurs near large joints, like your knee. It affects soft tissues like ligaments, muscles and tendons.
What is synovial sarcoma?
Synovial
sarcoma
(synovial cell sarcoma) is a rare type of
cancer
that affects soft tissues, like your
muscles
or
ligaments
. It’s called synovial sarcoma because these cancer cells resemble the cells in your synovial joints (like your elbows, hips and shoulders).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Synovial sarcoma grows very slowly and may not cause pain. Many times, you won’t have symptoms until the
tumor
grows large enough to create a lump you can see and/or feel. Some people develop pain or numbness, especially if the tumor presses on
nerves
as it grows.
Early diagnosis and treatment are helping people with synovial sarcoma live longer, with hope for a
cure
. But a cancer diagnosis can turn your world upside down. What does this mean? What will my life look like now? If these are questions running through your mind, you’re not alone. Your healthcare team will walk with you every step of the way.
Where does synovial sarcoma form?
This type of cancer can affect several different areas of your body, including your abdomen, arms, feet, legs and
lungs
.
Synovial sarcoma can also form in
joints
like your:
Ankles
Elbows
Hips
Shoulders
Wrists
Very rarely, synovial sarcoma can form in your chest, head or neck.
How common is synovial sarcoma?
Like other
soft tissue sarcomas
, synovial sarcoma is an uncommon form of cancer. It affects about 1,000 people each year in the U.S. Anyone can get synovial sarcoma, but it’s most common in
males
under 30.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of synovial sarcoma?
Synovial sarcoma cancer develops gradually over time. Tumors can grow undetected for up to two years. During this time, you may not have any symptoms at all. Once symptoms occur, they may include:
Advertisement
A lump you can see and feel. (The lump might be painless.)
Numbness
Pain
Swelling
Synovial sarcoma symptoms can look and feel like symptoms of other, less serious conditions like
arthritis
or
bursitis
. Because of this, synovial sarcoma may go undetected for a time. If you notice any kind of lump under your skin, schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider and see them as soon as possible.
What causes synovial sarcoma?
Researchers aren’t sure what causes synovial sarcoma. But they know it has something to do with
mutations
(changes) in your
chromosomes
. Synovial sarcoma cells always have one mutated gene in common. Sometimes, your chromosomes break into pieces. The pieces rejoin, but not in the same order or sequence.
Imagine your chromosome as a jigsaw puzzle and your genes as puzzle pieces. Now imagine someone jams a puzzle piece into a spot where it doesn’t belong. In synovial sarcoma, a gene called
SYT
jams up against genes that aren’t the right fit. When this happens, your cells don’t work as they should, and your body develops a mutant gene that causes synovial cell sarcoma.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is synovial sarcoma diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
and ask you about your symptoms and health history. If they think you might have synovial cell sarcoma, they’ll refer you to an
oncologist
for further testing.
An oncologist will examine you and use imaging tests to see the size and location of the tumor.
Imaging tests might include:
X-rays
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Ultrasound
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Your provider will likely have the tumor
biopsied
. During this procedure, they’ll take a small tissue sample from the lump under your skin. Once they have the sample, they’ll send it to a
pathologist
, who will look at the cells under a microscope.
Management and Treatment
How is synovial sarcoma treated?
Surgery is the standard treatment for synovial sarcoma. The goal is to remove the tumor and some of the tissue around it to make sure it all comes out. In some cases, this means removing an entire muscle or muscle group. It depends on how far the cancer has spread. Your provider can tell you what to expect in your situation.
Providers may do surgery as a stand-alone treatment or in combination with other therapies like:
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
Immunotherapy
Targeted therapy
Anti-angiogenesis drugs (which stop
blood vessel
formation and deprive cancer cells of the blood they need to survive)
Healthcare providers base treatment on several factors like tumor size and location, how long you’ve had the tumor and whether the cancer has spread (
metastasized
).
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have synovial sarcoma?
Healthcare providers have made huge strides in treating synovial cell sarcoma. But there’s still a chance the condition will
recur
(return), sometimes, many years after treatment. You’ll likely have checkups for several years so your providers can monitor you closely.
What’s the outlook for synovial sarcoma?
The five-year survival rate for synovial sarcoma is 50% to 60%. That means that 5 to 6 out of 10 people with synovial sarcoma are still alive five years after their diagnosis.
The five-year metastasis-free survival rate is 40% to 60%. That means that within five years after treatment, cancer didn’t spread (metastasize) in 4 to 6 out of 10 people with synovial sarcoma.
Survival rates are only estimates and depend on several factors. Researchers base them on previous outcomes for other people diagnosed with the same condition. Survival rates can’t tell you how long you’ll live or how you’ll respond to a specific treatment. To learn more about survival rates — or to find out what they mean for your situation — talk to your healthcare provider.
Prevention
Can synovial sarcoma be prevented?
You can’t prevent synovial sarcoma because you can’t control the chromosomal changes that cause it.
You can lower your risk of metastasis (
Stage 4
synovial sarcoma) with early detection and treatment. Stay aware of changes in your body. Tell a healthcare provider if you develop a lump that causes pain or doesn’t go away in a couple of weeks.
Advertisement
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Cancer treatments
for synovial sarcoma can take a toll on your body. The following can help boost your
immune system
and help you stay strong:
Ease your
stress
with activities like
meditation
,
mindfulness
or relaxation exercises.
Get plenty of rest
and
quality sleep
.
Meet with a
dietitian
, especially if cancer treatment causes appetite changes or changes to your sense of taste.
Reach out for support
from others who’ve been in your situation.
Try
physical therapy
to regain your strength after surgery.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll have regular visits with your healthcare provider during and after synovial sarcoma treatment. In addition, you should call your provider if you develop any new or worsening symptoms.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
You’ll have different questions during diagnosis, treatment and follow up. Some basic questions might be:
Where is my cancer located?
What caused my cancer?
Has my cancer spread? If so, how far?
What are my treatment options?
What are the possible side effects?
How will treatment affect my usual routines, like work, hobbies and time with family?
What are the chances my cancer will come back?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Any cancer diagnosis can launch a tidal wave of emotions. But when it’s a rare cancer like synovial sarcoma, it can feel especially isolating. Give yourself time and space to understand your diagnosis and treatment options. Consider joining a support group so you can get to know others who are going through the same thing. And lean on your healthcare team. They’re here to help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sarcomas are a rare form of cancer affecting your bones and soft tissues. Our specialists use the latest treatments to care for these types of tumors.
Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/20/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials