What Is A Lipidologist?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Lipidologist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Lipidologist
A lipidologist is a healthcare provider with expertise in diagnosing and treating lipid disorders. Lipids or cholesterol have a link to artery blockages that can cause heart attacks and strokes. With their extensive knowledge of lipid disorders, lipidologists can help people who struggle to manage their cholesterol numbers.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What is a lipidologist?
A lipidologist is a healthcare provider who’s an expert in
lipids
. These are the artery-clogging fats we know, including
cholesterol
. Lipidologists help people with lipid disorders. They do this by going beyond standard blood tests and using their advanced knowledge.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Lipidologists have a deep understanding of lipid disorders. They also know a lot about
cardiovascular (heart and blood vessel) disease
risk factors. Studies have found a connection between high levels of low-density lipoprotein (
LDL
) and a buildup of plaque (
atheroma
) in blood vessels. This collection of plaque is
atherosclerosis
.
When LDL, the cholesterol with a bad reputation, collects in your
arteries
, it can cause blockages. This is why lipidologists focus on how much LDL you have in your blood. If you have a higher amount of LDL, you’re at a higher risk of
heart attack
or
stroke
. Lipidologists help you manage
high cholesterol
to reduce your risk of heart and blood vessel disease.
Heart and blood vessel diseases are major causes of death and disability worldwide. Lipidologists use their expertise to help people at risk for these issues that have high cholesterol as their cause.
Is there a special certification for a lipidologist?
Yes. The American Board of Clinical Lipidology offers an exam that leads to certification. To take the exam, a physician has to have a current medical license. They also have to complete two years of clinical experience or have certification from another medical board. Once they’ve received certification, lipidologists can keep updating it every 10 years.
Advertisement
What does a lipidologist do?
A lipidologist treats people with lipid disorders, like:
Hyperlipidemia
(high cholesterol).
Hypercholesterolemia
(too much LDL).
Hypolipidemia (lower than normal cholesterol).
Familial hypercholesterolemia
(very high LDL that you inherit through your genes).
Hypertriglyceridemia
(too many triglycerides, another kind of lipid).
Lipidologists may prescribe one or more medications for you and recommend lifestyle changes. They can also order
lipoprotein
apheresis. This is a procedure that removes LDLs from your blood and then puts your blood back into your body.
Which doctor should be consulted for high cholesterol?
You can start with your
primary care provider
(PCP) to manage high cholesterol. But if the treatment they give you doesn’t work for you, you may want to see a lipidologist. They have a deeper understanding of cholesterol and the various treatments for high cholesterol. Their focus is to lower your risk of heart or blood vessel disease.
You might think that lipidologists are all heart doctors (
cardiologists
). They’re not. Many lipidologists work in internal medicine or family medicine. People in these specialties made up 50% of the National Lipid Association’s members when they surveyed them in 2010. So it’s worth asking your primary care provider if they have expertise in lipidology.
What is the clinical definition of lipidology?
Lipidology is the study, diagnosis and management of lipid disorders.
Lipidologists understand:
How lipoproteins work.
How atherosclerosis develops.
The impact of diet and physical activity on cholesterol levels.
The various treatments for high cholesterol.
How to treat people with inherited lipid disorders.
How to use risk factors to estimate your risk of heart and blood vessel issues.
Lipidology is a fairly young area of expertise, starting in the early 2000s. But it’s an important specialty because so many people have high cholesterol. More than 80 million people in America age 20 and older have high cholesterol.
What happens at a lipid appointment?
A provider will take a blood sample to perform a
lipid panel
. They’ll do a
physical exam
and talk with you about your medical history. Telling a lipidologist about your family history is important because lipid disorders run in families. They’ll also want to know about your daily activities, like whether you use tobacco products or exercise.
Once you start taking
cholesterol-lowering medicines
and making changes to your daily life, a lipidologist will see you again. They’ll need to check your blood regularly to see if your treatment is working for you. If your treatment isn’t working, a lipidologist may need to try a different one.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’ve had trouble managing your high cholesterol, ask for a referral to a lipidologist. They can use their expertise to make a treatment plan just for you. Don’t be afraid to ask for a referral if you’re not seeing results with your current provider’s treatment plan. Some people need more advanced options or a combination of treatments, especially if high cholesterol runs in their family.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/20/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment