Rumination Syndrome: What It Is, Symptoms and Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Rumination Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Rumination Syndrome
Rumination syndrome is a functional gastrointestinal disorder and eating disorder that causes habitual regurgitation after eating. Within minutes, food automatically comes back up from your stomach and into your mouth. Healthcare providers believe both physical and psychological causes might trigger the behavior. Treatment includes behavioral therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Rumination Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Rumination Syndrome?
Rumination syndrome is a rare disorder that causes you to regurgitate your food shortly after swallowing it. This may occur within minutes or up to two hours after eating. When it occurs, the undigested food comes back up from your stomach into your mouth. You may chew it and swallow it again, or you may spit it out. This pattern occurs repeatedly — generally, after every meal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Why this happens is still something of a mystery. Rumination syndrome is automatic, and often unconscious. It’s not the same thing as throwing up: It doesn’t happen because you feel sick or forced to regurgitate. It’s not painful. Instead, it’s more of a reflex, like burping. Somehow, your body learns to relax the muscular valve that usually keeps food in your stomach. And once it learns, it becomes a habit.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of rumination syndrome
Rumination syndrome is a pattern of regurgitation (food coming back up) after you eat. It’s typically painless and effortless. You might have a feeling like
belching
when it happens. It doesn’t involve
nausea
or retching. The regurgitated food doesn’t taste sour like vomit does. It hasn’t been in your stomach long enough to mix with the acid.
However, some people report:
Separate episodes of vomiting or
acid reflux
Coexisting abdominal pain or
indigestion
A feeling of pressure before regurgitation, which may be painful
Babies who have rumination syndrome may arch their backs or make sucking noises.
Rumination syndrome causes
Researchers don’t fully understand what causes rumination syndrome. Some describe it as a
functional GI disorder
, and others as a behavioral disorder. Regurgitation can be learned and intentional or unintentional. Some believe it might be a learned response to a physical or psychological condition.
Advertisement
Mechanically speaking, regurgitation happens because certain muscles relax or contract at the wrong time. Your lower esophageal sphincter (LES) is the muscular valve between your
esophagus
and stomach. It’s supposed to open when you swallow and then close to keep food down in your stomach.
But in rumination syndrome, it doesn’t work this way. It appears that pressure within your belly triggers your abdominal muscles to contract, pushing food back up. At the same time, your LES relaxes in response to this internal pressure, like a release valve, allowing the food to continue to rise.
Risk factors
Rumination disorder occurs frequently in babies and in people with developmental disabilities. In these cases, it might be more of a physical coordination problem. But it can also occur in children and adults of all ages and without known disorders. In these cases, you might be more likely to develop it during times of stress. Many people report that they developed the behavior following a very stressful life event.
Risk factors include:
Developmental delay
Emotional stress
Fibromyalgia
or
somatic pain
Gastrointestinal disorders
Infant emotional neglect
Mental illness or another
eating disorder
While rumination syndrome is rare overall, some studies suggest that
as many as 1 in 10
people with fibromyalgia or with other eating disorders may experience it.
Complications of rumination syndrome
Complications related to rumination syndrome can include:
Acid regurgitation and damage to your esophagus
Aspiration,
which can cause choking or pneumonia
Dehydration and electrolyte imbalances
Dental problems, like bad breath and tooth decay
Weight loss, nutrient deficiencies or growth faltering in children
Psychosocial issues, like shame and avoiding social interaction
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose rumination syndrome
Your healthcare provider may suspect rumination syndrome after an in-depth discussion of your symptoms and a brief exam. If they think you might have an underlying gastrointestinal disorder, they’ll check for that first with additional imaging or testing.
This might involve tests like:
Esophagram
Esophageal manometry test
Gastric emptying study
Upper endoscopy
The complete criteria for diagnosis, according to the
Rome Foundation’s Rome IV Criteria
, include:
Persistent or recurrent regurgitation of recently ingested food into the mouth with subsequent sitting or rechewing and swallowing
Regurgitation isn’t preceded by retching
Supporting evidence:
Effortless regurgitation events aren’t preceded by nausea
Regurgitation contains recognizable food, which may have a pleasant taste
The process tends to stop when the regurgitated material becomes acidic
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is rumination syndrome treated?
Behavioral therapy is the primary treatment for rumination syndrome. With practice, you can learn to become aware of what’s happening in your body when you regurgitate. Then, you can choose a new response. Healthcare providers often prescribe
diaphragmatic breathing
exercises. With this technique, you practice relaxing and contracting your diaphragm as you breathe.
Lie on your back with your knees bent and your head supported. Place one hand on your upper chest and the other just below your rib cage on your belly.
Breathe in slowly through your nose, letting the hand on your belly move outward with it. Keep the hand on your chest as still as possible.
As you breathe out, purse your lips and tighten your stomach muscles. Keep the hand on your upper chest still as your other hand falls inward.
Other complementary therapies may include:
Biofeedback
Cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT)
General
relaxation techniques
Reflux medications, like
baclofen
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you notice that you’re regurgitating after eating, it’s always better to interrupt the pattern sooner rather than later. You don’t need to wait for it to last three months or longer before you consult a healthcare provider or seek care. Eating disorders tend to worsen with time, and they can take longer to treat the longer they last. While a diagnosis can help, you don’t need a formal diagnosis to begin treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have rumination disorder?
Rumination syndrome isn’t a life-threatening disorder, as some eating disorders are. But it can have damaging side effects over time. It can encourage acid reflux and can also affect your quality of life. Behavioral therapy works well for most people with rumination syndrome. Even children can retrain their bodies and unlearn the behavior. If it involves another disorder, recovery may take a little longer.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Rumination syndrome is rare, but it often goes unrecognized. It may be less rare than we think. We now know it can occur in anyone of any age. This includes children and adults who are otherwise successful students and professionals. You may not know how it happened or believe that you can help it. But with practice, you can unlearn and reverse the pattern of regurgitation. Behavioral therapy can help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us