Mold Allergy: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Mold Allergy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mold Allergy
Mold allergies cause your immune system to react to molds that are normally harmless. You might have minor symptoms, like itchy eyes or a rash. Or you may have trouble breathing. Providers can determine what kind of mold allergies you have. The best way to deal with a mold allergy is to avoid it, but medications can help reduce your symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Mold Allergy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is a Mold Allergy?
An
allergy
is an abnormal reaction by your
immune system
to common substances (allergens), like mold, that don’t affect most people. Molds are a type of fungus. They exist almost everywhere in the world. The molds that grow inside our homes prefer dark, damp places, like basements or crawl spaces. They can be harmful to people who have mold allergies.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Mold allergies are common —
one study
estimates between 3 and 10 out of every 100 people have them. There are a lot of different types of molds. It’s possible for only certain types of mold to cause you to have an
allergic reaction
.
Are there different types of mold allergies?
Yes. Many different types of molds can cause allergies. Some common types include:
Alternaria
Aspergillus
Cladosporium
Penicillium
There are also molds that can cause illnesses in people with weakened immune systems, like
black mold
or other molds.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of being allergic to mold?
Mold allergy symptoms are a lot like other types of respiratory allergies that cause
hay fever
-like symptoms. They may include:
Coughing
Itchy or watery eyes
Itchy throat
Nasal congestion
Runny nose
Sneezing
Wheezing
If you have
asthma
, mold allergies can trigger an
asthma attack
.
Mold allergy causes
Molds produce spores. Spores are tiny cells that help molds grow and spread. If your immune system is sensitive to mold spores, it produces immunoglobulin E (IgE). IgE is an
antibody
that helps find the allergens in your body. They help remove the allergens by taking them to the
mast cell
(allergy cell), where the allergens attach to a special receptor. The receptor helps send and receive signals in your body. It tells the allergy cell to release
histamine
and other allergy chemicals, which is what causes allergy symptoms.
Advertisement
As you come across mold spores over time, your immune system sees the spores as something it must get rid of. It creates bigger reactions to protect you.
Risk factors
Molds don’t bother most people unless they have allergies or a weakened immune system. Mold smells can bother people. But they really shouldn’t cause any major issues.
You’re at a greater risk of developing an allergy to mold if you have:
A personal or biological family history of allergies
A respiratory condition like asthma
Can living in a house with mold make you sick?
Yes. Long-term exposure to mold can increase your risk of developing an allergy. For example, a humid house or a building with poor ventilation is an ideal environment for mold to grow.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose mold allergies
A healthcare provider will review your medical history, ask about your symptoms and perform a physical exam. They may recommend tests to confirm their diagnosis. They may also refer you to an
allergist
.
Tests that are used
Healthcare providers may recommend the following tests to diagnose mold allergies:
Allergy blood tests
: A provider will remove a small amount of blood, usually from a
vein
in your arm, and test it for IgE against molds. You may have mold allergies if you have high levels of immunoglobulin E antibodies in your blood sample.
Skin prick (scratch) test
: A provider will place droplets of mold allergens on your skin. Then, they’ll scratch your skin near the allergens with a thin needle and look for reactions. Reactions may include itching, discoloration or swelling.
Management and Treatment
How do you treat a mold allergy?
You can’t cure mold allergies. But one of the most important ways to manage a mold allergy is to avoid mold. This includes avoiding environments in which mold grows easily, like damp places or piles of wet leaves.
Medications can help relieve your symptoms. These may include:
Antihistamine
pills that you take with water
Over-the-counter nasal steroids
Nasal antihistamine sprays that you breathe in through your nose
If you have asthma, a healthcare provider may suggest medications such as inhaled
corticosteroids
.
A provider may also suggest
allergy shots
(immunotherapy). Each time you get an allergy shot, your body responds by lowering your sensitivity to the allergen. It may take several months before your symptoms start to improve.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have allergy symptoms and you think mold is the cause, call a healthcare provider. They can help treat your symptoms and may recommend allergy testing to make an official diagnosis.
You may wish to ask the following questions during your appointment:
What mold(s) am I allergic to?
Do you recommend allergy medications?
Should I take allergy medications every day or only when I develop symptoms?
Are there any side effects to allergy medications?
How do I know when I have mold allergy symptoms or cold and flu symptoms?
Should I see an allergist?
Advertisement
Contact a provider if you have asthma or other breathing problems and suspect a mold allergy. Call 911 (or your local emergency service number) or go to an emergency room right away if you have severe breathing problems.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have mold allergies?
There’s no cure for mold allergies. But you can help manage your reactions by avoiding molds and taking medications that a healthcare provider suggests.
Prevention
Can mold allergies be prevented?
No, you can’t prevent allergies. But you can take steps to avoid and remove mold. These include:
Clean up mold immediately
. You can use household cleaners or a solution of 1 cup of bleach in 1 gallon of water. It’s a good idea to wear protective clothing, including gloves and a respirator or N95 (KN95) mask.
Control moisture in your home
. Make sure your home is properly ventilated (like running a fan in your bathroom) and repair any leaks in your roof, walls or pipes immediately. You can also run a dehumidifier in your basement.
Stay safe outside
. If you have a yard, try to keep it free of piles of damp and decaying leaves or wood. It’s also a good idea to check outdoor mold counts. Stay indoors if mold counts are high.
Throw away wet carpets, rugs or other textiles that weren’t dried quickly
. You should also toss other absorbent materials in which you can’t completely remove mold, like ceiling tiles.
Advertisement
In some cases, it’s a good idea to call a professional. For example, if you have severe mold allergies or you have a contaminated water leak, like sewage.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
For some people, mold exposure can make you feel crummy. You may sneeze, cough, have a stuffy nose or develop a rash. But some reactions to mold are more dangerous, like when it acts as an asthma trigger.
The best way to prevent an allergic reaction is to avoid mold. Make sure there’s plenty of ventilation in your home and keep an eye on your ceilings, or your basement walls and floor, especially after heavy rains. It’s also a good idea to talk to a healthcare provider. They can recommend medications that help reduce your symptoms.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergies can wreak havoc on your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our team of experts can help create a treatment plan that’ll help you breathe easier.
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment