Jawline Filler: Options, What To Expect, Before & After
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Jawline Filler
Advertisement
Advertisement
Jawline Filler
Jawline filler injections smooth wrinkles and fine lines, giving your face a more youthful appearance. These dermal fillers add shape, volume and definition to thinning, saggy skin. This nonsurgical cosmetic procedure offers noticeable, immediate results. Jawline filler effects are temporary but can last months or years.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cosmetic Injectables Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
A jawline filler is a cosmetic injection procedure to give your jaw a more defined look.
What is jawline filler?
Jawline filler is a nonsurgical cosmetic procedure that gives your jaw area a more defined look. Your healthcare provider injects safe substances called fillers underneath your skin. The filler plumps up your skin. You get smoother-looking skin that looks more youthful.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What are other names for jawline fillers?
Jawline fillers are a type of
dermal filler
. The word “dermal” (dermis) refers to your
skin
. You may also hear these terms:
Facial fillers.
Injectable fillers.
Soft tissue fillers.
Who gets jawline fillers?
You can get dermal filler injections in different parts of your face and body. More than 3 million Americans get some type of dermal filler each year.
You may want a jawline filler to:
Add volume to your jawline.
Create a more defined separation between your jawline and neck.
Give your jawline a sharper angle.
Have a more youthful appearance.
Make your jawline more symmetrical.
Reduce the effects of aging like sagging skin and
wrinkles
.
Smooth creases or fine lines in your jaw.
How do jawline fillers work?
There are different dermal fillers that enhance the appearance of the jawline. How jawline fillers work depends on the type:
Calcium hydroxylapatite (CaHA):
This mineral compound exists in your bones. As a jawline filler, you get an injection of CaHA mixed into a water-based gel.
Collagen
forms around the gel, adding fullness to your jawline and smoothing lines. Radiesse® is one type of CaHA filler.
Hyaluronic acid
(HA):
This naturally occurring body substance keeps your skin hydrated and full. You make less of this acid as you age, leading to fine lines and thinner, saggy skin. HA injections include Juvederm® and Restylane®. These dermal fillers plump up your jawline, smoothing wrinkles and fine lines.
Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA):
These tiny collagen beads keep your skin looking fuller and firmer. It also contains bovine (cow) collagen. This semi-permanent filler can last for years, but often requires repeat injections to get the full effect. Bellafill® is one type of PMMA filler.
Advertisement
How long do jawline fillers last?
Over time, your body naturally breaks down and absorbs jawline fillers. How long they work depends on the filler type:
Calcium hydroxylapatite (CaHA) filler
lasts for up to 12 months.
Hyaluronic acid filler
lasts six to 12 months (and sometimes up to two years).
PMMA
lasts five years.
What other procedures may take place with jawline fillers?
It depends on your aesthetic goals. Your healthcare provider may recommend a
jaw implant
in addition to (or instead of) jawline fillers. During this
cosmetic surgery
, a plastic surgeon places a solid silicone implant into your jawline. The implant permanently adds definition and shape to your jawline.
Or your healthcare provider may recommend these nonsurgical cosmetic procedures:
Botulinum toxin injections
(Botox®).
Lip augmentation
or
dissolving lip filler
.
Nonsurgical facelift.
Vampire facelift
.
Who shouldn’t get jawline fillers?
You shouldn’t get dermal fillers if you have:
Cold sores
(herpes simplex virus type 1).
Connective tissue diseases
like lupus or scleroderma.
An infection.
Uncontrolled
diabetes
.
Treatment Details
Who performs jawline filler procedures?
Different types of healthcare providers can inject jawline fillers. You should look for a licensed provider who has experience with dermal fillers.
Providers who perform jawline filler procedures include:
Dermatologists
.
Cosmetic or
plastic surgeons
.
Physicians, physician assistants and nurse practitioners.
Where do jawline filler procedures take place?
You can get this quick outpatient procedure at your healthcare provider’s office. You can also get dermal fillers at a medical spa (also called a medspa or medispa). This medical clinic delivers cosmetic procedures in a spa-like environment.
What happens before a jawline filler procedure?
Your healthcare provider will examine your face and discuss your treatment goals. This information helps determine the filler type and amount that’s right for you, as well as the depth and locations of the injections. They may mark your face to show where the injections go. They may also take pictures to show before-and-after results.
Before the procedure, your healthcare provider will review possible side effects. You’ll learn what to expect in terms of results and recovery. Your provider may also recommend other cosmetic procedures or surgeries to help achieve your desired look.
You should tell your healthcare provider about your:
Medications and supplements:
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), blood thinners (including aspirin) and some supplements can increase your risk of bleeding and
bruising
.
Nicotine use:
Smoking
and using nicotine products can slow the healing process.
Skin conditions:
Dermal fillers may not be an option if you have an active
skin disease
or are getting certain treatments.
Advertisement
What happens during a jawline filler procedure?
The outpatient procedure takes 10 to 20 minutes. You go home soon after treatment. Your provider will cleanse your skin and apply a topical numbing
anesthetic
cream. Some fillers also contain a numbing agent to ease discomfort.
Your healthcare provider uses a very thin needle to inject small amounts of filler underneath your skin. You may feel a slight pinch or sting, but the procedure isn’t painful.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cosmetic Injectables Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of jawline fillers?
Compared to more invasive cosmetic surgeries, jawline fillers offer:
Fast procedure and recovery with little, if any, missed work or activities.
Immediate results.
Minimal health risks.
Monetary savings (it’s less expensive than surgery).
What are the risks of jawline fillers?
Jawline filler procedures are relatively safe. Any side effects tend to be temporary. They include:
Allergic reaction
to the filler.
Asymmetrical appearance.
Bleeding, bruising and redness.
Bumps that look like
acne
.
Infections.
Numbness
.
Skin damage or
scars
.
Skin discoloration, sensitivity and swelling (
edema
).
Recovery and Outlook
What is recovery like after a jawline filler procedure?
You may have some bruising or swelling after the procedure. These side effects go away in a few days. Still, you should be able to see an immediate and noticeable difference. You can apply cold compresses or ice packs to the treatment area to minimize any discomfort.
Advertisement
Follow your healthcare provider’s recommendations about resuming activities. Depending on the type of work you do, you should be able to return to work after the procedure. Your provider may recommend waiting 24 hours before performing strenuous physical activities.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call the doctor?
You should call your healthcare provider if you experience:
Allergic reaction like an itchy rash.
Bruising, redness or swelling that lasts for more than a week.
Bumps or nodules near the injection sites.
Lopsided (asymmetrical) appearance that lasts for more than a week.
Signs of infection, such as
fever
.
Additional Common Questions
Can you get a fat transfer procedure instead of jawline fillers?
A fat transfer (fat grafting) procedure uses fat from your body as the dermal filler. Fat grafting is a more complicated process than a filler injection (although it’s still an outpatient procedure). A plastic surgeon performs this procedure.
Fat transfer requires
liposuction
, a surgical
body contouring
procedure. Your surgeon removes fat deposits from one or more areas of your body, like your butt or thighs. After purifying the fat, your surgeon injects it into your jawline.
About half of the injected fat survives, creating permanent lifelong changes. However, you might not get the changes or look that you get with more traditional dermal fillers. The risk of complications is also greater. And recovery after liposuction can take as long as two weeks.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Jawline filler is a fast, noninvasive cosmetic procedure to smooth wrinkles in your jawline. These fillers can enhance your jawline’s appearance and make you look younger. The effects of jawline fillers are temporary. You’ll need repeat injections every six to 18 months. While dermal fillers are relatively safe, skin injections aren’t without risk. It’s important to choose an experienced healthcare provider who can help you get the look you seek.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
How you look can affect how you feel. If you’re worried about lines and wrinkles, Cleveland Clinic’s experts can help you navigate the world of cosmetic injectables.
Cosmetic Injectables Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/28/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment