Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART): Technique & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Assisted Reproductive Technology
Advertisement
Advertisement
Assisted Reproductive Technology
Assisted reproductive technology (ART) is any treatment or procedure that involves a laboratory to help you get pregnant. There are different types of ART. IVF (in vitro fertilization) is the most common. They all involve eggs, sperm or embryos being handled outside your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Overview
What is assisted reproductive technology?
Assisted reproductive technology (ART) is a fertility treatment or procedure that helps you get pregnant.
In vitro fertilization (IVF)
is the most common ART.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
ART is a treatment for
infertility
or when natural conception isn’t possible. It can also be helpful if you have a
genetic condition
that you don’t want to risk passing on to your child.
Using ART to start a family is a big and important step. Your fertility team knows you’ll have questions. They’ll help you understand the benefits, risks, costs and steps. And they’ll get to know you, your preferences and why you’re seeking help. They’ll suggest procedures and processes that make sense in your situation.
ART isn’t common. Fewer than 2% of all babies born in the U.S. each year are conceived using ART.
Types of ART
Assisted reproductive technology involves a person handling
eggs
,
sperm
or embryos. Healthcare providers use different fertility treatments and procedures. Your provider will recommend treatment based on the cause of your infertility and your preferences.
The most common examples are:
IVF
: A provider removes eggs from your ovaries and mixes them with sperm to fertilize the egg. Then, they place the fertilized egg into your uterus.
Donor sperm/donor eggs
: Your provider uses donated eggs or sperm to help you get pregnant.
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)
: This procedure involves injecting sperm directly into the center of an egg.
Freezing eggs or embryos
: This process lets you delay pregnancy while preserving your fertility.
Gestational surrogacy
: This is when another
female
carries the pregnancy.
Advertisement
Treatment Details
What is involved with assisted reproductive technology?
All ART procedures start with getting eggs from your ovaries. Then, a healthcare provider combines the egg with sperm to make an embryo. The last step is placing the embryo into your uterus.
The exact steps vary, but ART typically involves all or most of the following steps:
Ovarian stimulation
: Hormone medications help your ovaries produce multiple eggs.
Preparing sperm
: Your fertility team confirms sperm are healthy and active. They use a process called sperm washing.
Egg retrieval
: A provider uses a thin needle to take mature eggs from your ovaries. They may freeze the eggs for you to use later.
Fertilization
: Providers combine eggs and sperm to create embryos. They may use ICSI or other steps to increase the chance that sperm will fertilize the egg and create an embryo.
Embryo monitoring
: Your provider watches the embryos in incubators for several days. They find out which embryos are most likely to result in pregnancy. Some people choose to freeze embryos at this step in the process.
Embryo transfer
: This is the process of placing the embryo back into your uterus to achieve a pregnancy.
Some people do preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) on the embryos before embryo transfer. These tests can tell you the chances of the embryos having a genetic disorder.
What are the pros and cons of assisted reproductive technology?
The main benefit is that it helps couples and individuals become pregnant or have a family. It can also give you control over when you start a family. This can be helpful when you know you’d like to be a parent in the future.
Possible disadvantages of ART are:
Risk of
multiples
: Your risk for having more than one baby is higher.
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS)
: A rare side effect of the hormone medication that helps you produce multiple eggs.
Expense
: Not all insurance plans cover fertility treatment. You should check with your plan to make sure you understand the costs
Stress
: It may take several tries for ART to be successful. The process can take a toll on your physical and emotional health.
Ectopic pregnancy
: There’s a slightly higher risk of ectopic pregnancy with ART compared to a natural conception.
There are other risks specific to each type of ART. Your provider can give you a better idea of what to expect based on your circumstances.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
How successful is assisted reproductive technology?
According to the CDC, the overall average success rate of ART is about 21% per cycle in the U.S. An ART cycle begins when you start taking fertility drugs or a provider begins to check your ovaries for signs that your follicles are making eggs.
Advertisement
Some types of ART are more successful than others. There are many factors that go into determining if ART is successful. Some of those are:
Your age
Underlying health conditions
Reasons for infertility
Embryo quality
If you use your own eggs or donor eggs
The technique you use
The clinic or laboratory success rate
Your provider can give you the best sense of how successful ART will be for you.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When getting pregnant naturally is difficult or impossible, ART can be something you hold onto. It has helped many individuals and couples have a family. It includes treatments like IVF, using donor sperm or freezing embryos. It’s becoming more common and more accessible, too. Talk to your healthcare provider about ART and your options. They can help explain each method and what may work best for you based on your health history, age and preferences.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment