Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common type of lung cancer. It happens when normal cells in your lungs change and grow out of control. NSCLC grows slowly compared to small cell lung cancer. But it can spread to other parts of your body before you develop noticeable symptoms. Early detection and treatment are key.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lung Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
What is non-small cell lung cancer?
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) occurs when abnormal cells form and multiply in your
lungs
. NSCLC is one of two main types of
lung cancer
. The other is
small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
. NSCLC is the most common type of lung cancer, making up about
80% to 85%
of all lung cancer cases.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Small cell lung cancer gets its name because the cancer cells look small and round under a microscope. Generally, SCLC is more aggressive than NSCLC. With non-small cell lung cancer, the cancer cells are larger, and they typically grow slower.
NSCLC may not cause symptoms. So, even though it grows slower than small cell, it’s often diagnosed after the cancer has spread (
metastasized
) to other areas of your body. That’s why early detection and treatment are so important.
Types of non-small cell lung cancer
There are three main types of non-small cell lung cancer:
Adenocarcinoma
: Usually forms in the outer portions of your lung
Large cell carcinoma
: Can develop in any part of your lungs
Squamous cell carcinoma
: Typically starts in the central part of your lungs
Other types of non-small cell lung cancer include sarcomatoid carcinoma and adenosquamous carcinoma. They’re much less common.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of non-small cell lung cancer
Non-small cell lung cancer symptoms can include:
Chest pain
Chronic cough
Coughing up blood
Hoarseness
Loss of appetite
Shortness of breath
Tiredness
Wheezing
In some cases, NSCLC may not cause symptoms.
Non-small cell lung cancer causes
NSCLC occurs when normal cells change and grow out of control. But experts don’t always know why it happens in some people and not in others. But they have identified some risk factors. A risk factor is something that increases your chances of developing non-small cell lung carcinoma.
Advertisement
Risk factors
The most common risk factor for lung cancer is a history of
smoking
. Other known NSCLC risk factors include:
A family history of lung cancer
Asbestos exposure
Exposure to metal and mineral dust
Exposure to
radon
, a naturally occurring radioactive gas
Having respiratory conditions like
pulmonary fibrosis
or
COPD
Radiation therapy to your breast or chest
Complications of non-small cell lung cancer
Like many other cancers, non-small cell lung cancer can spread to other parts of your body. Most commonly, it can spread to your:
Adrenal glands
Bones
Brain
Liver
Lymph nodes
Skin
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose non-small cell lung cancer
Your healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
and ask about your symptoms and medical history. If they suspect non-small cell lung cancer, they’ll recommend certain tests to diagnose and
stage
the disease.
Tests that are used
Medical tests that help diagnose non-small cell lung cancer include:
Lung
biopsy
Bronchoscopy
, which gives your healthcare provider a view inside your airways
Imaging tests like
chest X-rays
or
CT scans
, PET scans and MRI scans of the brain
Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS)
, which helps your provider get a better look inside your chest
Management and Treatment
How is non-small cell lung cancer treated?
For cancer that’s only in your lung and nowhere else, your healthcare provider may recommend surgery as a first line of treatment. During this procedure, a surgeon removes the
tumor
and a small amount of healthy tissue around it. If the cancer has spread beyond the original site, all or part of your lung may need to be removed (
lung resection
).
Early-stage lung cancer is rare, so many people receive a combination of treatments, including:
Chemotherapy
. Chemotherapy involves using drugs that attack lung cancer. It’s one of the most common NSCLC treatments. Your oncologist might recommend chemotherapy on its own or in combination with other therapies.
Immunotherapy
. This treatment uses certain drugs to boost your
immune system
so it can recognize and destroy cancer cells.
Targeted therapy
. This treatment uses drugs designed for specific types of lung cancer. Targeted therapy can find and attack specific cancer cells without harming healthy cells.
Radiation therapy
. A radiation specialist uses X-rays to kill cancer by carefully aiming them at the lung cancer wherever it is in your body. Your provider might use it in combination with chemotherapy or on its own.
Recovery time
Recovery after non-small cell lung cancer treatment varies. It depends on several factors like the size and location of the tumor, the type of treatment you receive and your body’s own healing capacity.
Some people may recover in a few months. For others, it might take years. Ask your healthcare provider what you can expect in your situation.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your oncologist or visit your nearest emergency room if you develop:
Advertisement
Breathing problems
Fever of 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius)
Severe pain that doesn’t improve with medication
New or worsening symptoms
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lung Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Life expectancy depends on the stage of cancer and the subtype of NSCLC. For example, the five-year
survival rate
for early-stage NSCLC is
65%
. This means that 65% of people diagnosed with the condition are still alive five years later.
The five-year survival rate for regional NSCLC (when the cancer has spread to nearby tissues or lymph nodes) is 37%. With metastatic non-small cell lung cancer, the five-year survival rate is 9%.
Keep in mind that survival rates are just estimates. They can’t tell you how long you’ll live or how your body will respond to treatment. To learn more about what survival rates mean for you, talk to your healthcare provider.
And the outlook is different for everyone. Non-small cell lung cancer may be
curable
, especially with early detection and treatment. But certain factors affect your overall prognosis, like cancer type, stage and your overall health.
Even when NSCLC isn’t curable, it’s still treatable in many cases. Many people with non-small cell lung cancer can manage their symptoms successfully.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A cancer diagnosis is one of the most difficult things you’ll ever face. It’s normal to feel scared, worried or frustrated. No matter what stage of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) you have, treatment can play a major role in easing your symptoms and improving your quality of life. Talk to your healthcare provider about your options. Consider meeting with a social worker to navigate this uncertain time. You may also want to join an online or local support group, which can help you feel less isolated and more empowered.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have lung cancer, you might feel alone and afraid. You don’t have to be. Cleveland Clinic is here to help find and treat your cancer at any stage.
Lung Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials