RSV Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
RSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus)
Advertisement
Advertisement
RSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus)
RSV is a respiratory infection caused by a virus. Babies, kids and adults can get it. It can cause mild symptoms, but sometimes — especially in babies and older adults — it can lead to severe difficulty breathing. Babies can get a monoclonal antibody treatment to help protect them. There’s a vaccine available for adults over 60 and pregnant women.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is RSV?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is RSV?
Kristin Barrett, MD, explains how RSV spreads and how it’s treated.
RSV is a respiratory illness that can cause cold-like symptoms or, sometimes, serious illness. RSV stands for respiratory syncytial (sin-SISH-uhl) virus, the
germ
that makes you sick with RSV. Almost everyone gets it for the first time before the age of 2. But the protection (
immunity
) you get from being infected doesn’t last, so you can get it more than once.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
RSV is more common than you might think. We most often hear about babies getting severely ill from RSV, but adults and kids of all ages get it. Infants are more likely to get very sick from RSV because their
immune systems
are still developing. Their smaller
airways
are also more likely to get inflamed.
You can also get RSV many times throughout your life — sometimes even twice in one year. For adults, it usually causes mild,
cold-like
symptoms. But adults over 65 and people with
compromised immune systems
are at a higher risk for serious illness.
Symptoms and Causes
RSV can affect adults, kids and babies differently. Watch for signs of difficulty breathing, like flared nostrils.
RSV symptoms
Cough
Trouble breathing
Pauses in breathing in young infants
Runny
or
stuffy nose
Sneezing
Sore throat
Headache
Fatigue
Fever
Not feeling hungry
Symptoms in
babies or young kids
might look a little different. They might seem fussy or irritable, or they might not want to play as they usually would. Contact your healthcare provider if your child is younger than a year old and has RSV symptoms.
Go to an emergency room if you or your child has severe symptoms. These include:
Shortness of breath
or trouble breathing
Wheezing
or noisy breathing
Bluish or grayish skin, lips or nails
Skin pulling in between your child’s ribs when they breathe (
retractions
)
Nostrils
spreading out (flaring) when breathing
Short, shallow or fast breathing, or pauses in breathing
Advertisement
RSV causes
A
virus
— respiratory syncytial virus — causes RSV. It’s not caused by
bacteria
. RSV spreads through:
Close contact with someone who has it
Coughing and sneezing (respiratory droplets)
Contaminated objects or surfaces (think toys, countertops and phones)
Is RSV contagious?
Yes, RSV is contagious while you have symptoms — usually three to eight days. RSV spreads easily from person to person. It can live on hard surfaces, like tables, for several hours.
You may be able to spread RSV a day or two before you develop symptoms. Babies and people with compromised immune systems may be contagious even after symptoms go away, for up to four weeks.
Complications of RSV
RSV can cause complications that make it hard to breathe. They include:
Bronchitis
Pneumonia
Bronchiolitis
Worsening of existing conditions like asthma,
congestive heart failure
or
COPD
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
Respiratory failure
Hypoxia
or low oxygen levels
Dehydration
Ear infections
Risk factors
Babies born early (
preterm
) and kids under 2 years old have smaller airways and are more likely to get severely sick from RSV. You’re also at a higher risk if you:
Are over age 65
Have a compromised immune system
Have heart disease, including
congenital heart disease
Have chronic lung conditions, like
asthma
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose RSV
A healthcare provider
swabs
your nose with a soft-tipped stick to test for RSV. They may get a
chest X-ray
to look for pneumonia and other complications.
Management and Treatment
How is RSV treated?
There’s no specific treatment for RSV. If you or your child has severe RSV, you may need to stay in the hospital to recover. There, providers might help you get better with:
Oxygen therapy
to get more oxygen into your body
Fluids
through an IV to prevent dehydration
Mechanical ventilation
(a ventilator) if you can’t breathe on your own
Antibiotics don’t treat RSV since it’s a virus.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call a pediatrician if your child has RSV symptoms and is under 12 months old. You should also call if your child has any of the following:
A temperature above 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit or 38 degrees Celsius (if your baby is under 3 months old)
A fever above 104 degrees F and 40 degrees C (at any age)
Symptoms that don’t improve or get worse after a week
Ear drainage or tugging at their ears (possible signs of an ear infection)
Difficulty breathing or bad coughing fits
Wheezing or noisy breathing
Adults can often manage RSV symptoms on their own. Call a healthcare provider if you have symptoms and at least one of the following applies to you:
You’re over age 65
You have a compromised immune system
You have a heart or lung condition
Advertisement
Your provider will let you know if you should come in for a checkup and what severe symptoms to look out for.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to an emergency room if you or your child has severe RSV symptoms. These include signs of difficulty breathing — like wheezing, flaring nostrils, chest retractions, or bluish or grayish skin color.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does RSV last?
RSV can last a week or two. You might have a lingering cough for a while. Severe cases of RSV may last longer.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
If you have mild symptoms, you can take care of yourself at home with:
A cool-mist humidifier to help with breathing
Nasal saline spray to help relieve cough and congestion
Suctioning your child’s nose to remove mucus
Plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration
Over-the-counter (OTC) medications (like acetaminophen or ibuprofen)
Always check with your provider or your child’s pediatrician before using any medications or giving them to kids.
Prevention
Can RSV be prevented?
There are some things you can do to help protect yourself from RSV. Babies up to 8 months old and some toddlers at high risk can get a
monoclonal antibody
immunization. This gives them
antibodies
that can
help them fight off an RSV infection
.
Pregnant
women
and adults 75 and older (or 60 and older with certain health conditions) are eligible for
RSV vaccines
. Talk to your healthcare provider about what’s best for you and your family.
Advertisement
Other steps you can take include:
Wash your hands
. Always
wash your hands
after using the bathroom and before eating or preparing food.
Limit exposure to germs
. Avoid taking your baby out in large crowds, especially during cold and flu season. Avoid play dates or other close contact with kids who are sick.
Clean commonly touched surfaces
. Disinfect toys, tables, doorknobs and other surfaces that people in your house touch often.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
RSV can be as mild as a cold. Or it can turn into something more serious. The important thing is to keep an eye out for signs of serious illness. If you feel something isn’t right — even if you think you or your child just has a cold — don’t hesitate to call a provider or seek emergency care.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider