Perforated Septum: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Perforated Septum
Advertisement
Advertisement
Perforated Septum
A perforated septum (septal perforation) is a hole in the cartilage or bone in between your nostrils. Causes include injuries and conditions that damage the blood vessels in your nose. Symptoms include crusting in your nose and a noticeable dip in the bridge of your nose.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule a Septoplasty
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Perforated Septum?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Perforated Septum?
A perforated septum — or septal perforation — is a hole in the tissue that separates your nostrils. Your septum is made of cartilage, bone and soft tissue lining called
mucosa
. It separates your
nasal cavity
into two parts so that the air you breathe through your nose travels through two passages instead of one.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Sometimes, a hole or tear (perforation) can weaken your septum and cause symptoms. When this happens, you may need treatment. Other times, a nasal septum perforation isn’t serious and doesn’t cause issues at all. In that case, you may need to have it monitored instead of fixed.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of nasal septum perforation
It’s possible to have a nasal septum perforation without knowing it. But when symptoms are present, they can be pesky. Symptoms include:
Dryness and crusting inside your nose
Dip in the bridge of your nose (
saddle nose deformity
)
Nasal obstruction
Nosebleeds
Runny nose
Whistling sound when you breathe through your nose
Can you feel a perforated septum with your finger?
Sometimes, you can touch the perforation, but this is a really bad idea. Sticking a finger up your nose to feel for the hole can create pressure that tears the tissue even more. Bacteria on your finger can cause an
infection
, making things worse.
This is why it’s best to get checked by a healthcare provider instead.
Septal perforation causes
Causes of nasal septum perforation include injuries and conditions that damage the
blood vessels
inside your nose. The damage can block blood flow to your septum, causing the tissue to become unhealthy. Specific causes include:
Autoimmune diseases
.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
,
lupus
and
rheumatoid arthritis
are examples of these conditions that can cause a perforation.
Drug misuse
. Using steroid nasal sprays in excess or inhaling cocaine can cause a hole in your septum.
Exposure to chemicals
. Inhaling harmful chemicals on the job, like chrome, can lead to a tear in this delicate tissue.
Infections
.
Tuberculosis
and
syphilis
are just two types of infections that can cause a perforated septum.
Injuries
. A
broken nose
or even excessive nose picking can cause a perforation.
Nose conditions.
Atrophic rhinosinusitis
and chronic (long-term) rhinosinusitis can cause tears.
Treatment complications
. A healthcare provider may accidentally damage the tissue during surgery on your septum (
septoplasty
) or
electrocauterization
to stop excessive nosebleeds.
Tumors
. In rare cases, a
tumor
can cause a perforation. The most common kind associated with a perforated septum is a cancer called
squamous cell carcinoma
.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider will ask about your medical history. It’s important to let them know about previous surgeries you’ve had. Let them know if you’re taking prescription, over-the-counter or recreational drugs. They need a complete picture of your health to make an accurate diagnosis.
They may perform a
nasal endoscopy
. This test uses a flexible tube with a light and camera at the end to record images of the inside of your nose.
You may need
blood tests
if your provider believes an infection is causing the perforation. You may need a
biopsy
to test for cancer cells if they find a tumor.
Management and Treatment
How is a perforated septum treated?
Treatment depends on how severe your symptoms are, the hole’s size and whether the perforation is weakening your nose’s structure.
At-home remedies and medicines
Often, there are things you can do at home for a perforated nasal septum. You may need to apply antibiotic ointments or products that contain
emollients
inside your nose. Your healthcare provider may recommend using a humidifier or doing regular saline rinses (
nasal irrigation
). These treatments keep the inside of your nose moist. This can ease your symptoms and prevent crusting that can make perforations worse.
Prosthetic button
Your provider may be able to insert a prosthetic button that fills the hole. Some are custom-made to fit, while others are premade. Your button may be a single device. Or it may come in two parts that fit together inside your nose. No matter the type, they’re made of medical-grade safe material, like silicone.
Depending on your situation, your provider may insert the button while you’re under general
anesthesia
(asleep). Or they may be able to numb the area and insert the button during an office visit.
If you get a prosthetic button, it’s still a good idea to keep the inside of your nose moist by using home remedies like a humidifier.
Surgery
You may need surgery to fix the hole if other treatments haven’t been successful (or if your surgeon thinks you’re a good candidate). There are various techniques your surgeon may use. They’ll tailor their approach to your specific situation.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if your symptoms make you suspect a nasal septum perforation. Lots of conditions can cause symptoms similar to this condition. But you’ll need to see a provider for an accurate diagnosis and the best treatment plan.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule a Septoplasty
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Nasal septum perforations don’t heal on their own, but this doesn’t mean you need repairs right away. Home remedies are often all people need to manage symptoms and keep the hole from getting bigger. You and your healthcare provider may decide that monitoring the perforation is the best bet.
If you do need a procedure, your healthcare provider will advise you about the pros and cons of surgery versus a prosthesis. They’ll let you know why they recommend one type of treatment over another.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A perforated septum may or may not cause issues depending on how big it is, where it’s located and what caused it. Your healthcare provider will consider these factors when determining whether your condition requires monitoring or treatment. If you suspect a perforation, contact your provider. Depending on your situation, they can fix it. Or they can help you care for it so that it’s something you can manage with no issues.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A deviated septum can make it hard to breathe. Cleveland Clinic experts can help you breathe easier with septoplasty.
Schedule a Septoplasty
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment