Spastic Cerebral Palsy: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Spastic Cerebral Palsy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Spastic Cerebral Palsy
Spastic cerebral palsy is the most common type of cerebral palsy. This movement condition causes stiff muscles and involuntary muscle movements. It can affect the muscles in your child’s legs, arms and face, independently or together. Treatment is available to help them manage their symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Cerebral Palsy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is spastic cerebral palsy?
Spastic cerebral palsy is a condition that causes increased
muscle
tone (
spasticity
) and stiffness. It can sometimes be painful if severe. It also causes muscle spasms, or sudden movements, that your child can’t control.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms look a bit different for each person. For example, it may be difficult for your child to walk by rolling their step (heel to toe). It may be more comfortable for them to walk on their tiptoes. Quick or sudden movements, like reaching out to catch a ball, might trigger pain with this condition.
Spastic cerebral palsy is the most common type of cerebral palsy.
Cerebral palsy
is a group of
neurological conditions
(affecting your brain and
nerves
) that cause difficulty with movement and coordination.
What are the types of spastic cerebral palsy?
There are three types of spastic cerebral palsy:
Spastic diplegia/diparesis.
Symptoms affect your child’s legs. It makes walking difficult due to tight hip and leg muscles. Your child’s legs may pull inward and may even cross at their knees (this motion is called “scissoring” of the legs).
Spastic hemiplegia/hemiparesis.
Symptoms affect one side of your child’s body, either the right side or the left side. It may involve the arm, leg or both limbs on one side.
Spastic quadriplegia/quadriparesis.
Symptoms affect both arms, both legs and your child’s face. It represents a more severe form of cerebral palsy. Your child may also have symptoms of cognitive delay (difficulty with learning), seizures or other symptoms.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of spastic cerebral palsy?
The symptoms of spastic cerebral palsy may include:
Tight muscles
Stiff muscles
Muscle pain
Involuntary muscle movements or
spasms
These symptoms can make movements of the affected muscles jerky, preventing smooth motions in your child’s arms and legs. Symptoms can range from mild to severe.
What are the signs of spastic cerebral palsy?
The first signs of spastic cerebral palsy may include:
Increased tone, or tightness, of your child’s limbs (on examination by their pediatrician)
Difficulty fully extending
joints
Delays in meeting
developmental milestones
(like crawling, walking or grabbing)
Difficulty with
coordination
Problems walking or an
abnormal gait
or stride (like your child’s knees crossing when walking)
Walking on tiptoes only
What causes spastic cerebral palsy?
Spastic cerebral palsy occurs due to an injury that disrupts the
brain
pathways that control muscles and movement. It may happen due to a lack of oxygen to the brain, a brain injury or, less commonly, due to a genetic abnormality (change in
DNA
).
Lack of oxygen to the brain or brain injury can occur during pregnancy, birth or shortly after birth if the following occur:
Lack of blood flow to the brain (
ischemic stroke
)
Bleeding in the brain (
hemorrhagic stroke
)
Injury to the brain due to infection
Injury to the brain due to trauma (
traumatic brain injury
)
A person may be more likely to develop spastic cerebral palsy if they experienced the following:
Born too early
(preterm)
A low birth weight
Jaundice
that’s severe and doesn’t get treated
An infection during pregnancy that affects the fetus or placenta
Multiples in the uterus (
twins, triplets
)
Complications of pregnancy (like
placental abruption
or
uterine rupture
)
Chemical exposure to a toxin that can damage the brain (like persistent exposure to high levels of
mercury
in seafood)
What are the complications of spastic cerebral palsy?
Spastic cerebral palsy can affect more than your child’s muscles. Complications may include:
Difficulty with speech and communication
Problems with cognitive development (
intellectual disability
)
Seizures
Vision loss
Hearing loss
Diagnosis and Tests
How is spastic cerebral palsy diagnosed?
A healthcare provider usually diagnoses spastic cerebral palsy during infancy or childhood. A
physical exam
in your child’s provider’s office is the first step in diagnosis.
Your child’s provider will examine their muscle tone, movement, motor skills and coordination. They’ll also ask you about your child’s development to see if they’re on track for their age (like crawling or walking).
What tests diagnose spastic cerebral palsy?
Findings on physical examination may suggest spastic cerebral palsy. Your child’s provider may recommend imaging tests to look for areas of damage in your child’s brain. Other tests help your child’s provider rule out conditions with similar symptoms, like:
Advertisement
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) test
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Blood tests
Genetic testing
Management and Treatment
How is spastic cerebral palsy treated?
Treatment for spastic cerebral palsy focuses on improving your child’s ability to move. Treatment could include:
Daily stretching at home to prevent tightness from worsening over time
Physical
,
occupational
and/or
speech therapy
Using braces,
casts
or splints to keep their arms or legs in one position to stretch the muscles
Using assistive devices such as a walker or wheelchair
Medications to relieve muscle stiffness and spasms (
baclofen
,
diazepam
,
clonazepam
,
dantrolene
and
tizanidine
)
Botulinum toxin injections
(Botox®) to help their muscles relax
Intrathecal baclofen therapy
to deliver medication directly to their spinal cord
Selective dorsal rhizotomy
(surgery to reduce spasticity)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Cerebral Palsy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the life expectancy for spastic cerebral palsy?
In most cases, spastic cerebral palsy doesn’t directly affect your child’s life expectancy. Severe symptoms and untreated cases may cause complications that might affect their lifespan. While there’s no cure, the prognosis is usually good with treatment.
Is spastic cerebral palsy progressive?
Spastic cerebral palsy isn’t a progressive disease. Early in life, the affected muscles should be the same muscles affected later in life. It shouldn’t affect any new muscles. However, without treatment, the tightness of the affected muscles may become more severe over time.
Advertisement
Treatment is important to reduce muscle tightness, which can affect function (such as walking, changing clothes and gripping items) and may be painful. Your child will likely need support from their care team to help them manage the condition for their entire life.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you notice signs of spastic cerebral palsy in your child. Look out for signs and symptoms that affect their movement and development.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Can you help me understand my child’s diagnosis?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
What are the goals of treatment?
Are there side effects of the treatment?
How often is physical or occupational therapy needed?
Will surgery improve my child’s symptoms?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Spastic cerebral palsy can be a frustrating condition for your child to manage. This is because their brain and muscles aren’t communicating as well as they should. Symptoms can affect their ability to move around safely and independently.
Spastic cerebral palsy isn’t curable, but, fortunately, there are management options available, including therapies and medications. You’ll get to know your child’s care team well, as you’ll visit them frequently throughout their life. If you have any questions about what you or your family can expect, don’t hesitate to reach out to a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A lot of things in adulthood can be hard. Finding the right provider to treat your adult cerebral palsy shouldn’t be one of them. Cleveland Clinic is here to help.
Adult Cerebral Palsy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/31/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment