Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma (ACC)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma (ACC)
Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is a rare type of cancer that affects your glandular tissues. It commonly forms in your salivary glands. But it can also occur in other parts of your body, like your tear or sweat glands. While ACC is slow-growing with a high five-year survival rate, it often comes back — sometimes after many years.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is adenoid cystic carcinoma?
Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is an uncommon type of
cancer
that usually develops in your
salivary glands
or other areas of your head and neck. Sometimes, it can form in other parts of your body, including your
skin
, breast tissue,
cervix
or
prostate gland
. ACC tumors might be solid, round and hollow. Or they might have holes in them (like Swiss cheese).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
ACC tumors grow slowly. But they can become aggressive and unpredictable over time. That means that even if surgery gets rid of the cancer, it could come back later. Most people with adenoid cystic carcinoma will have
recurrence
(the cancer will come back) within five to 10 years. If you receive a diagnosis, you’ll need routine scans and checkups to monitor your condition.
How common is adenoid cystic carcinoma?
Adenoid cystic carcinoma is rare. It makes up about 1% of all
head and neck cancers
and affects
4.5 out of every 100,000 people
in the general population. In the United States, about
1,200 people
receive a diagnosis every year.
Most people with ACC are between the ages of 40 and 60. The condition is slightly more common in
females
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of adenoid cystic carcinoma?
Adenoid cystic carcinoma symptoms depend on the size and location of the tumor. You might have:
A painless lump.
Difficulty breathing.
Difficulty swallowing
.
Hoarseness
.
Muscle weakness.
Nasal congestion
.
Nosebleeds
.
Pain.
Vision
changes.
Because ACC is slow-growing, it doesn’t always cause symptoms.
What causes adenoid cystic carcinoma?
Experts aren’t sure what causes adenoid cystic carcinoma. They think it happens because of
genetic mutations
(changes) that occur over time. ACC doesn’t run in families and there are no known risk factors.
Advertisement
What are the complications of adenoid cystic carcinoma?
Adenoid cystic carcinoma can spread (
metastasize
) in the following two ways:
Perineural invasion
. In most cases of ACC, cancer cells creep into the
nerve
fibers around the tumor. It happens on such a microscopic level that it can be hard for healthcare providers to detect on imaging scans or during surgery.
Through your bloodstream
. Cancer cells from the tumor can break off and travel to other areas of your body via your bloodstream.
Metastatic (or Stage 4) adenoid cystic carcinoma most commonly spreads to your
lungs
and
liver
. Unlike other types of cancer, ACC doesn’t spread to
lymph nodes
very often. But it happens in about 5% to 10% of cases.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is adenoid cystic carcinoma diagnosed?
If your healthcare provider thinks you may have adenoid cystic carcinoma, they will likely take a
biopsy
. They’ll send your tissue sample to a
pathologist
for testing. Your provider may also take one or more imaging tests, like:
CT scans
(computed tomography scans).
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging).
PET scans
(positron-emission tomography scans).
Ultrasound
.
Due to the rarity of ACC, it can take some time to diagnose. You might need several rounds of testing before you receive a diagnosis and begin treatment.
Management and Treatment
How is adenoid cystic carcinoma treated?
Adenoid cystic carcinoma treatment depends on the location of the tumor and whether it has spread. Options include:
Surgery
. Surgery is the go-to treatment for adenoid cystic carcinoma. The goal is to remove the entire tumor, if possible. In some cases, your surgeon may have to remove lymph nodes or part of a nerve.
Radiation therapy
. This can get rid of any remaining cancer cells after surgery. Or you might have radiation therapy as a stand-alone treatment.
Chemotherapy
. Drugs like
cisplatin
,
vinorelbine
,
paclitaxel
and
carboplatin
can treat advanced or metastatic ACC.
Targeted therapy
. Drugs like
lenvatinib
and
sunitinib
block the actions of proteins that encourage cancer growth. Healthcare providers use targeted therapy for advanced or metastatic cases of ACC.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for adenoid cystic carcinoma?
Adenoid cystic carcinoma is a slow-growing cancer. Healthcare providers can often detect and treat it early with successful results. But it’s common for ACC to recur (return) many years later — either in the same place or a different area of your body. When this happens, it’s more difficult to treat.
Survival rates
The overall five-year
survival rate
for people with adenoid cystic carcinoma is
80.4%
. This means that 80.4% of people with this condition are still alive five years later. The 10-year survival rate is 61.3%.
Remember, survival rates are only estimates. They can’t tell you how long you’ll live or how you’ll respond to treatment. To learn more about survival rates and what they mean for you, talk to your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can adenoid cystic carcinoma be prevented?
Because there are no identifiable risk factors for ACC, there’s no known way to reduce your risk. There’s also no known way to prevent ACC from coming back.
Living With
How can I take care of myself?
Because ACC is so rare, it can take a while to get a diagnosis. This can take a toll on your mental and emotional health. Talking with a counselor or therapist can help you process complicated feelings. Many people find solace in support groups, or by taking music or art therapy classes. Try reducing stress through
meditation
or other
mindfulness
exercises.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have adenoid cystic carcinoma, tell your healthcare provider any time you develop new or worsening symptoms. A change in symptoms could mean that your tumor has grown.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Here are some questions you might consider asking your healthcare provider about ACC:
Where’s the tumor located?
What symptoms might I develop?
Has cancer spread anywhere else in my body?
Will you be able to remove the tumor with surgery?
Will I need radiation therapy?
Can I work while undergoing cancer treatment?
How long will treatment take?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
An ACC diagnosis is life-changing. Early treatment is usually successful. But the uncertainty that comes after can feel overwhelming. Learning to live with adenoid cystic carcinoma can take time. Consider joining a support group so you can talk with others who are going through similar things. Your healthcare provider is here for you. Lean on them and ask for resources.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/28/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials