Eczema on Nipples: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Eczema on Nipples
Advertisement
Advertisement
Eczema on Nipples
Eczema on nipples causes an itchy, red, scaly rash on your nipples and areola (the darker circle around the nipple). The rash isn’t contagious. There’s no cure for eczema, but you can relieve symptoms by avoiding things that cause a flare-up, such as harsh soaps and lotions. See your provider for an exam and to rule out other conditions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is eczema on nipples?
Eczema (atopic dermatitis) is a condition that causes an itchy rash to develop on your skin. The rash can appear anywhere on your body. Eczema can develop on your nipples as well as your areola (the dark circle of skin surrounding the nipples). Anyone can get this common condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Eczema on your nipples isn’t dangerous. But it can lead to an infection, especially if you scratch the rash. Scratching can break your skin and allow bacteria to enter. It can also cause your skin to thicken and harden over time.
Nipple eczema can get worse when your nipples come into contact with irritants such as harsh laundry detergents, soaps and lotions. There is no cure for eczema, but you can relieve symptoms by avoiding the irritants that make eczema worse and using emollients such as petroleum jelly (Vaseline®) or other products that help increase the barrier function of your skin. Providers can also treat eczema with steroid creams, medications and even light treatments.
Who might get eczema on nipples?
Most of the time, eczema develops before age 5. It’s one of the most common
skin problems in children
. Many children outgrow the condition.
Anyone can get eczema on their nipples. Some people develop the rash all over their body, including their nipples and areola. Other people only have eczema on their nipples and areola, but not on the rest of their body. You’re more likely to get
eczema
(atopic dermatitis) if you have:
Allergic rhinitis (hay fever)
.
Asthma
.
Family history of allergies, asthma or eczema.
Food allergies
.
Obesity
, or if you carry extra weight.
Advertisement
How common is eczema on nipples?
Eczema is very common. It affects around 15 million people in the United States, usually in cities. Every year, providers diagnose eczema in around 10% of adults and up to 20% of kids. It’s more common among women and Black people. Only a small number of people with eczema will get it on their nipples.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes eczema on nipples?
Eczema is a type of
dermatitis
. It isn’t contagious. You can’t get it from someone else, and you can’t spread it. Eczema results from:
Genetics:
Eczema is often inherited (passed down through families).
Environmental factors:
Laundry detergents, certain fabrics, soaps, lotions and perfumes can irritate the skin around your nipple and lead to a flare-up of eczema. Sweat can get trapped under your breasts inside your bra or shirt, which can cause irritation.
Overactive immune system:
The red, scaly rash can develop when your
immune system
reacts to a substance that isn’t actually harmful. You may have an allergic reaction to food or another substance, and that can trigger an eczema outbreak.
Stress levels:
High-stress levels,
anxiety
and
depression
can trigger the rash and make it worse.
What are the symptoms of eczema on nipples?
People with nipple eczema develop a red, itchy, scaly rash on their nipples and areola. Your areola is part of your
breast anatomy
. It’s the dark circle of skin around your nipple. Nipple eczema can flare up or get worse every now and then. It may get better or even go away for a few weeks, months or years and then come back. Signs of nipple eczema include:
Dry, inflamed skin around your nipple.
Itchy, painful, burning or sensitive skin.
Nipple discharge
.
Rash that has brown, red or gray patches or spots.
Scaly,
dry skin
that may peel, crust or scab over.
Small bumps that ooze fluid.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is eczema on nipples diagnosed?
Usually, providers can diagnose eczema by looking at your skin. Your provider will ask about your symptoms and examine the skin around your nipples. They will also look for signs of eczema on other parts of your body.
If you’re
breastfeeding
, tell your provider. People with eczema are more likely to get
mastitis
, an infection in your milk ducts that causes
breast pain (mastalgia)
, redness and swelling.
Your provider may order:
Allergy testing
,
to see if you have an
allergy
to certain substances or foods.
Complete blood count
(CBC),
to check your blood for infections or other conditions.
Skin
biopsy
,
to test your skin for infection and see what kind of dermatitis you have.
Two rare types of
breast cancer
called
Paget’s disease of the breast
and
inflammatory breast cancer
(IBC) can have some of the same symptoms as nipple eczema. If your provider suspects these conditions, they may recommend a
mammogram
or additional tests.
Management and Treatment
How do providers treat eczema on nipples?
There isn’t a cure for eczema, but treatments can help. Your provider may recommend you:
Advertisement
Avoid the substance
(such as lotion or soap) that may cause your symptoms. They may also recommend avoiding certain foods if you have a food allergy.
Moisturize the skin
around your nipple using an unscented cream or lotion. You can also use petroleum jelly to keep the skin moist.
Taking medications
such as
corticosteroids
, which reduces inflammation and itchiness. They come in the form of creams that you to apply to your skin. You can also take corticosteroids orally (by mouth) or antihistamine medications for severe itching. Your provider may also recommend immunosuppressant drugs to regulate your immune system or antibiotics to treat infection.
Trying phototherapy,
which uses ultraviolet light waves from special lamps to relieve symptoms of eczema.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for people with eczema on nipples?
Eczema symptoms usually get better or go away with age. But flare-ups can happen throughout life. You’re more likely to have repeated flare-ups if you:
Also have allergies or asthma.
Got eczema at a young age.
Have severe eczema.
People who scratch their skin repeatedly are at an increased risk of infection. Long-term scratching can also cause your skin to harden and thicken over time. To avoid these complications, don’t scratch the rash. Talk to your provider about ways to relieve the itching.
Advertisement
Prevention
How can I prevent an outbreak of eczema on nipples?
To prevent an outbreak, you should:
Avoid strong soaps and lotions,
especially those with artificial smells or colors. Use hypoallergenic lotions. You may also want to try creams and lotions that contain
ceramide
, which can restore your skin’s natural barrier.
Cut foods out of your diet
that you are allergic to or that trigger an eczema outbreak.
Maintain a healthy weight,
and talk to your provider about
losing weight
if you have obesity.
Manage stress levels
with
relaxation exercises
or therapy.
Run a humidifier
in your room to keep the air from getting too dry.
Take shorter showers or baths,
and don’t bathe in water that’s too hot since it can dry out your skin.
Try not to scratch the rash.
Scratching might give you relief at first, but it can make the itching and pain worse. It can also cause your skin to break, which increases the chance that you’ll get an infection.
Use unscented laundry detergent
made for sensitive skin.
Wear cotton shirts and bras.
Manmade or scratchy fabrics (like polyester and wool) can irritate your nipples.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider about nipple eczema?
If you have a
breast rash
that doesn’t go away after a few days, see your provider. It’s important to get an examination. Call your provider right away if you have:
Advertisement
Itchiness that’s severe or discomfort that makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Breast lumps
or nipple discharge.
Pain or swelling in the breast or nipples.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Eczema on your nipples can cause extreme discomfort. In severe cases, the itchy rash and dry skin can make it difficult to move, wear clothing or sleep. If you or your child has a rash on or around the nipples, see your provider for an evaluation. It’s important to get a checkup, rule out other conditions and get treatment. Although there isn’t a cure for nipple eczema, treatments can relieve symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/26/2021.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment