Meningoencephalitis: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Meningoencephalitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Meningoencephalitis
Meningoencephalitis happens when you have inflammation and/or infection of your meninges and brain at the same time. It’s life-threatening, and early treatment is essential. Symptoms include fever, stiff neck and neurological issues, like light sensitivity, behavior changes and seizures. Treatment depends on the cause and severity.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is meningoencephalitis?
Meningoencephalitis is a rare and life-threatening condition in which you have
meningitis
and
encephalitis
at the same time. Healthcare providers may also call it encephalomeningitis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Meningitis is an infection or
inflammation
of the area surrounding your
brain
and
spinal cord
(meninges). Your
meninges
protect your brain and spinal cord from injury and provide support and structure. Encephalitis is inflammation in your brain tissue.
Both conditions usually develop due to an infection (like a
viral
or
bacterial infection
), but they can have other causes as well. Meningoencephalitis can affect anyone at any age, including infants.
Types of meningoencephalitis
There are different types of meningoencephalitis based on the underlying cause. But it’s most often related to an infection, like viral, bacterial,
fungal
and amoebic infections. Other potential causes include autoimmune diseases, like
autoimmune encephalitis
or meningoencephalitis, or medication-related side effects (such as from immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy).
Some common infections include:
Bacterial meningoencephalitis
: This condition comes from a bacterial infection.
Neisseria meningitides
(
meningococcal disease
),
Streptococcus pneumoniae
and
Haemophilus influenzae
type b are the most common causes of bacterial meningoencephalitis.
Cryptococcal meningoencephalitis
: This fungal infection happens when
Cryptococcus
fungi affect your brain and/or lungs.
Herpetic meningoencephalitis (HME)
: This condition can develop from an infection of the herpes virus. Most cases result from
herpes simplex virus type 1
(HSV1) — the virus that causes
cold sores
. But it can also develop from herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV2). Sometimes, meningoencephalitis happens during the initial infection. But it most often occurs due to the reactivation of the virus from an earlier infection.
Primary amebic meningoencephalitis (PAM)
: This condition comes from an amoeba called
Naegleria fowleri
. It lives throughout the world in warm and shallow bodies of fresh water, such as lakes, rivers and hot springs. It’s commonly called the “
brain-eating amoeba
.”
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of meningoencephalitis?
Symptoms of meningoencephalitis include:
Headache
.
Stiff neck
or
neck pain
.
Fever
.
Fatigue
.
Nausea
and
vomiting
.
Muscle weakness.
Speech issues.
Sensitivity to light (photophobia).
Difficulty thinking clearly.
Personality and behavior changes.
Hallucinations
— usually visual and/or auditory.
Seizures
.
Loss of consciousness.
Other symptoms of meningoencephalitis that can affect infants include:
Bulging forehead.
Feeding issues.
Difficulty arousing or excessive sleepiness.
Symptoms of meningoencephalitis typically develop and progress quickly.
If you or your child have these symptoms, seek immediate medical help. Meningoencephalitis is life-threatening, and early treatment is essential.
What causes meningoencephalitis?
Infectious diseases
, like viruses, bacteria, fungi and the amoeba
Naegleria fowleri
, are the main causes of meningoencephalitis.
These infections can spread through air, water, food or close contact with somebody else who has them. Not everyone who gets these infections develops meningoencephalitis.
In the rare cases of an autoimmune cause, the reason may not be entirely clear. Some risk factors include a personal or family history of autoimmunity, younger age and being
female
.
Is meningoencephalitis contagious?
Meningoencephalitis itself — inflammation in your brain and meninges — isn’t contagious. But some of the causes of it are. Most bacterial and viral causes of meningoencephalitis can spread from person to person, like the herpes simplex virus.
What are the risk factors for meningoencephalitis?
People with a weakened immune system (
immunocompromised
) are at increased risk of developing infectious meningoencephalitis.
Conditions and factors that weaken your
immune system
include:
Children under 5 and people over 65 typically have weaker immune systems. Infants are especially at risk for meningoencephalitis.
HIV
(human immunodeficiency virus). Cryptococcal meningoencephalitis, for example, frequently affects people with advanced HIV disease.
Taking
immunosuppressants
, such as for an
organ transplant
,
stem cell transplants
or certain
autoimmune conditions
.
Cancer
and cancer treatments, like
chemotherapy
and
radiation therapy
.
Primary immunodeficiency disorder (PIDD)
.
Certain autoimmune conditions, like
psoriasis
,
Crohn’s disease
and
lupus
.
Alcohol use disorder
.
If you’re immunocompromised, talk to your healthcare provider about ways to stay healthy and decrease your risk of serious infections.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is meningoencephalitis diagnosed?
If you or your child have signs of meningoencephalitis, a healthcare provider will act quickly to confirm a diagnosis. They’ll do
physical
and
neurological exams
. And they’ll ask questions about your symptoms, like when and how they developed.
Tests providers use to confirm a diagnosis of meningoencephalitis include:
Advertisement
Body fluid tests
: Providers can test different body fluids like
urine
(pee),
blood
and saliva to look for signs of an infection (like
white blood cell
counts). These tests can also detect the specific type of infection.
Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
: To perform a spinal tap, your provider inserts a needle into your lower back to get a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample. A lab tests the fluid sample to check for the presence of bacteria, fungi or abnormal cells; protein types and levels; and white blood cell types and levels. Providers most often use CSF tests to distinguish meningoencephalitis from other conditions like blood toxicity or
sepsis
.
EEG (electroencephalogram)
: An EEG measures and records your brain’s electrical signals. Providers look for issues with how your brain is functioning to help diagnose or assess meningoencephalitis.
CT (computed tomography) scan
: A CT scan is an imaging test that uses a series of
X-rays
(radiation) and a computer to create detailed images of inside your body. It can show issues in your brain or meninges, like clots, swelling, infection or inflammation.
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)
: An MRI scan is an imaging test that uses a large magnet, radio waves and a computer to produce detailed images. Like a CT scan, it can show any issues with your brain or meninges. Healthcare providers prefer to use MRI for infants and children because it doesn’t use radiation, which can be harmful to children.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is meningoencephalitis treated?
The treatment for meningoencephalitis depends on the cause and severity. Most cases require treatment in a hospital. Treatments may include:
Medication to treat the underlying infection
: Cryptococcal meningoencephalitis, for example, requires
antifungal medication
. Providers use
antiviral
medications (like
acyclovir
) for herpetic meningoencephalitis.
Antiseizure medications
: Providers use antiseizure medications, like dilantin or
phenytoin
, to prevent or treat seizures related to meningoencephalitis.
Corticosteroids
and
diuretics
: Corticosteroids (like decadron) can help reduce swelling due to inflammation. They may also help prevent
hearing loss
related to meningoencephalitis.
CSF drainage
: This can also help reduce intracranial pressure.
Pain relievers
and/or
sedatives
: Providers may use these medications in cases of severe inflammation.
Your healthcare team will continue to closely monitor you as you stay in the hospital. They’ll address any issues or complications you may experience.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for people with meningoencephalitis?
The prognosis (outlook) for people with meningoencephalitis depends on the cause, its severity and how quickly they receive treatment.
In survivors of cryptococcal meningoencephalitis, about 69% have cognitive and/or physical impairments 12 months after diagnosis. About 50% to 70% of people with herpetic meningoencephalitis experience permanent brain damage, neurological disorders or
coma
.
Advertisement
People who have mild cases and receive timely treatment are more likely to have fewer complications.
Prevention
Can I prevent meningoencephalitis?
Not all cases of meningoencephalitis are preventable. But the best strategy for lowering your risk is to try to stay healthy and avoid bacteria, viruses and fungi that cause infections.
Strategies for protecting yourself and others against infections include:
Washing your hands
frequently with soap and water.
Covering your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze.
Disinfecting frequently touched surfaces.
Avoiding or minimizing contact with others when either of you are sick with a contagious disease.
Not swimming in or drinking water that could be contaminated. Use distilled or treated water for
nasal irrigation
.
Reducing your risk of
sexually transmitted infections
(STIs) by using
condoms
and regularly getting tested for STIs.
Reducing your risk of fungal infections by wearing a mask in dusty areas like construction sites and staying inside during dust storms. Take extra precautions if you live in areas where fungal infections are common.
Seeing a healthcare provider regularly, especially if you’re at increased risk of getting infections (like if you’re immunocompromised).
When traveling, learn how to reduce your risk of infectious diseases that are common in your destination.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Meningoencephalitis is a serious, life-threatening condition. If you or your child have symptoms, get medical help immediately. Early treatment is essential for a better outcome. If you’re at increased risk of getting infections that can lead to meningoencephalitis, talk to your healthcare provider about how to lower your risk and stay healthy.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/25/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment