Type 5 Diabetes: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Type 5 Diabetes
Advertisement
Advertisement
Type 5 Diabetes
Type 5 diabetes is a newly recognized type of diabetes that develops from long-term undernutrition. It mainly affects people from low-income countries where malnutrition is common. Type 5 usually requires insulin as treatment. But researchers are looking into other ways to treat it, like with oral medications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Diabetes Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Type 5 Diabetes?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
What Is Type 5 Diabetes?
Type 5 diabetes happens when a long-term lack of nutrition in childhood prevents your
pancreas
from growing properly. Because of this, your pancreas doesn’t make enough
insulin
(a
hormone
). It’s also known as
malnutrition
-related diabetes mellitus (MRDM). A lack of insulin results in
high blood sugar
levels (
diabetes
). This type usually develops before the age of 30.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The International Diabetes Federation officially recognized Type 5 diabetes in 2025. Researchers estimate that it affects 20 to 25 million people worldwide. It mainly affects people in regions where malnutrition is common, like in parts of Asia and Africa. Researchers are actively studying how to better diagnose and treat this type of diabetes.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Type 5 diabetes
Type 5 diabetes symptoms can include:
Increased thirst
Frequent urination
(peeing)
Headache
Blurred vision
Fatigue
Slow-healing cuts and sores
Many classic symptoms of diabetes overlap with undernutrition signs, like
weight loss
, fatigue and
hunger
. Because of this, Type 5 may be difficult to recognize.
People with Type 5 diabetes typically have underweight — a
body mass index (BMI)
that’s less than 18.5. They may also have features of long-term (chronic) undernutrition, like:
Impaired skeletal growth
Enlarged
parotid (salivary) gland
Skin and/or head hair changes
Type 5 diabetes causes
Research is ongoing. But scientists think Type 5 diabetes happens when chronic undernutrition prevents your pancreas from fully developing.
A lack of nutrients over a long time can affect many parts of your body and health. This can include your pancreas. It’s the organ that makes insulin, a hormone that’s necessary to manage blood sugar levels.
Advertisement
People with this type have a history of malnutrition in early childhood or during
fetal development
. Researchers think this affects the growth of their pancreases.
Complications of this condition
Type 5 diabetes can lead to the same complications as other types of diabetes, like:
Cardiovascular disease
Kidney damage
Eye (retina) damage
Nerve damage
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
The main test to help diagnose diabetes is usually a
blood glucose test
. This test checks the level of glucose (sugar) in your blood. People with diabetes often have a result of over 200 mg/dL.
In the U.S. and other high-income countries, healthcare providers use other tests to help identify the type of diabetes (like
Type 1
or
Type 2
). These may include an
A1C
,
urinalysis
and
antibody tests
.
Due to limited access to these kinds of tests in low- and middle-income countries, providers often misdiagnose Type 5 diabetes as Type 1 diabetes.
A history of malnutrition in childhood, a low BMI and age younger than 30 years at diagnosis can all help distinguish Type 5 diabetes from Type 1, which it can be easily confused with. A unique feature of Type 5 is that people with it often don’t have
ketones in their pee
at diagnosis. It’s very common for people with Type 1 to have ketones at diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
How is Type 5 diabetes treated?
Healthcare providers typically prescribe insulin injections to manage Type 5 (malnutrition-related diabetes). Researchers are studying the possibility of using
oral diabetes medications
to manage it.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Researchers and healthcare providers still have a lot to learn about Type 5 diabetes. It’s gone unrecognized for a long time. With ongoing research and advocacy, experts aim to better understand and treat Type 5 diabetes.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you’ve been living with diabetes for years or you’re newly diagnosed, you want experts you can trust. Our team at Cleveland Clinic is here to help.
Diabetes Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes