What Vaccines Do I Need for Travel?
Search
Advertisement
Advertisement
December 5, 2023
/
Health Conditions
/
Infectious Disease
Which Vaccines Are Required To Travel?
Plan early — getting the right vaccines can help you stay healthy on your travels
International travel may sound dreamy. But the dream can quickly fade into a nightmare if you get sick or contract a rare disease while traveling.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
To make your
vacation
as smooth and healthy as possible, take some time to research where you’re heading and how to protect yourself there, advises primary care provider
Daniel Sullivan, MD
.
Getting the proper
vaccinations
before you head out can provide peace of mind and save you from searching for medical care in a foreign land. In some cases, you won’t even be allowed to travel without specific immunizations
What vaccines do you need? And how can you get them? Dr. Sullivan shares what you need to know about travel vaccines.
Do you need vaccines to travel?
Not every travel destination requires specific
vaccinations
. But protecting your health should always be a top priority.
What vaccines you should consider depends on a few things, such as:
Where you’re heading
Your age
Your overall health and history
What you’ll be doing there (for example, if you’ll be traveling for work as a health care provider, veterinarian or other role)
Dr. Sullivan offers this advice:
Vaccines for cruises
Cruises pack a lot of people into tight quarters — especially during things like mealtimes and shows. Respiratory viruses, like
influenza
(flu),
COVID-19
and colds, can spread quickly in those conditions.
“Anytime you find yourself in a large crowd, you need to protect yourself from germs,” Dr. Sullivan says. “Even if you stay to yourself, you’re still touching the same surfaces and breathing the same air as other people.”
Advertisement
Before you embark on your journey, he suggests discussing
routine vaccinations
with your healthcare provider, including vaccines for:
COVID-19
Flu
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Tetanus
“People don’t always realize how important the hepatitis A vaccine is in these situations,” Dr. Sullivan says. “We get hepatitis A from eating food contaminated with the virus. So, anytime you plan on eating food prepared by someone else, it’s a good idea to get the Hep A vaccine.”
Vaccines for out-of-country travel
Protecting your health can mean different things depending on the area of the world you plan to visit. You may be exposed to dangerous insects or animals, unsanitary water or rare disease outbreaks.
“All adults traveling anywhere in the world should check that their
tetanus vaccination
is up to date and consider getting vaccinated for hepatitis A and B if they haven’t been,” Dr. Sullivan emphasizes.
He also urges travelers to visit the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Traveler’s Health
website to find out what’s required and recommended for your particular destination.
When you enter your destination country into their database, it gives you all the information you need to stay healthy, including:
A packing list of
health-related items to bring
Recommended vaccines to consider before you go
Travel health notices, which are updated regularly
What to avoid while there to limit your exposure to diseases
Non-routine vaccinations required for travel to some countries
Dr. Sullivan recommends staying up to date on typical vaccines like those for COVID-19, flu, tetanus and hepatitis A and B.
And depending on where you’re headed, there may be some additional non-routine vaccinations to get. Non-routine vaccines aren’t on the recommended immunization schedule for children or adults. But they may be required or recommended when traveling to certain places in the world.
“Learning about health concerns in the country you’re visiting is important,” Dr. Sullivan says. “Some vaccinations are required — you can’t get into that country or come back to the United States without evidence of the vaccination.”
For example:
Cholera
vaccines are often recommended for people with underlying medical conditions to reduce the risk of
traveler’s diarrhea
Rabies
vaccines are recommended when traveling to countries where rabid animals are common
Typhoid fever
vaccines are recommended to keep you from contracting a bacterial illness passed through contaminated food or water
Yellow fever
vaccines are recommended to protect you from a virus spread by
mosquitoes
Japanese encephalitis
vaccines may be recommended if you’re traveling to Asia or the Western Pacific and plan to stay for more than four weeks
Advertisement
Discussing vaccines with your provider is a good start. But it’s also important to take additional proactive measures against viruses common to the country you’re visiting.
For instance, if
malaria
— a
mosquito
-borne virus — is common where you’re going, consider bringing prescription medicine with you to treat it or taking antimalarial drugs to prevent it before you leave.
Where to get vaccines for travel
You can get routine vaccinations or check your vaccination status with your primary care provider (PCP). But check in with your provider as soon as you make travel plans — some vaccines may require multiple doses at particular timeframes.
For non-routine vaccinations, you’ll likely need to visit a travel clinic.
Travel clinics
Many mid-size and large health systems have infectious disease teams with expertise in non-routine travel vaccinations. They stock and administer those vaccines through a travel clinic. Some freestanding travel clinics may also offer those vaccines. (Pro tip: If you need the yellow fever vaccine, make sure to visit an
authorized yellow fever vaccine clinic
.)
“Primary care providers don’t typically store travel vaccines,” Dr. Sullivan states. “They aren’t used frequently enough, so a dedicated travel clinic is best for your non-routine vaccinations.”
Advertisement
If the travel clinic you choose is in your healthcare provider’s network, your patient record may automatically update when you receive the vaccines. If you get vaccinated outside that network, bring confirmation of the vaccines to your provider so they can add them to your vaccination records. That’s particularly important if your destination will require proof of vaccination to enter or leave the country.
Also, consider taking pictures of your vaccination records or bringing paper copies with you on your trip, in case any concerns arise.
Tips for staying healthy while traveling
Getting vaccinated is only part of the equation to staying healthy while traveling. Dr. Sullivan also recommends that you:
Beware of unsafe water
: Unsanitary drinking water can lead to a decidedly unpleasant vacation. Do your research and, when in doubt, stick to bottled water.
Choose food carefully
: You don’t know where food is sourced in foreign countries, so eat at reputable establishments and avoid street vendors.
Stay hydrated
: When you’re constantly on the go during vacation, it’s easy to get
dehydrated
— especially if you’re traveling in the summer. Dress in layers and drink lots of fluids.
If you get mildly sick or have stomach issues while traveling, Dr. Sullivan says a pharmacy can help. “Pharmacies and pharmacists are incredibly helpful in most parts of the world,” he shares. “Many of our prescription medications are available over the counter in other parts of the world. Pharmacists can provide guidance and help you get what you need to feel better.”
Advertisement
Safe travels!
Learn more about our
editorial process
.
Health Library
Vaccinations & Traveling Abroad
Overview
Health Library
Vaccinations & Traveling Abroad
Overview
Advertisement
Related Articles
March 18, 2025
/
Mental Health
What Vacations Do for Your Brain
Among other benefits, a little time away can help make you more creative, decisive and focused
March 12, 2025
/
Mental Health
8 Ways To Make the Most of Your Vacation
Setting realistic expectations and scheduling downtime can help reduce stress and make your time away more enjoyable
February 14, 2025
/
Children's Health
Flying With a Baby: Your Questions Answered
Dress baby in layers, gate-check your stroller and bring noise-canceling headphones
October 20, 2023
/
Primary Care
How Airplane Travel Affects Your Body
Flying can cause dehydration and bloating and make you feel tired and stressed
June 9, 2023
/
Mental Health
Highway Hypnosis Is Just Around the Bend
When the drive is familiar or monotonous, ‘procedural memory’ can take the wheel
September 23, 2022
/
Mental Health
How To Manage Travel Anxiety
Create a checklist, reflect on your needs and ask for help when unexpected delays occur
March 18, 2022
/
Infectious Disease
How To Travel Safely During the Pandemic
Protect yourself whether you're on a plane, ship or in a car
August 31, 2021
/
Primary Care
What First-Aid Items Do You Need When You Travel?
How to pack a well-stocked travel emergency kit
Trending Topics
Sleep
Breathing Problems? Try These Sleep Positions
If you’re feeling short of breath, sleep can be tough — propping yourself up or sleeping on your side may help
Mental Health
What Is Anxious Attachment Style — and Do You Have It?
If you fear the unknown or find yourself needing reassurance often, you may identify with this attachment style
Nutrition
Are Prebiotic Sodas Good for You?
If you’re looking to boost your gut health, it’s better to get fiber from whole foods
Health Categories to Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Ad
Rendered:
Fri Oct 31 2025 11:36:06 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)