Ingrown Hair Cyst: Treatment, Causes, Preventing Infection
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ingrown Hair Cyst
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ingrown Hair Cyst
Ingrown hair cysts are sacs of fluid or skin cells that form a lump under your skin at the site of an ingrown hair. Removing hair through shaving, tweezing or waxing may lead to these cysts. You may be able to treat some ingrown hair cysts at home. Painful cysts or ones that show signs of infection need medical treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is an ingrown hair cyst?
An ingrown hair cyst is a small sac of fluid that forms around a hair that’s trapped beneath your
skin
. This happens when a strand of hair grows back into your skin instead of outward (
ingrown hair
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When an ingrown hair develops, your
immune system
reacts by sending fluid to your
hair follicle
(the tube where your hair grows). Fluid gets trapped in your hair follicle by the ingrown hair. As a result, a cyst forms. The cyst may cause irritation like itchy skin or a stinging sensation and swelling.
It can be tempting to want to pop a cyst, but don’t do it! Popping a cyst could lead to an infection or scarring. Talk to your healthcare provider about treatment options.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of an ingrown hair cyst?
The symptoms of an ingrown hair cyst may include:
Itchy skin
Warm or hot skin
Pain (burning or stinging sensation)
Swelling
Sometimes, ingrown hair cysts don’t cause pain unless an infection develops. Infections may be serious, so it’s important that you see a provider if you notice the cyst is getting larger, leaking pus or causing you more pain and swelling. Contact your provider right away if you experience these symptoms with a
fever
.
What does an ingrown hair cyst look like?
Features of the cyst may include a bump on your skin that’s:
Small at first but gets bigger
Firm or hard (like a pimple) or soft (like a blister)
Raised from the skin around it
Discolored
(lighter or darker than your natural skin tone or red, white, purple, yellow or brown)
Where do ingrown hair cysts appear?
An ingrown hair cyst forms deep under your skin. They tend to develop where you remove hair. You’re more likely to get one in the following places:
Advertisement
Armpits
Back
Chest
Facial area (especially the chin or beard)
Legs
Neck
Pubic area
Scalp
What causes an ingrown hair cyst?
A blocked hair follicle from an ingrown hair causes an ingrown hair cyst.
Hair grows out of a tiny tube in your skin (hair follicle). Shaving, waxing or tweezing removes the hair, leaving the follicle behind. An ingrown hair develops when your hair grows back from the follicle and curls under your skin instead of growing straight out.
An ingrown hair can clog your hair follicle. Since there’s a space between the clogged surface and the base of your follicle, a pocket forms. Substances like skin cells or
keratin
(a protein that helps hair grow) collect in the pocket to form a cyst.
What are the risk factors for an ingrown hair cyst?
Anyone can get ingrown hair cysts. They’re more common if you have thick or curly hair because the direction of hair growth is less predictable. Your risk of developing cysts increases if you frequently get ingrown hairs.
What are the complications of an ingrown hair cyst?
The complications of an ingrown hair cyst usually happen after scratching, irritating or popping the cyst and may include:
Bacterial infection
(pain, swelling, pus)
Skin discoloration
Scarring
Diagnosis and Tests
How is an ingrown hair cyst diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider or a
dermatologist
will diagnose ingrown hair cysts. They’ll examine your skin and ask you questions about your symptoms. You shouldn’t need any tests.
What other conditions look similar to ingrown hair cysts?
Ingrown hair cysts can look like
cystic acne
. Or if the cyst is near your genitals, it might look like
genital herpes
, a
sexually transmitted infection
. A healthcare provider can review your symptoms and determine what the diagnosis is.
Management and Treatment
How do you get rid of an ingrown hair cyst?
Your provider may recommend the following treatments for an ingrown hair cyst:
Applying warm compresses to the cyst
Receiving a
steroid
injection or using a steroid cream
Taking
antibiotics
for an infection
Undergoing surgery to drain or remove the cyst
Most ingrown hair cysts are harmless and go away on their own. But reach out to a provider if you have a cyst that’s bothersome and not going away. You should stop shaving, waxing or tweezing the area until the cyst heals.
Treating infected ingrown hair cysts
A healthcare provider will give you antibiotics to treat an infected ingrown hair cyst.
You may receive antibiotics you take by mouth or an antibiotic cream that you rub on the cyst. Make sure you follow the instructions and take the antibiotics as directed, even if you start feeling better.
In some cases, your provider may recommend surgically removing and draining the cyst and then treating it with antibiotics.
What do I put on an ingrown hair cyst?
Your provider may recommend specific products to help keep your skin clear and prevent ingrown hair cysts. These may include over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription products that contain the following ingredients:
Advertisement
Benzoyl peroxide
Glycolic acid
Hydrocortisone
Retinoids (vitamin A substances)
Your provider may have other specific recommendations for your skin type.
Can I pop an ingrown hair cyst?
No, you shouldn’t pop an ingrown hair cyst. It’s pretty normal to want to pop or pick at an itchy or uncomfortable cyst. Popping an ingrown hair cyst may increase the pain and swelling you experience. It also increases your risk of infection, scarring and the possibility of the cyst coming back in the future.
When you feel the urge to pop it, place a warm compress on your skin instead. After softening the skin with a warm cloth, you can gently exfoliate the area around the cyst. Then, apply a gentle moisturizing skincare product that doesn’t include harsh fragrances (which may irritate your skin).
What to do when an ingrown hair cyst pops
If you have an ingrown hair cyst that popped, don’t panic. Here’s what you can do:
Clean your skin with soap and warm (not hot) water.
Pat your skin dry.
Apply a small amount of over-the-counter antibiotic ointment on the cyst.
Place a bandage on your skin.
Contact a healthcare provider or a dermatologist.
Don’t try to drain the cyst on your own by squeezing your skin. Your provider will give you guidance on what you need to do next. This might include making an appointment to drain and remove the cyst completely or receiving an antibiotic to prevent an infection if you have additional symptoms.
Advertisement
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does it take for an ingrown hair cyst to heal?
Healing time varies from person to person based on the cyst size, what treatment options you’re using and whether or not you have an infection. Cysts could last for a couple of days to a couple of weeks.
If you’d like to speed up the process, talk to your healthcare provider. They may have skincare suggestions or be able to remove the cyst.
Prevention
Can you prevent ingrown hair cysts?
You can’t prevent all ingrown hair cysts. But you can take steps to lower your risk by:
Allowing time between waxing to let your hair grow back
Practicing
good shaving methods
Shaving or tweezing in the same direction as hair growth (not against it)
Switching to an electric razor
Using
depilatory
(hair removal) products to dissolve hair instead of shaving or getting permanent hair removal
Following a skincare routine that includes gently exfoliating and moisturizing your skin
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Call your provider if you experience:
A popped cyst
Signs of infection like severe pain, pus or
fever
New or unexplained skin bumps, especially ones that itch, hurt or grow in size
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
What caused the cyst?
What’s the best treatment for me?
Are there side effects of treatment?
What steps can I take to prevent ingrown hair cysts?
Can you recommend any skincare products?
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between an ingrown hair cyst and folliculitis?
An ingrown hair cyst is a fluid-filled sac within your hair follicle caused by an ingrown hair.
Folliculitis
is an infection of the root of a strand of hair at the hair follicle.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Let’s face it: people remove a lot of hair from their bodies. It’s common to shave, wax and tweeze so that you feel your best. Most of the time, hair removal is harmless. But it does increase your risk of developing ingrown hairs, which could turn into ingrown hair cysts.
Although it might be tempting to pop ingrown hair cysts, hands off! This means don’t remove hair from the area and don’t mess with the cyst until it heals. Instead, use warm compresses to relieve symptoms. Don’t hesitate to contact your healthcare provider if you want a cyst removed or are worried about an infection.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/18/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment