Hypothalamic Hamartoma: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hypothalamic Hamartoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hypothalamic Hamartoma
A hypothalamic hamartoma is a noncancerous growth on your hypothalamus. This is located deep in the base of your brain. It can cause early puberty, seizures, cognitive dysfunction and other symptoms. Medication and brain surgery are the most common treatments.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
A brain scan with a hypothalamic hamartoma circled.
What is a hypothalamic hamartoma?
A hypothalamic hamartoma (HH) is a rare, present-at-birth growth on your
hypothalamus
. The hypothalamus is an almond-sized structure deep within your
brain
. It links your
endocrine system
and your
nervous system
to maintain homeostasis, or a state of balance, for your body systems to function as expected.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The growth is a noncancerous
tumor
. It can disrupt many important functions of the hypothalamus, including:
Blood pressure
Body temperature
Feelings of
stress
Hunger and thirst
Release of
hormones
from your
pituitary gland
Sleep
and wake cycles
A hypothalamic hamartoma forms while a fetus develops. It grows as your brain grows. HH doesn’t spread to other parts of your brain or body. It usually involves one lesion, but in some cases, there are several.
Treatment options are available to manage symptoms of HH.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hypothalamic hamartoma?
The symptoms of hypothalamic hamartoma vary for each person but may include:
Precocious (early) puberty
Seizures
Neurological symptoms
Precocious puberty (early puberty)
Central precocious puberty
happens when your brain releases
sex hormones
too soon. This typically happens before age 8 in
girls
and before age 9 in boys.
Physical signs for girls include:
Breast development
Pubic and underarm hair growth
Menstrual bleeding
Acne
Physical signs for boys include:
Deepening voice
Facial, underarm and pubic hair
Penis and testicle enlargement
Acne
Seizures
Seizures
are common with this condition. One of the most frequent types is a gelastic seizure. This brief episode may only last a few seconds but can happen multiple times per day, even per hour in severe cases.
Advertisement
A gelastic seizure causes you to burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter when there’s abnormal electrical activity happening in your brain. These seizures usually begin before your child’s first birthday. They reduce in frequency after age 10.
You may experience other seizure types like:
Atonic seizures
, or drop attacks, which cause a sudden loss of muscle control
Dacrystic seizures, or short bursts of uncontrollable crying
Tonic-clonic seizures
, which cause a loss of consciousness and uncontrollable body movements
Neurological symptoms
HH may affect your behavior, mood and cognitive function, including:
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD)
Conduct disorder
Intellectual disability
Mood disorders
Oppositional-defiant disorder
Reactive behavior (aggression, anger)
Short-term memory problems
What are the types of hypothalamic hamartomas?
The two types of hypothalamic hamartomas are based on the location and the symptoms they cause:
Intrahypothalamic lesion.
A growth is near the back of your hypothalamus. It may disrupt electrical activity in your brain and cause seizures and abnormal behavior.
Parahypothalamic lesion (pedunculated lesion).
A growth is near the front of your hypothalamus. It may cause early puberty.
It’s possible to have both types at the same time.
What causes hypothalamic hamartoma?
Experts don’t know exactly what causes HH and there’s no known way to prevent it. The majority of cases happen randomly. This means that they don’t usually run in your biological family history, so you likely won’t inherit it.
Recent studies of removed tumor tissue found a
somatic variant
within the tumor of the
GLI3
gene. Other
genetic variants
have also been found in removed tumor tissue. Research is ongoing to learn more about the possible genetics involved.
There may be a link between hypothalamic hamartoma and a genetic condition called Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS). This condition is the result of a genetic variant that can cause abnormalities in how your hands, feet, larynx (voice box) and anus develop.
What are the risk factors for hypothalamic hamartoma?
Anyone can develop this condition. It’s slightly more common in males. HH primarily affects children and adolescents. But in some cases, you might not receive a diagnosis until symptoms appear in adulthood.
What are the complications of hypothalamic hamartoma?
Early puberty can affect a child’s physical and mental health if their body is changing faster than their peers. It may result in short stature, for example. In addition, your child may not fully understand the changes that are taking place, which may affect their self-esteem and emotional well-being. Your child’s care team can help them manage any possible complications that may arise.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hypothalamic hamartoma diagnosed?
Your provider will offer imaging tests to diagnose HH. An
MRI
creates highly detailed images of your brain. Children usually need light
sedation
so they stay still during an MRI. If they move, the images might not be clear.
Your provider may also recommend an
electroencephalogram (EEG)
if you have seizures. This test monitors the electrical activity in your brain.
Neurological testing
can measure the extent of cognitive problems, such as thinking, learning and remembering. Your provider may also recommend
blood tests
to check hormone levels. These tests may help guide treatment.
HH may be difficult to diagnose because symptoms may resemble other
neurological conditions
.
Management and Treatment
How is hypothalamic hamartoma treated?
Treatment for HH may include:
Medications (
gonadotropin-releasing hormone
agonists) for precocious puberty
Surgery to manage seizures
Your child’s provider may recommend other treatment options like educational support in school and
therapy
or medications for different types of mood, behavioral and psychological disorders.
Hypothalamic hamartoma surgery
A provider may recommend
epilepsy surgery
or another procedure to remove or destroy the hamartoma and manage seizures.
Antiseizure medications
usually don’t work well to treat gelastic seizures but may help manage other seizure types.
Advertisement
Common procedure types may include:
Gamma Knife surgery
.
This treatment is a form of
radiation therapy
and it doesn’t require an incision (cut). It uses powerful beams of energy to destroy the tumor.
Resection (removal surgery).
A surgeon may perform brain surgery (
craniotomy
) to open your skull, or they drill a hole in your skull and insert an endoscope (a small tool) to remove the growth.
Stereotactic
laser ablation
.
This minimally invasive option destroys the tumor using a laser light that’s delivered through a fiber optic cable.
Stereotactic thermoablation.
This form of
ablation therapy
uses heat to treat the hamartoma. A surgeon inserts thin probes through your skull until they reach the growth. They use radio waves to heat the probes and destroy the tissue.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis for hypothalamic hamartoma?
The prognosis (outlook) is usually good for hypothalamic hamartoma because treatment options are effective at managing symptoms.
Surgery may reduce the frequency or severity of seizures. Some people are seizure-free after surgery. In some cases, surgically removing the hamartoma may cure the condition if it can be done safely. But there’s a risk that seizures may return.
Monthly injections of a drug that suppresses the release of certain hormones help keep early puberty symptoms in check. Your child’s provider may stop the medication when they reach the normal age for puberty to occur. Most children and teens have an expected puberty and sexual development at this time.
Advertisement
Your child’s provider can give you the best information on what you can expect for your situation.
What is the survival rate for hypothalamic hamartoma?
A healthcare provider will let you know what your life expectancy may look like, as this can vary from person to person and depend on many factors, including:
The size and type of hamartoma
The severity and frequency of seizures
The effectiveness of treatment
There’s a risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) with hypothalamic hamartomas. A provider will help you stay safe and create a treatment plan to manage seizures.
Living With
When should my child see a healthcare provider?
If you suspect something is wrong, you know your child best, so don’t hesitate to contact a healthcare provider. Look out for signs or symptoms that affect their behavior, cognitive function and hormone regulation, which may include:
Seizures
Early puberty (like early hair growth or voice changes)
Changes in concentration,
memory
or learning
Behavioral changes (like anger or frustration over small things)
Hormone imbalances (like extreme thirst, appetite changes or
mood swings
)
What questions should I ask my child’s healthcare provider?
If your child has HH, you may want to ask their provider:
What type of treatment do you recommend?
How likely is it that they’ll need multiple treatments or surgeries?
What are the side effects of treatment?
How will treatment affect my child’s ability to work, go to school and perform normal activities?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It might be scary to learn that you have a tumor in your brain. Seizures are unpleasant and your body wants to kickstart puberty faster than you were expecting. This can be a lot to handle emotionally.
Fortunately, treatment is effective at managing hypothalamic hamartoma symptoms. You’ll get to know your care team well, as you’ll visit them regularly for treatment. They’ll make sure your symptoms don’t interrupt your physical or mental health. Surgery may reduce how often and how severe symptoms affect you, so talk to your provider to see if you’re a good candidate.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment