Garlic Allergy: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Garlic Allergy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Garlic Allergy
A garlic allergy can cause symptoms like skin rash, hives and difficulty breathing. This allergic reaction happens when your body mistakenly believes garlic is a harmful substance. Avoiding garlic and having an epinephrine injector (EpiPen) for emergencies are possible treatments.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Food Allergies Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a garlic allergy?
A garlic allergy happens when your immune system triggers an
allergic reaction
when you consume or touch garlic. A garlic allergy can occur at any age.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Garlic is a type of herb that you may use to add flavor to your food. Most people don’t experience an allergic reaction to garlic, but for some people, eating even a small amount of garlic can cause symptoms like difficulty breathing or skin rash (
contact dermatitis
).
A garlic allergy is different from a
garlic intolerance.
Food allergies
happen when your
immune system
mistakenly detects a food as harmful. In the case of garlic, your immune system thinks garlic is dangerous. In response to the danger, your body releases chemicals and creates antibodies to fight it. An allergic reaction can affect your skin, respiratory system, circulatory system and
digestive system
. An allergic reaction is typically more intense than an intolerance.
A garlic
intolerance
originates in your gastrointestinal system. It often doesn’t involve your immune system at all. Symptoms usually affect your digestive system and include bloating, diarrhea or nausea. A food intolerance is usually linked to conditions like
IBS (irritable bowel syndrome)
or lactose intolerance. Food intolerances can also happen if your body is missing an
enzyme
that helps break down a certain food.
How common is a garlic allergy?
Garlic is an uncommon food allergy. It’s more likely that you have a garlic intolerance than an allergy. A healthcare provider can help determine if your symptoms are happening due to an allergy or an intolerance.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a garlic allergy?
Symptoms of a garlic allergy vary from person to person. Some common symptoms include:
Hives
, itching skin or skin discoloration.
Swelling in your mouth, tongue or throat.
Shortness of breath
or difficulty breathing.
Stomachache, diarrhea or nausea.
Rapid pulse, dizziness or fainting.
Anaphylaxis
(a life-threatening allergic reaction).
An allergic reaction to garlic can occur immediately or within about two hours after eating or touching garlic. On the other hand, a garlic intolerance can happen several hours after eating garlic and symptoms are usually less severe.
It’s important to remember that everyone is different, and the intensity of allergic reactions is hard to predict. You may even find you react differently depending on what form garlic is in. For example, you may find you don’t react to garlic in sauces, soups or condiments, but experience an allergic reaction to garlic if it’s raw.
You should take your allergy seriously and let your healthcare provider know if you experience discomfort or pain after eating or touching garlic.
Call 911 right away if you experience a severe allergic reaction
.
What causes a garlic allergy?
Food allergies happen when your immune system thinks a specific food is a threat. In response to this threat, it releases chemicals like
histamine
and creates inflammatory cells to fight the threat. Your body’s reaction is what gives you allergy symptoms.
Healthcare providers aren’t entirely sure why some people have allergies to certain foods and not to others or why it occurs.
Are you allergic to onion if you’re allergic to garlic?
You can be allergic to garlic and not be allergic to onion. But a lot of people experience allergic reactions to both. This is because onion and garlic are both bulbous plants from the allium family. They contain similar proteins, which means your body can react to them similarly.
This is called cross-reactivity. Other close relatives of garlic include chives, shallots and leeks. You’re not automatically allergic to all herbs in the same family, but research suggests that cross-reactivity can be a problem for people with a garlic allergy.
What are the risk factors for a garlic allergy?
Some factors that may increase your risk for a garlic allergy are:
Having a family history of allergies.
Having conditions like asthma and
eczema
.
Being allergic to similar herbs like onions, chives or leeks. People who have a reaction to one of these may be more likely to react to garlic.
What are the complications of a garlic allergy?
A garlic allergy typically doesn’t cause life-threatening symptoms, but it can cause severe symptoms or anaphylaxis, a life-threatening allergic reaction. Research shows that anaphylaxis is more likely to happen if you consume or touch raw garlic as compared to cooked garlic.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a garlic allergy diagnosed?
Food allergies in general can be hard to diagnose. This is because most people are eating many different foods and ingredients at one time.
To diagnose a food allergy, a healthcare provider or
allergist
will ask about your symptoms and take your health history. They can also perform
allergy tests
like a blood test or
skin prick test
to see if a specific food, like garlic, is the cause of your symptoms.
Skin prick tests work by exposing your skin to a small amount of an allergen and watching for a reaction. Blood tests work by checking for an immune response to a specific food.
A
food challenge test
is another way your provider can diagnose a garlic allergy. It involves your provider asking you to eat garlic in a healthcare setting. Then, they watch to see if it causes a reaction.
Remember, you shouldn’t attempt to diagnose yourself by eating garlic at home and watching for a reaction. A provider performs tests in a clinical setting so they can be prepared for any serious allergic responses.
How serious is a garlic allergy?
Most garlic allergies aren’t serious. But it’s important to talk to your healthcare provider about your symptoms and avoid garlic until you figure out how sensitive you are to it.
Management and Treatment
How is a garlic allergy treated?
The best way to treat a garlic allergy is to avoid it entirely. If you accidentally eat or touch garlic and develop mild symptoms, most people respond well to
antihistamines
that you can purchase at a drugstore or grocery store. Some examples include diphenhydramine (Benadryl®) and cetirizine (Zyrtec®).
Advertisement
For more serious reactions, or in the case of an emergency, your provider may prescribe an
emergency epinephrine
auto-injector (EpiPen®). You should carry this around with you in the case of a severe allergic reaction. Keep in mind that if you use an EpiPen for a severe allergic reaction, you should still contact emergency services because the medication can wear off.
It’s also important to note that garlic is found in a variety of pre-packaged and processed foods. It may not always be listed in the ingredients. When in doubt, avoid the food entirely or contact the manufacturer before eating it.
Garlic is also a key ingredient in many cuisines and restaurant foods. You should tell the restaurant staff about your allergy before ordering so they can recommend something that’s garlic-free.
Some specific things you can do include:
Thoroughly wash any pots, pans, cutting boards or food surfaces if they touch garlic.
Let a restaurant server know if you have a garlic allergy before you order any food. The chef may be able to cook your food separately or give you a list of safe foods.
If you’re at a party or picnic, let the host know you’re allergic to garlic. They may be able to tell you what ingredients were used or give you another food option. Alternatively, you could bring your own food.
Use alternative spices like paprika, oregano, cumin or basil to spice or flavor your food.
Advertisement
Can you get rid of a garlic and onion allergy?
Most food allergies can’t be cured. The best thing you can do is prevent allergic reactions from happening by avoiding the foods you’re allergic to and being prepared in the event they do happen.
Children may outgrow a garlic allergy as they age, but only a healthcare provider can confirm your child has outgrown a food allergy. Sometimes, they do this by performing tests. Adults are less likely to outgrow a food allergy.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Food Allergies Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What do I do if I have a garlic allergy?
Living with a garlic allergy requires a constant awareness of food ingredients. This can be tough, but it’s what you should do to avoid a potentially serious allergic reaction.
Being vigilant about your garlic allergy when eating at restaurants, friends’ houses or while grocery shopping is very important. This helps reduce the chances of accidentally eating or touching garlic. The good news is that people with garlic allergies can usually find plenty of foods to eat that don’t contain garlic.
Will a garlic allergy last forever?
Most food allergies don’t just go away. But sometimes, especially in children, an allergy can be outgrown. Don’t try to test or experiment with your allergy on your own. You should only do this under your healthcare provider’s supervision.
Prevention
Can you prevent a garlic allergy?
No, you can’t prevent a garlic allergy. You can only manage your allergic reaction by avoiding garlic or taking medication.
Living With
What foods should I avoid if I have a garlic allergy?
Garlic comes in many forms like raw, cooked, powder, oil and more. You can also find it in many processed (packaged) foods. Some food items that may contain garlic that you should watch for include:
Salad dressings.
Frozen meals.
Canned soup or chili.
Boxed rice and pasta.
Other condiments and sauces.
Remember, garlic is a common ingredient and may not always be listed on packaging. If you’re unsure, you should either avoid eating the food entirely or call the manufacturer to check about specific ingredients. When eating out at a restaurant, let your server or the chef know about your garlic allergy.
Because herbs like chives, onions and shallots come from a similar plant species, avoiding those foods can also be helpful for some people.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if you have a physical reaction to garlic. Some common symptoms include hives, skin rash or swelling in your mouth or tongue. While a garlic allergy is rare, it’s still possible. A healthcare provider can help diagnose the allergy and tell you what treatment options are best for you.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s rare to have a garlic allergy, but it can still happen. See a healthcare provider or allergist if you believe garlic is causing allergy symptoms. They can help make a diagnosis and recommend the best way to treat the allergy. Trying to avoid garlic is often the best treatment, but it can be hard because garlic can be found in lots of foods. If you’re having difficulty navigating life without garlic, consider seeing a mental health provider. They’re available to help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have a food allergy, you might worry a lot about what to eat so you don’t have a reaction. Cleveland Clinic can ease your fears and treat your allergies.
Food Allergies Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/13/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment