Atrioventricular Canal (Septal) Defect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Atrioventricular Canal Defect
Advertisement
Advertisement
Atrioventricular Canal Defect
An atrioventricular canal defect is a congenital (present at birth) heart condition. It means there’s a hole in the center of your child’s heart and issues with their heart valves. It may affect some or all heart chambers. Babies with this condition usually need surgery soon after birth. After surgery, children need lifelong monitoring.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Congenital Heart Disease in Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is an AV Canal Defect?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is an AV Canal Defect?
An atrioventricular canal defect forces your heart to work too hard to pump blood, and allows blood to flow in the wrong direction.
An atrioventricular (AV) canal defect is a
congenital (present at birth) heart condition
. It describes a group of several heart issues, including a hole in the wall (septum) at the center of your
heart
and problems with the way your heart’s
valves
work.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Having a hole in the wall that separates the right and left sides of your heart is like a pipe with a leak. It allows oxygen-rich
blood
(normally from the left side of your heart) to mix with oxygen-poor blood (normally from the right side of your heart). These don’t mix in a properly functioning heart.
In most cases, the hole allows too much blood to flow into your
lungs
and not enough blood to flow to the rest of your body. If the hole is present for a long time, blood with less oxygen may flow in the opposite direction. More of that blood goes to your body than your lungs. This can result in lower oxygen levels and
cyanosis
(bluish coloring of your skin). Darker skin may look gray or white.
By making your heart work too hard to pump blood, an AV canal defect can lead to a variety of health conditions like
congestive heart failure
.
Atrioventricular canal defect can be fatal in children who don’t get treatment. Without an operation, children with this condition may only live two or three years. But the good news is that the surgery to fix this has a high success rate. Providers can diagnose an atrioventricular canal defect in a baby before it can cause fatal complications.
About 1 in 1,700 babies are
born with this defect
each year in the U.S. It makes up between
3% and 5%
of all congenital heart defects.
Advertisement
Other names for AV canal defect include:
Atrioventricular septal defect
AVSD
Atrioventricular canal defect
Endocardial cushion defect
AV canal defect types
An atrioventricular canal defect can take various forms, with differences in hole size and number of valves. The types of AV canal defect are:
Complete AV canal defect
: The hole is big enough to make an opening between all four
chambers of your heart
. Instead of the typical two valves between the upper and lower chambers, there’s just one valve. Its flap might not open and shut correctly.
Partial AV canal defect
: The hole is only between the wall of the two upper chambers (most typical) or the two lower chambers, not all four. There are two valves between the upper and lower chambers. But one of them doesn’t work correctly.
Transitional AV canal defect
: There’s a hole between the two upper chambers and a smaller hole between the two lower chambers. The two AV valves are separate.
Unbalanced complete AV canal defect
: The single (shared) AV valve is closer to one ventricle (lower chamber) than the other. The ventricle that gets more blood flow becomes larger than the other one. Providers call the smaller ventricle “hypoplastic.”
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of AV canal defect
Soon after birth, a baby may have atrioventricular canal defect symptoms like:
Gray or white tint to darker skin, bluish tint to lighter skin
Difficulty feeding
Fatigue
, especially when feeding
Heart palpitations
or racing
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
Slow weight gain
Swelling (
edema
) in their belly or legs
Weak
pulse
Sweating
with feeding
Babies with mild partial or transitional AV septal defect may not have symptoms until later in childhood, or even their teen years or early adult years.
AV canal defect causes
Researchers are unclear about what causes atrioventricular septal defect. It’s likely a combination of genetic and environmental factors. There’s a strong link between this congenital heart condition and
Down syndrome
. Endocardial cushion defects occur in up to 40% of fetuses with this syndrome.
Risk factors
Experts haven’t identified the exact risk factors for atrioventricular septal defect.
Genetics
may be a factor. A fetus can inherit an abnormal gene or genes from a parent, which may make them more likely to develop a heart condition during fetal development.
Other risk factors during pregnancy that may increase the chances of giving birth to a baby with a congenital heart issue include:
Certain medications
Addictive substances
Exposure to environmental toxins or chemicals
Nutrient or vitamin deficiencies
Obesity
Unmanaged chronic health conditions like
diabetes
or
high blood pressure (hypertension)
Viruses or fevers, like
influenza (flu)
Advertisement
Complications of this condition
A severe endocardial cushion defect can lead to:
Abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmia
)
Congestive heart failure
An infection in your heart (
endocarditis
)
High blood pressure in your
pulmonary arteries
(
pulmonary hypertension
) ()
Lung damage
Eisenmenger syndrome
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider can often diagnose an atrioventricular septal defect before birth with a few tests:
Prenatal ultrasound
shows moving pictures of the fetus in your uterus, including its heart. A large septal defect may show up on an ultrasound.
A fetal
echocardiogram
creates images of the heart with more detail than an ultrasound. It can give a provider information about the structure of the heart and how well it’s pumping blood.
A provider may use a stethoscope to listen to your baby’s heartbeat after birth. An abnormal “whooshing” sound may mean that blood is flowing through a hole in their septum. Other tests after birth might include:
Chest X-rays
to show the size and shape of your child’s heart
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
to track the electrical activity of your baby’s heart
Echocardiogram to look at the structure of your child’s heart in detail
Cardiac catheterization
to learn more about the severity of your child’s condition
Heart MRI
to show the parts of your baby’s heart and how well they work
Advertisement
In some cases, your baby may have a small septal defect that doesn’t cause symptoms right after birth. It might be several years before a healthcare provider detects the condition.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Treatment for AV canal defect ranges from surgery to medicines.
Surgery
Atrioventricular canal defect treatment usually consists of
open-heart surgery
. During AV canal defect repair, a surgeon will put patches on the hole in your baby’s heart. In the case of a complete defect, they’ll also split the single heart valve into two separate valves on the right and left sides of your child’s heart.
A baby with an unbalanced AV canal defect may need several operations, leading to a
Fontan procedure
.
It’s best to do surgery as early as possible, before the condition causes lasting damage to your child’s heart. Many babies have the surgery during infancy, within their first six months of life. Some babies with a partial defect but no symptoms may get the surgery during their first three years of life.
Another option is a short-term procedure: pulmonary artery banding. This allows less blood to go through your child’s pulmonary artery to their lungs. Babies who receive pulmonary artery banding can have a permanent repair later.
Advertisement
Medicines
A baby who isn’t healthy enough or large enough for surgery may need medication to manage symptoms until they gain weight and strength.
Diuretics
help clear excess water, while
digoxin
helps your baby’s heart beat more strongly.
ACE inhibitors
widen
blood vessels
to make it easier for blood to flow through them.
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
You should take your child to regular appointments with their
pediatric cardiologist
. They can monitor your child’s heart for any issues that develop. Some children with an endocardial cushion defect need more treatment after surgery. A patch can leak, and a repaired heart valve may develop a leak or get too narrow.
A child with an AV canal defect may also have
neurological
or developmental disorders. They may need help with these, as well.
Once your child reaches adulthood, they should switch to an adult congenital heart specialist for annual visits.
Questions you may want to ask your child’s doctor include:
Which type of AV canal defect does my child have?
What symptoms might be signs that the condition is getting worse?
When will they need surgery?
Will my child need medication after the surgery?
Will I need to limit my child’s activities?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Congenital Heart Disease in Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has this condition?
Without surgery, children with an AV canal defect may have a life expectancy of two or three years. Some live to be young adults.
About
90% of children
who have repair surgery have a 10-year survival rate. This means they live for at least another 10 years on average after treatment.
About 65%
are alive 20 years after surgery.
But even after surgery, someone with an atrioventricular canal defect won’t have a typical heart. They’ll need periodic echocardiograms to monitor their heart’s function and catch complications early.
The patch over the hole can usually stay in place for the rest of a person’s life. But over time, one of the repaired heart valves may begin to leak. About
10% to 20% of people
need a second surgery.
After surgery, many people don’t need medications or more operations for their hearts. But cardiac arrhythmias may develop later in life. A provider may recommend minimally invasive procedures like
ablation
to treat an arrhythmia.
Prevention
Can an atrioventricular canal defect be prevented?
There’s no way to prevent an atrioventricular septal defect. But if you’re pregnant, you can reduce the risk of your baby having a congenital heart defect by:
Avoiding recreational drugs, alcohol and tobacco products
Getting all necessary
vaccinations
to prevent illness
Maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you
Managing chronic health conditions
Taking
prenatal vitamins
, including
folic acid
, as your healthcare provider recommends
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hearing that your newborn has a heart issue like atrioventricular (AV) canal defect can bring out a range of emotions. But your baby’s healthcare providers are there to help you, and they want the best for your child. Learn about the specific details of your child’s condition. Ask your child’s healthcare providers questions if there’s anything you want them to clarify. Now is the time to be an advocate for your child’s health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you were diagnosed as a child or later in life, Cleveland Clinic is here to treat your adult congenital heart disease.
Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Congenital Heart Disease in Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/06/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment