Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery (VATS)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
VATS
Advertisement
Advertisement
VATS
Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) is a procedure to diagnose or treat issues in your chest. Healthcare providers often use it to diagnose or treat lung cancer. They also use VATS for esophageal cancer, lung infections and pleural effusion. Compared to open-chest surgery, VATS offers a faster, less painful recovery with fewer complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lung Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
VATS is a procedure to diagnose and treat conditions in your chest. Surgeons use VATS most often for lung cancer.
What is VATS?
Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) is a common procedure to diagnose and treat certain conditions that affect your chest area.
Thoracic
refers to the thorax, the area between your neck and abdomen that includes multiple organs. For this
minimally invasive surgery
, healthcare providers insert a thin tube with a tiny video camera on the end (a thoracoscope) into a small incision between the ribs in your chest. This scope allows your provider to see inside your chest cavity.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your provider inserts surgical instruments into separate small incisions. They use images from the thoracoscope to guide and perform procedures. You may also hear the term video-assisted
thoracoscopy
.
A
thoracic
(chest) or
cardiothoracic
(heart and chest) surgeon performs video-assisted thoracoscopy. These providers have additional training in performing surgery to diagnose and treat conditions in your chest area. They’re performing VAT surgical procedures more and more often because there are many advantages for you.
What does this procedure treat?
Healthcare providers mostly use VATS to diagnose and treat
lung cancer
or
metastatic cancer
that spreads to your lungs.
VAT procedures also help providers diagnose and treat other thoracic conditions, like:
Cancer of the
esophagus
or
thymus
Metastatic cancer to the chest
Pleural effusion
and
pleural mesothelioma
Lung diseases like
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) and lung infections
Pericardial effusion
Spine tumors
and paraspinal tumors
Hyperhidrosis
(excessive sweating)
Myasthenia gravis
Lymphoma
What are the types of video-assisted thoracic surgeries (VATS)?
In a hospital or surgical center, thoracic surgeons use VAT surgery to perform different procedures like:
VATS
lung resection
,
the removal of a small portion of your lung (wedge resection), a lobe of the lung (
lobectomy
) or your entire lung (
pneumonectomy
)
Esophagectomy
,
the removal of your esophagus
Thymectomy
,
the removal of a diseased thymus gland
Decortication
,
the removal of infected material and scar from around your lung
Lung volume reduction surgery
(LVRS),
the removal of diseased lung tissue
Advertisement
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for this procedure?
You should follow your surgeon’s instructions on what to do before the procedure. They may need you to fast (not eat or drink) for several hours before VAT surgery. Your surgeon may ask you not to take certain medications, including vitamins and
herbal supplements
. You may also need to
quit smoking
.
Before video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, you may get tests like:
Blood tests
, including a
complete blood count
(CBC)
Heart tests like an
electrocardiogram
(EKG) or
exercise stress test
Imaging tests, like a
chest X-ray
,
CT scan
or
positron emission tomography (PET)
scan
Pulmonary function testing
Metabolic exercise stress test
Upper endoscopy
or
gastrointestinal (GI) X-ray examination
(barium swallow)
What happens during VATS?
You’ll receive general
anesthesia
to sleep through the procedure. You’ll lie on your nonsurgical side during surgery.
Depending on the thoracic condition and VATS procedure, your surgeon will:
Make several quarter-inch to half-inch incisions in your chest — for a uniport VATS (U-VATS) procedure, they make a single incision, instead
Insert the scope device, which sends images of the inside of your chest to a video screen
Insert surgical instruments into the other incisions
Use the video images to guide the removal of the diseased tissue or organ
Put in a temporary chest tube to drain air or fluids
Close the incisions with removable stitches or staples
Some surgeons use
robotic
technology to perform video-assisted thoracoscopy. Your surgeon views images from the thoracoscope and operates robotic arms. They place these arms through small incisions to remove tissue or the diseased organ.
A VATS or robotic procedure usually takes two to three hours for lung cancer operations. Times for video-assisted thoracoscopic surgeries vary based on how complex the operation is.
What are the potential benefits and risks of this procedure?
Minimally invasive surgery often takes less time to perform than an open-chest surgery (
thoracotomy
). Because there’s no large incision, the recovery is less painful and often quicker.
But it’s good to remember that you have vital organs in your chest, and any procedure involves some risk.
Benefits of VAT surgeries include:
A shorter hospital stay
Less severe postoperative pain and
scarring
Faster recovery of respiratory function
Lower risk of infection
A quicker return to daily activities
VAT surgical procedures have lower rates of complications than open procedures. But they carry a risk of complications like:
Arrhythmias
Blood clots
and
strokes
Bruising
Collapsed lung
(pneumothorax) or
atelectasis
(lung air sacs don’t properly inflate)
Damage to nearby glands,
organs
, nerves or blood vessels
Hypoxemia
(low blood oxygen)
Infections
Internal bleeding and
blood
loss
Respiratory problems like
pneumonia
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lung Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery?
Your surgeon may send tissue to a lab for a
biopsy
. A
pathologist
examines the tissue for signs of
cancer
, infection or disease. The findings may indicate a need for additional surgery or treatments.
After surgery, your healthcare team will help you
manage pain
. They’ll also encourage you to do deep breathing exercises and walk around. Your healthcare provider may ask you to do
physical therapy
to help you recover faster and lower your chances of complications.
Before you go home, a provider will remove the chest tube they put in during VAT surgery.
What is the recovery time?
Recovery time varies depending on your VATS procedure. It may take two weeks to recover from some procedures and eight weeks for others. During this time, you’ll have follow-up appointments with your provider.
Most people need to spend one or two nights in the hospital after surgery. You should carefully follow your discharge instructions. Doing so will promote a healthy recovery and lower your risk of complications.
Your at-home recovery may include:
Changing surgical dressings regularly
Not driving and staying home from work or school for the designated time
Not lifting anything heavy for a set time
Taking
antibiotics
,
pain relievers
or other medications as directed by your provider
Walking at least three times a day to prevent blood clots in your legs
Advertisement
Your outlook depends on the specific thoracic disorder, your overall health and the success of treatments. Your thoracic surgeon can discuss your
prognosis
(outlook) with you based on your diagnosis.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You should call your provider if you experience:
Chest pain
Difficulty breathing
Signs of infection, like redness or yellow discharge at the incision site or a
fever
Additional Common Questions
What is thoracoscopy vs. VATS?
VATS and thoracoscopy are the same thing. Surgeons use a thoracoscope to perform thoracoscopy/VATS.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a cancer diagnosis is hard enough. Any break you can get is a welcome one when it comes to treatment. Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) offers a faster recovery and less pain than open-chest surgery. Your provider can tell you if this is the right procedure for you. Don’t hesitate to ask any questions you have about the procedure.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have lung cancer, you might feel alone and afraid. You don’t have to be. Cleveland Clinic is here to help find and treat your cancer at any stage.
Lung Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment