AIDS-Defining Illnesses: Characteristics & Diagnosis Criteria
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
AIDS-Defining Illnesses
Advertisement
Advertisement
AIDS-Defining Illnesses
AIDS-defining illnesses (ADIs) are certain infectious diseases, cancers and other conditions that you can get if HIV weakens your immune system. This can make it harder for your body to fight off illnesses. Healthcare providers use ADIs and CD4 counts as criteria to stage HIV. Antiretroviral therapy is very effective at preventing ADIs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
HIV and AIDS treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are AIDS-Defining Illnesses?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Are AIDS-Defining Illnesses?
AIDS-defining illnesses (ADIs) are cancers and opportunistic infections that can affect people with advanced
HIV
(human immunodeficiency virus). Opportunistic infections are ones caused by infectious agents (
germs
) that wouldn’t normally make you sick but have an opportunity to do so when
your immune system is weakened
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers use CD4 cell counts (a type of
T cell
that HIV destroys) and AIDS-defining illnesses as criteria to stage HIV, or determine how far the illness has progressed. If you have HIV and an AIDS-defining illness, you have stage 3 HIV (AIDS).
For some people, a diagnosis of an AIDS-defining condition leads to an HIV diagnosis. But having an AIDS-defining illness doesn’t mean you have HIV. While some ADIs mostly affect people with HIV or a
weakened immune system
, many ADIs can affect people who don’t have underlying health conditions.
What are the types of AIDS-defining illnesses?
Types of AIDS-defining illnesses include
infectious diseases
(like fungal, bacterial, parasitic and viral infections), certain cancers and some neurological conditions.
Fungal infections
AIDS-defining
fungal infections
include:
Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP)
Candidiasis
of your bronchi, esophagus, trachea or lungs
Coccidioidomycosis
that’s spread outside of your lungs (disseminated/extrapulmonary)
Chronic intestinal
cryptosporidiosis
(lasting more than a month)
Cryptococcosis
in organs other than your lungs (extrapulmonary)
Histoplasmosis
that’s spread outside of your lungs (disseminated/extrapulmonary)
Bacterial infections
AIDS-defining
bacterial infections
include:
Tuberculosis
(
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
) in people age 6 and older
Other
Mycobacterium
infections
, including
Mycobacterium kansasii
and
Mycobacterium avium
complex (MAC) that have spread outside of your lungs (disseminated/extrapulmonary)
Multiple or recurrent bacterial infections in kids younger than age 6
Recurrent nontyphoid
Salmonella
septicemia
(when a
Salmonella
infection
enters your blood and spreads throughout your body)
Advertisement
Parasitic infections
AIDS-defining
parasitic infections
include:
Toxoplasmosis
in your brain (except for infants under 1 month old)
Chronic intestinal cystoisosporiasis that lasts more than a month
Viral infections
AIDS-defining
viral infections
include:
Herpes simplex
bronchitis, pneumonitis or esophagitis (except for infants under 1 month old)
Herpes simplex ulcers that last longer than a month
Cytomegalovirus
disease (in organs other than your liver, spleen or lymph nodes), including
cytomegalovirus retinitis
(except for infants under 1 month old)
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Cancers
Low T cell counts can put you at higher risk for cancers caused by
viruses
or ones that affect your immune system. AIDS-defining cancers in people with HIV include:
Kaposi sarcoma
Burkitt lymphoma
Invasive cervical cancer
Immunoblastic
lymphoma
Primary lymphoma of the brain
Other conditions
Other AIDS-defining conditions include:
Recurrent
pneumonia
(in adults and kids age 6 and older)
. Pneumonia is a lung infection that can be caused by viruses, bacteria or fungi.
HIV encephalopathy
. This is when HIV affects your brain’s ability to function.
HIV wasting syndrome
. Wasting syndrome causes weight loss and weakness.
What are the most common AIDS-defining illnesses?
The most common AIDS-defining illnesses include:
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Kaposi sarcoma
HIV wasting syndrome
Esophageal candidiasis
Mycobacterium avium
complex infections
Tuberculosis
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of AIDS-defining illnesses?
Symptoms of AIDS-defining illnesses depend on the disease causing them. Some common symptoms of infections include:
Fever
Headache
Muscle aches
Sore throat
Shortness of breath
Rash
Diarrhea
Confusion
or other mental changes
What causes AIDS-defining illnesses?
HIV is a virus that destroys T cells — part of your
immune system
that helps fight infections. If you have too few T cells, your body can’t fight infections like it normally would. This can cause you to get sick with things that people with healthy immune systems don’t. It can also lead to certain cancers of your immune system or ones that are caused by viruses.
Antiretroviral therapy
(ART), the treatment for HIV, is very effective at keeping your immune system healthy. But you can get an ADI while on ART if:
You aren’t able to consistently take your medications
Your medications aren’t working well
You have an ADI without symptoms before starting ART (when you first start ART, it can sometimes cause an immune reaction and allow infections to become symptomatic (immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome)
Diagnosis and Tests
How are AIDS-defining illnesses diagnosed?
How your provider diagnoses an AIDS-defining illness depends on your symptoms. They may test your blood or other body fluids or perform a biopsy. They may also use imaging to look for changes in your lungs or other organs.
Advertisement
If you’re diagnosed with an AIDS-defining illness without an HIV diagnosis, a provider might also test you for HIV or other causes of a weakened immune system.
What tests will be done?
Tests and procedures your provider might use include:
Blood tests
Nasal swab
Biopsy
Sputum test (you cough up mucus from your lungs to test for infections)
Stool test
Chest X-ray
CT scan
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
HIV test
Management and Treatment
How are AIDS-defining illnesses treated?
Treatment depends on the type of illness you have and your specific situation. If you aren’t on antiretroviral medications, you may begin treatment right away or within two to four weeks of starting treatment for opportunistic infections.
If you already have an HIV diagnosis and are on ART, your provider may perform tests to check how well your medications are working.
Treatment for specific ADIs could include:
Antibiotics
for bacterial infections
Antifungals
for fungal infections
Antiparasitics
for parasitic infections
Surgery,
radiation
or
chemotherapy
for cancers
Care at Cleveland Clinic
HIV and AIDS treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have an AIDS-defining illness?
Having an ADI increases your risk of dying from an AIDS-related complication. But the number of deaths from AIDS-related infections has come down a lot in recent years.
About 1 in 4 people
with HIV die from AIDS-related complications. With early antiretroviral therapy, many people with HIV no longer progress to AIDS.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can AIDS-defining illnesses be prevented?
Antiretroviral therapy is very effective at keeping viral loads low, which increases your T cell counts. This keeps your immune system healthy enough to fight off infections, including viruses that cause HIV-related cancers.
Other ways to reduce your risk of infections include:
Preventive medications
. Your provider might prescribe preventive medications, like antibiotics and antifungals, to reduce your risk of certain infections.
Vaccination
. Ask your provider which vaccinations you should get and if there are any you should avoid.
Screenings
. Your provider might recommend regular screening for certain cancers and infectious diseases.
Don’t share drug injection equipment
. This includes needles and syringes for prescription and non-prescription drug use.
Good hygiene
. Wash your hands frequently, especially before preparing food or eating, and after going to the bathroom. Don’t share food, drinks or personal items with other people.
Food safety
. Don’t consume undercooked eggs, unpasteurized milk (or food made from it, like cheese or ice cream) and unpasteurized juices. Wash or peel fruits and vegetables before eating.
Avoid drinking or contact with untreated water
. This includes getting water in your mouth while swimming in lakes or other natural water sources and drinking untreated tap water. If you’re visiting an area where you’re unsure if the water is treated, drink bottled water and use it for cooking.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have HIV, attend all of your scheduled appointments with your provider. Let them know about new or worsening symptoms or if you’re having trouble taking your ART medications as prescribed. Ask them about steps you can take to prevent infections and what to do if you have symptoms of an infection.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room if you’ve been exposed to HIV or if you have signs of serious illness, including:
Fever over 103 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius)
Difficulty breathing
Severe vomiting or diarrhea
Chest pain
Confusion or disorientation
A wound that’s hot, red, swollen, painful or not healing
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It might be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:
How do I take my medications?
What should I do if I miss a dose?
What can I do to prevent infections?
What symptoms should I look out for?
When should I go to the ER?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
AIDS-defining illnesses (ADIs) are a way for healthcare providers to determine how severely HIV is affecting your body. When you have HIV, any kind of infection can put you at higher risk for serious complications. But taking antiretroviral medications consistently can keep your immune system healthy and allow your body to fight off infections. They can prevent AIDS-defining illnesses and allow people with HIV to live as long as people without it. Talk to your provider about other precautions you can take to prevent serious illness.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
HIV or AIDS can affect your life in many ways. At Cleveland Clinic, we can develop a treatment plan that covers all aspects of your health.
HIV and AIDS treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment