Meatal Stenosis: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Meatal Stenosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Meatal Stenosis
Meatal stenosis is when the opening at the end of your penis is narrower than expected. It may be present at birth, but it most often develops after circumcision. Symptoms generally affect you pee, including pain or spraying. A healthcare provider can diagnose and treat meatal stenosis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is meatal stenosis?
Meatal stenosis (mee-AY-tull stuh-NO-sus) is a condition where the opening at the tip of your penis (meatus) becomes narrow. Your meatus is at the end of your
urethra
. The term “stenosis” means that a passage in your body is narrower or smaller than normal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Meatal stenosis can be present at birth (congenital) or it can develop later in life. If you develop meatal stenosis, it usually occurs between the ages of 3 and 7.
What is meatal stenosis in adult males?
Meatal stenosis isn’t common in adults. If it develops, it usually occurs because of a procedure or treatment in or around your urethra. It can also develop from an
autoimmune disorder
such as
lichen sclerosus
.
How common is meatal stenosis?
Worldwide, between 8% and 10% of
men
have meatal stenosis.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of meatal stenosis?
The main symptom of meatal stenosis is that the meatus is narrower than usual. This can partly block your urine (pee) flow and cause symptoms such as:
Pain or a burning feeling while peeing (
dysuria
).
Sudden urges to pee (
urge incontinence
).
Peeing more than usual (
frequent urination
).
A small, narrow and/or very fast pee stream.
A pee flow that sprays (usually upward) or is difficult to aim.
Difficulty completely emptying your
bladder
.
A drop of blood at the tip of your penis after peeing (
hematuria
).
What does meatal stenosis feel like?
Meatal stenosis can cause pain or a burning feeling when you pee. It can also cause discomfort if it prevents you from fully draining your bladder when you pee.
What causes meatal stenosis?
The most common cause of meatal stenosis in babies is
circumcision
. It’s rare for uncircumcised people to have meatal stenosis.
Advertisement
Other possible meatal stenosis conditions may include:
Inflammation, swelling or an injury to a baby’s penis, usually when the penis rubs against a diaper or skin in the surrounding area after circumcision.
Pee-soaked diapers. Pee contains the waste products uric acid and ammonia, which can build up and crystallize in diapers.
Long-term use of urinary catheters.
Surgeries or procedures in which a healthcare provider inserts instruments into your urethra.
Who does meatal stenosis affect?
In babies, meatal stenosis is more common after a circumcision.
In older children and adults, meatal stenosis is more common after an injury to the penis or using a urinary catheter for a long time.
What are the complications of meatal stenosis?
There are many different opinions in the medical community about what can happen if you don’t treat meatal stenosis. Some medical experts believe that untreated meatal stenosis may lead to:
Urinary tract infections
(UTIs).
Kidney
problems.
Peeing when you don’t mean to.
Other experts doubt that these complications can develop from meatal stenosis alone. They recommend surgery only if these complications develop, not just if your meatus is narrow.
Talk to a healthcare provider about how untreated meatal stenosis can affect you or your child.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is meatal stenosis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can typically diagnose meatal stenosis during a
physical examination
. During a physical exam, they’ll:
Measure the width of the meatus. There are natural differences in meatal widths. You could naturally have a narrow meatus without having meatal stenosis.
Ask questions about how you or your child pees, including in which direction your pee flows or if there’s any spraying.
For babies and younger children, they may observe your child while they pee to see if the stream is straight or sprays.
Measure the strength of the pee stream (flow rate).
Management and Treatment
Can meatal stenosis correct itself?
No, meatal stenosis can’t correct itself.
How do you fix meatal stenosis?
There are several ways to treat meatal stenosis.
In most cases, a
meatotomy
is the best way to fix meatal stenosis. A meatotomy is a surgical procedure that involves cutting apart part of the meatus so the opening is bigger. It has a high success rate — it’s rare for meatal stenosis to come back after a meatotomy.
In some cases, a steroid cream (topical
corticosteroid
) can treat meatal stenosis. You apply the steroid cream to the tip of your penis. You may need to apply the cream twice a day for up to three months.
Another possible treatment option is to stretch the opening of your meatus (dilation). However, dilation may tear your skin and cause
scarring
. Scar tissue can make the meatus even narrower.
How do you treat meatal stenosis in adults?
The best way to treat meatal stenosis in adults is a meatotomy.
Advertisement
How soon after meatal stenosis treatment will I feel better?
It takes a few days to feel better after a meatotomy. You can reduce discomfort with
pain relievers
and warm baths. Bleeding isn’t common. But you can control any bleeding by putting pressure on the area with a clean towel.
Applying a skincare ointment (Vaseline® or Aquaphor®) to your affected areas twice a day for a few weeks can help you heal faster.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have meatal stenosis?
With treatment, the outlook for meatal stenosis is good. The success rate for a meatotomy is high, and the odds of meatal stenosis coming back after the procedure are low.
Prevention
Can meatal stenosis be prevented?
There’s no way to prevent congenital meatal stenosis.
Not circumcising your child would also prevent most cases of meatal stenosis. But not circumcising may slightly increase your child’s risk of developing other health conditions, including:
Sexually transmitted infections
(STIs).
Penile cancer
.
If you circumcise your child, applying a skincare ointment may help prevent meatal stenosis from developing.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Call a healthcare provider if you or your child:
Can’t pee comfortably.
Can’t pee at all.
Feel pain when you pee.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the nearest emergency room if you or your child develops any of the following symptoms or complications after a meatotomy:
A
fever
of 100 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius) or higher.
Heavy bleeding.
Increased pain.
Vomiting
three or more times a day.
Difficulty peeing.
A regularly dry diaper.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
How do you know my child has meatal stenosis?
If my child doesn’t have meatal stenosis, what other condition might they have?
How did my child get meatal stenosis?
How narrow is my child’s meatus?
Does my child need treatment?
What treatment do you recommend?
What’s the complete list of risks of your recommended treatment?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Meatal stenosis is when the opening at the tip of your penis is narrower than usual. It may be present at birth, but it most commonly appears after circumcision. Not circumcising your child can help prevent meatal stenosis. But there are pros and cons to circumcision, and choosing whether to circumcise your child or not is a personal decision that generally depends on your personal, religious and cultural beliefs. Talk to a healthcare provider if you think you or your child has symptoms of meatal stenosis. They can diagnose the condition and recommend the proper treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your urinary system, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/27/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment