Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE): What It Is
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE)
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a degenerative brain condition that happens after repeated head injuries. CTE usually affects athletes who play contact sports or military personnel. There’s no cure for CTE, but your healthcare provider will suggest treatments to help you manage the symptoms you experience.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Traumatic Brain Injury Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE)?
CTE gets worse over time and causes increasingly severe symptoms.
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a brain condition that can develop if you experience repeated impacts or blows to your head.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
CTE permanently destroys nerve cells in your brain. This is called neurodegeneration. Over time, this damage can cause changes in your behavior and mental abilities.
Visit a healthcare provider if you think you’ve experienced a head injury, especially if you know this isn’t your first one. They’ll help you understand how you can protect your brain from more damage.
Symptoms and Causes
The symptoms of chronic traumatic encephalopathy can disrupt processes throughout your brain. As this condition worsens, it can cause disruptive or aggressive behavior.
Symptoms of CTE
CTE shares symptoms with other brain conditions that cause neurodegeneration. It can affect:
Your ability to think and remember (cognitive function)
Your mood and personality
How you physically move and use your body (motor function)
Cognitive function
CTE can affect certain mental abilities. You might notice:
Memory loss
Trouble solving problems or making plans
Trouble making a choice or judging what you should do next
Mild cognitive impairment
Mood and personality
Neurodegeneration can affect the parts of your brain that control your personality and emotions. You might experience:
Anxiety
Depression
Mood swings
, especially acting or feeling more aggressive or impulsive
Personality changes
Thoughts of
self-harm
or
suicide
It might be hard to notice some of these changes in yourself. Loved ones might tell you you’re acting differently or “not like yourself.” Try to remember that people care about you and are sharing these concerns because they want to make sure you’re feeling safe and healthy.
Advertisement
Motor function
CTE can affect your brain’s ability to control your body. Some symptoms can include:
Balance issues
Loss of coordination
Tremors
, twitches or other muscle movements you can’t control
CTE causes
Experiencing repeated head injuries causes CTE. Experts are still studying exactly why it happens in some people but not others. But they know having multiple head injuries is one of the most common causes. People with chronic traumatic encephalopathy almost always have a history of repeated head injuries over many years.
You don’t have to pass out (get “knocked out”) for a hit to your head to damage your brain. The effects of repeated head impacts build up over time.
Researchers think a buildup of abnormal tau proteins in your brain may also cause CTE. Tau proteins help your cells keep their shape. But if repeated head hits damage your cells, the tau proteins may lose their normal structure.
Risk factors
Having multiple head injuries is the biggest risk factor for CTE. Some activities that increase your risk include:
Playing contact sports like ice hockey, American football or rugby
Practicing combat sports like boxing, mixed martial arts (MMA) or traditional martial arts like taekwondo, aikido, judo or jiu-jitsu
Serving in the military
Some experts think having certain
genes
may increase your CTE risk. Researchers are still studying these potential genetic factors.
How to lower your risk for CTE
Avoiding head injuries is the only way to lower your risk of developing CTE. Wear the right protective equipment for all activities and sports, especially helmets or protective headwear.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose CTE
There’s no way to diagnose chronic traumatic encephalopathy in a living person. The only way healthcare providers can confirm CTE is by examining samples of a person’s brain with a microscope. But they can only do this during an autopsy after someone dies.
Even though your provider can’t definitively diagnose CTE while you’re alive, they can still make an educated assumption. They’ll build a diagnosis using a few factors:
A physical exam
A neurological exam
The symptoms or changes you’re experiencing
Your medical history (especially if you know you’ve had head injuries)
Experiencing CTE symptoms doesn’t automatically mean you have it. Lots of other conditions can cause similar symptoms. Your provider will use tests to help diagnose or rule out these other issues. You might need:
Blood tests
CT scan
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
MRI
PET scan
Management and Treatment
How is CTE treated?
Your healthcare provider can’t directly treat CTE, and there’s no way to reverse the brain damage. Instead, they’ll suggest ways to manage any symptoms you’re experiencing. You might need:
Advertisement
Cognitive behavioral therapy
Occupational therapy
Physical therapy
Speech therapy
Experts are still researching CTE. Ask your provider about any
clinical trials
that you might be eligible for. These may let you try new or experimental treatments.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you think you have a head injury. Tell them how many head injuries you’ve had (if you can remember them all or know they happened).
It might help to ask your provider a few questions, including:
How likely do you think it is that I have CTE?
Is it safe for me to keep playing sports or doing physical activities?
Which kinds of therapy will I need in the future?
Which symptoms or changes should I watch out for?
In the U.S., you can call the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
if you’re thinking about hurting yourself or have suicidal thoughts. Call or text 988 anytime for 24/7 help from specially trained providers and counselors.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Traumatic Brain Injury Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have chronic traumatic encephalopathy?
CTE is a permanent, lifelong condition. It’s also progressive, which means the symptoms will get worse over time. These changes can happen slowly (over years or even decades).
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy isn’t fatal. It won’t affect your life expectancy. But as it progresses, it can cause complications that affect your health and well-being. At the end stage of CTE, you might lose the ability to feed, bathe or dress yourself.
Advertisement
You can start planning for the future before you experience more severe symptoms. You might want to think about things like
advance directives
and legal and financial plans.
Your healthcare provider will help you understand what you and your loved ones can expect.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) can be a confusing condition. It might be hard to understand how it can have such a big impact on your health and life if providers can’t confirm you have it. But it’s real and so are the symptoms it causes.
Talk to your healthcare provider or a mental health professional if you feel like you need extra support. They’ll make sure you feel safe and confident as you learn to live with CTE and any changes it brings.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Traumatic brain injuries can be serious or life-threatening. Cleveland Clinic’s experts provide fast treatment to give you the best chance of recovery.
Traumatic Brain Injury Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment