Morning After Pill: Emergency Contraception & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Morning-After Pill
Advertisement
Advertisement
Morning-After Pill
The morning-after pill is a type of birth control that can be used in emergency situations when typical birth control wasn’t used or failed, and in cases of nonconsensual sexual intercourse (rape). This pill is most effective at preventing pregnancy when it’s taken as quickly after unprotected sex as possible. Brand names include Plan B One-Step® and ella®.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Birth Control Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
The morning-after pill can cause side effects like irregular menstrual cycles, vaginal bleeding, nausea and headaches.
What is the morning-after pill?
The morning-after pill is a type of emergency contraception. Emergency contraception isn’t the same as typical
birth control
. It’s for situations where your birth control has either failed or you were unable to use protection. These medications are a temporary way to prevent
pregnancy
— they aren’t long-term routine forms of birth control. There are better and more effective ways to prevent pregnancy like
birth control pills
,
intrauterine devices (IUDs)
and
implants
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Some situations where you may need the morning-after pill are:
Having sexual intercourse without any form of preventive birth control.
Experiencing birth control failure (like a broken
condom
, forgotten birth control pills or missed dose of the
birth control shot
).
Experiencing nonconsensual or forced sexual intercourse (
rape
).
The most important thing to know about emergency contraception is that how soon you take it has a big impact on how effective it is. Each type of morning-after pill has its own timeframe for when you should take it, but studies show that both types work best when you take it within 24 hours of unprotected sex.
Are there different types of morning-after pill?
There are two main types of morning-after pills approved by the FDA in the U.S. — each with popular brand names you may have heard of. Both types come as pills that you swallow. A third, less common type of emergency contraception involves taking combination birth control.
Levonorgestrel morning-after pills
Pills containing levonorgestrel (a type of
progestin
) work best when you take it within three days (72 hours) of unprotected sex. They’re available to purchase anytime at most drug stores. There are several brands you can buy, and the prices vary, but they all work the same way.
Common brands include:
Advertisement
Plan B One-Step®.
My Choice™.
Option 2®.
Take Action™.
Aftera®.
Preventeza™.
Ulipristal acetate
Pills containing
ulipristal acetate
work for up to five days (120 hours) after unprotected sex. It’s only available with a prescription. (You can fill the prescription and save it for when you need it.) The most common brand name for this medication is ella®.
Combined birth control
This type of emergency contraception involves taking birth control pills that contain both progestin and
estrogen
. Unlike the two other types of morning-after pills, this option typically involves taking two doses. When you use
combination birth control
as an emergency contraception option, you’re taking a typical birth control pill at a higher dose. It’s important to talk to your healthcare provider or
pharmacist
about the exact dosage you’ll need and how far apart you should take the two medications. This isn’t something you should do without talking to your provider.
Combined birth control (Yuzpe regimen)
This type of emergency contraception involves taking extra pills from a regular birth control pack. It’s referred to as the Yuzpe regimen. This method involves combining pills from an available birth control pack to total 100 mcg of ethinyl estradiol and 0.5 mg levonorgestrel. A second dose is then repeated in 12 hours. It’s important to know that this regimen is less effective and less well-tolerated than other forms of emergency contraception.
How does the morning-after pill work?
The morning-after pill doesn’t reverse pregnancy. Instead, it’s a type of emergency birth control that prevents pregnancy. The main way the morning-after pill works is by preventing or delaying ovulation. If you don’t ovulate, you can’t get pregnant. The morning-after pill won’t end a
pregnancy
that has already begun.
How effective is the morning-after pill?
All forms of emergency contraception pills are more effective the sooner you take them, ideally within 24 hours of unprotected sex. You don’t need to wait to take these medications until the next day — despite the name “morning-after pill.” So, if you have concerns about pregnancy after unprotected sex, it’s best to get emergency contraception as soon as you can.
Each type of morning-after pill has its own effectiveness. The data and studies are mixed on exactly how effective each one is:
The levonorgestrel option should be taken within the first 72 hours (three days) after unprotected sexual intercourse. Studies show it can be around 94% effective if you take it in the first 24 hours. It’s about 58% effective within 72 hours.
The ulipristal acetate option can be taken up to 120 hours (five days) after sex. Studies show it can be as high as 98% effective if you take it in the first 24 hours. It’s about 85% effective if you take it within 120 hours. Since you need a prescription for it, having it on hand is the best way to achieve that success rate.
Combined birth control is the least effective emergency contraception.
Advertisement
Can you get pregnant if you take morning-after pill?
Yes. Even with perfect use, there’s no guarantee it’ll prevent a pregnancy.
Treatment Details
How soon do I take the morning-after pill?
You don’t need to wait until the next morning to take the morning-after pill. Emergency contraception pills are most effective at preventing pregnancy when they’re taken as quickly as possible after unprotected sexual intercourse. The amount of time you have can vary between different medications.
Levonorgestrel (Plan B):
You typically have about a three-day window of time when Plan B will still be effective. It becomes less effective at preventing pregnancy the longer you wait.
Ulipristal (ella®):
You have up to five days after unprotected sex when it’s still effective at preventing pregnancy. It’s more effective the sooner you take it.
Combined birth control pills:
Combining birth control pills that contain progestin and estrogen can be taken for up to five days after unprotected sex. There can be a lot of variety between different brands of birth control pills, so you must talk to your healthcare provider about the exact timing and dosage.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Birth Control Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the risks of the morning-after pill?
Emergency contraception is safe and effective. It won’t harm your chances of getting pregnant in the future or impact your fertility.
There are side effects, though. Some symptoms of taking a morning-after pill can include:
Advertisement
Changes to your normal
menstrual cycles
(your period might be earlier or later than normal)
Light
vaginal bleeding
(spotting)
Nausea
and
vomiting
Tiredness (
fatigue
)
Headaches
and
dizziness
Breast tenderness
Pain or cramping in your abdomen
The side effects of the morning-after pill are mild for most people. But if you notice more severe symptoms or have concerns after taking the morning-after pill, reach out to your healthcare provider.
What are reasons the morning-after pill fails?
The most common reason for failure is timing. It’s always best to take emergency contraception as soon as possible. Other possible reasons for failure include:
Vomiting within two hours of taking it
Weight (levonorgestrel may be less effective if you have overweight)
Interaction with other medications making it less effective (like certain
barbiturates
or
St. John’s wort
)
Can weight impact the effectiveness of the morning-after pill?
There’s research that suggests that your weight can impact how effective the levonorgestrel morning-after pill will be for you. People with a higher
body mass index (BMI)
may not experience the same level of effectiveness. Pills containing ulipristal seem to work the same regardless of having a higher BMI.
Is there bleeding after I take the morning-after pill?
You might experience light bleeding — called spotting — after taking emergency contraception. Even though this doesn’t happen to everyone who takes the morning-after pill, it isn’t something that should worry you. If you notice that the bleeding is heavier or happens after you’ve missed a period, reach out to your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Can the morning-after pill make your period late or disrupt your cycle?
The morning-after pill can cause your next period to be irregular. If your period is late or abnormal, contact your healthcare provider and consider taking a home pregnancy test. Your provider will advise you on your next steps if your menstrual cycle doesn’t return to normal.
What are the signs that the morning-after pill didn’t work?
If you take the morning-after pill in the immediate time window after having unprotected sex, it can be very effective. One of the main signs that a morning-after pill hasn’t worked is a missed menstrual period. If your period is more than seven days (a week) later than you expected, take a
pregnancy test
.
When To Call the Doctor
Should I see my healthcare provider after taking the morning-after pill?
In most cases, you won’t need to see your healthcare provider after taking the morning-after pill. But if you haven’t gotten your period within a week of when you expect it, talk to your healthcare provider. A missed period is one of the
early signs of pregnancy
. You should also contact your provider if you have severe abdominal pain or heavy vaginal bleeding. These could be signs of a
miscarriage
or
ectopic pregnancy
.
The morning-after pill isn’t meant to be your primary form of birth control. Reach out to your provider about finding a birth control option that works best for you.
Additional Common Questions
Does the morning-after pill work if I take it first and then have unprotected sex?
The morning-after pill was made to be taken
after
unprotected sex. It’s not effective if you take it before you have unprotected sex.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’re considering the morning-after pill, the most important thing you need to know is, timing is everything. Morning-after pills are most effective when you take them immediately after unprotected sex (you don’t have to wait until the next morning).
There are lots of morning-after pills you can buy at your local drug store and each one has its own instruction label. Over-the-counter versions from your drug store are effective for up to three days after unprotected sex. The prescription-only morning-after pill is good for up to five days after unprotected sex. Both are most effective within 24 hours.
The morning-after pill doesn’t end a pregnancy; it prevents pregnancy from happening. But it shouldn’t be your primary form of birth control. If you have any questions about emergency contraception or birth control, talk to your healthcare provider.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your birth control needs to work for you. At Cleveland Clinic, we help you find the right birth control option to fit your goals and lifestyle.
Schedule Birth Control Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/21/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment