Nongonococcal Urethritis (NGU): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nongonococcal Urethritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nongonococcal Urethritis
Nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) is usually a sexually transmitted infection, although urethral trauma can also cause it. Common symptoms include itchiness, irritation, discharge and pain while peeing. Healthcare providers treat NGU with antibiotics. Make sure to take all of your medicine. And tell all of your sexual partners so they can get help, too.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is nongonococcal urethritis?
Nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) is
inflammation
of the small tube that allows urine (pee) to exit your body (
urethra
). It’s commonly a
sexually transmitted infection
(STI) that occurs after having unprotected sexual intercourse with a partner who has an NGU infection. But there are also nonsexual causes. It can affect anyone, but
men
are more likely to have NGU.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
“Nongonococcal” means that
germs
other than
gonorrhea
cause the infection. “
Urethritis
” means inflammation of your urethra.
Another name for nongonococcal urethritis is nonspecific urethritis (NSU).
How common is nongonococcal urethritis?
Nongonococcal urethritis is very common. Healthcare providers treat nongonococcal urethritis more than any other STI in men.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of nongonococcal urethritis?
In men, early symptoms may include:
Leaking fluid (discharge) from your
penis
.
Pain while peeing (
dysuria
).
Pain while
ejaculating
(dysorgasmia or orgasmalgia).
Itching, irritation and/or tenderness.
Abdominal pain
.
Without treatment, the infection can get worse. More severe NGU symptoms in men may include:
Testicular pain
and swelling.
Infertility
.
Signs of infection that affect other parts of your body, including
fever
,
chills
,
headache
and feeling very tired (
fatigue
).
Women usually have fewer NGU symptoms. But symptoms may include:
Vaginal discharge
.
Pain while peeing.
Pain during sexual intercourse (
dyspareunia
).
Spotting or cramping throughout the month (
irregular periods
).
In some cases, people with NGU don’t have any symptoms.
What does urethritis feel like?
Urethritis feels uncomfortable. You may have a burning or stinging feeling when you pee or ejaculate. You may also feel an annoying itch inside your urethra that you can’t scratch.
Advertisement
What causes nongonococcal urethritis?
There are sexual and nonsexual causes of nongonococcal urethritis.
Sexual causes
STIs are the main cause of nongonococcal urethritis. You may pass STIs through unprotected vaginal, oral or anal sexual intercourse.
Many types of germs may cause NGU. The most common is
chlamydia
. But other common bacteria that cause NGU include:
Haemophilus vaginalis
(
vaginalis
).
Mycoplasma genitalium
(
genitalium
).
Ureaplasma urealyticum
(
urealyticum
).
The
herpes simplex virus
and
Trichomonas vaginalis
can also cause NGU. But it’s uncommon.
Nonsexual causes
Nonsexual NGU causes include:
Foreskin
that’s too tight (
phimosis
).
Using a
Foley catheter
to drain pee from your
urinary bladder
during a medical procedure.
Narrowing of your urethra (
urethral stricture
).
Urinary tract infections
(UTIs).
When do nongonococcal urethritis symptoms develop?
If you get NGU from bacteria, symptoms usually develop one to three weeks after infection. But you can also have NGU without any noticeable symptoms.
Who does nongonococcal urethritis affect?
Anyone can get NGU. But you’re more likely to get it if you're male. You may have a higher risk of developing NGU if you:
Are between the ages of 15 and 30.
Have unprotected sexual intercourse.
Have more than one sexual partner.
Experience trauma to your urethra; for example, you sustain an injury or use a Foley catheter.
What happens if NGU is left untreated?
NGU generally goes away without complications, even without treatment. It won’t likely cause long-term health effects. However, in rare instances, untreated NGU can lead to other complications, including:
Epididymitis
. This is inflammation in the tube behind your testicle (epididymis). Epididymitis can cause
testicular pain
.
Reactive arthritis
(Reiter’s syndrome)
. This is a type of
arthritis
that affects your back, joints, urinary tract and eyes.
Skin lesions
. These are changes to your skin.
Vaginal
infections
. These may include mucopurulent cervicitis (MPC) and
vaginitis
. Untreated vaginal infections can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease and
infertility
.
It’s a good idea to schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider any time you notice symptoms that affect your genitals, especially when you pee or have sexual intercourse.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is nongonococcal urethritis diagnosed?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you think you have NGU. They’ll review your health history and conduct a
physical exam
. They may also ask you questions about your sexual habits, including:
Are you sexually active?
Have you had unprotected vaginal, oral or anal sex in the past 60 days?
Have you ever tested positive for an STI?
Have any of your partners ever tested positive for an STI?
Advertisement
These questions may seem uncomfortable or intrusive. But providers aren’t judging you — they’re trying to make a diagnosis so you can feel better as soon as possible. It’s important to answer these questions honestly.
A provider may also order tests to help confirm their diagnosis.
What tests will be done to diagnose nongonococcal urethritis?
Usually, a healthcare provider will use a cotton swab to conduct a
bacteria culture test
from one of the following areas:
Urethra
Cervix
.
Rectum
.
Throat.
It’s possible to have multiple STIs at the same time. So, they may also order the following tests:
Lab tests of your penile or vaginal discharge.
Blood test
.
Urine test (
urinalysis
).
Management and Treatment
Can nongonococcal urethritis go away on its own?
Yes, NGU can go away on its own without treatment. But to protect your sexual partners and for your own peace of mind, it’s a good idea to schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider as soon as you notice symptoms of NGU.
How do you treat nonspecific urethritis?
Healthcare providers will prescribe
antibiotics
to destroy the germs that cause nongonococcal urethritis. A provider may prescribe:
Doxycycline
. You’ll take doxycycline twice a day for a week.
Macrolide antibiotics, such as
azithromycin
. This is a single-dose medication.
If you’re allergic to these medications, or they don’t get rid of the infection, your provider may prescribe
erythromycin
or
ofloxacin
.
Advertisement
You and your partner(s) should receive treatment. If only one partner receives treatment, you may continue to pass NGU back and forth to each other.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
It may take a week or two for your symptoms to go away after starting antibiotics.
Without treatment, NGU may go away on its own in a few weeks or up to six months.
How long is a person with NGU contagious?
You’re only able to spread NGU if it results from an STI. You’ll remain contagious until you finish your full course of antibiotics and your symptoms disappear.
Don’t have sexual intercourse until you finish your medicine and you no longer have any symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How serious is urethritis?
The overall outlook for nongonococcal urethritis is good. Most people make a full recovery a week or two after starting treatment. Your
immune system
can also typically clear it on its own after several months. However, you run the risk of spreading it to any other sexual partners. Long-term NGU complications aren’t common, though.
How long does non-STD urethritis last?
It depends on the exact cause. You may have irritation for only a few days after you remove a Foley catheter. More severe trauma may take a month or longer to heal. A healthcare provider will give you a more accurate estimate according to your specific cause.
Can I get NGU again?
Yes, you can get an NGU infection again. Having it once doesn’t protect you from getting it again.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can nongonococcal urethritis be prevented?
You can help prevent nongonococcal urethritis by:
Using a new
condom
or
dental dam
each time you have sexual intercourse.
Avoiding sexual intercourse if you suspect you or your partner have NGU or another STI.
Getting tested
for NGU and other STIs before having sexual intercourse with a new partner.
Getting regular STI tests if you have multiple sex partners.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
After a healthcare provider diagnoses you and prescribes antibiotics, you can take the following steps to stay healthy:
Take your medicine as directed by a provider
. Finish your entire course of medicine, even if your symptoms improve. Don’t share your medicine with others.
Pause your sex life
. Don’t have sexual intercourse until you’ve finished your entire course of medicine and your symptoms go away.
Avoid reinfection
. Always use protection any time you have oral, vaginal or anal sexual intercourse.
Contact your sexual partners
. Get in touch with everyone you’ve had sexual intercourse with during the previous three months. Suggest that they talk to a provider and get tested as well.
See a provider
. If your symptoms don’t go away, or if they go away and come back, schedule another appointment with a provider.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider if you notice that you or your partner have any symptoms of NGU. It’s also a good idea to get annual (yearly) or more frequent STI testing if you’re sexually active with multiple partners.
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
How do you know that I have NGU?
Do I have sexual or nonsexual NGU?
What treatment do you recommend?
Should I get tested for other STIs?
When can I resume having sexual intercourse?
How can I protect myself in the future?
Will I have any long-term health effects from NGU?
Should I get regular STI testing?
Additional Common Questions
Can you have nongonococcal urethritis without an STI?
Yes, you can have NGU without an STI. Trauma to your urethra may cause NGU.
Is NGU the same as gonorrhea?
No, nongonococcal urethritis isn’t the same as gonorrhea. They can lead to similar symptoms. But the bacterium
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(
N
.
gonorrhoeae
) causes gonorrhea. A different type of bacteria or even trauma causes NGU. Therefore, gonorrhea and NGU need different treatments.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s nerve-wracking when you have symptoms that affect your sensitive areas, especially if you’ve been having unprotected sexual intercourse. You want to hope for the best, and you may believe if you wait a little bit, your symptoms will go away on their own. But if you ignore your symptoms, you run the risk of developing complications.
If your test reveals you have nongonococcal urethritis (NGU), a provider can prescribe antibiotics that typically clear up the infection. And be sure to contact all of your sexual partners over the last three months if you have NGU. It doesn’t matter if you spread NGU to them or if they spread it to you — it’s important to protect your health and the health of others.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/14/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment