Carotid Endarterectomy: Surgery & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Carotid Endarterectomy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Carotid Endarterectomy
A carotid endarterectomy removes plaque (fat and cholesterol) buildup from inside your carotid artery, improving blood flow to your brain. This surgery can help prevent a stroke. You can help prevent future plaque buildup by changing what you eat and being physically active.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Carotid Artery Stenosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
A carotid endarterectomy is a surgery to take plaque out of your carotid artery so your blood can flow through it better.
What is a carotid endarterectomy?
A carotid endarterectomy is a surgery to remove
plaque
(fat and cholesterol buildup) from inside your
carotid artery
. A carotid artery on each side of your neck supplies
blood
to your brain, neck and face. You may have an
endarterectomy
on the left or right side of your neck.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers remove plaque from carotid artery walls so you can get better blood flow to your
brain
. Plaque can slow down or stop blood flow. If enough blood can’t reach your brain, you can have a
stroke
.
Carotid endarterectomy is a common
carotid artery disease
treatment. This helps prevent a stroke, which is the fifth leading cause of death in the U.S.
If you have a stroke, it’s important to get to an emergency room for treatment within three to six hours to get the care you need.
When is a carotid endarterectomy performed?
A surgeon will evaluate you and your medical history and test results. They may recommend a carotid endarterectomy procedure if you:
Have carotid artery disease (Your provider may have seen in an
ultrasound
that your carotid artery is at least halfway blocked with plaque buildup)
Have poor blood flow
Had a
transient ischemic attack
(TIA) or a mild stroke due to significant carotid artery disease
Have severe narrowing or blockage in your carotid artery but haven’t had symptoms
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for this procedure?
Before a carotid endarterectomy, you may need to:
Have tests, like a
cerebral angiogram
,
CT angiography
or
MR angiography
. These provide information about your carotid arteries and your brain.
Tell your healthcare provider about everything you're taking (including nonprescription drugs,
herbs
and supplements).
Stop taking certain medications. Most people will remain on
aspirin
through the procedure.
Stop using tobacco products.
Get specific instructions from your healthcare team to help you prepare for your procedure.
Advertisement
What happens during a carotid endarterectomy?
A surgeon performs this procedure in a hospital. A carotid endarterectomy normally takes about one or two hours.
A healthcare provider will give you general
anesthesia
(like being asleep) or local anesthesia, which means you’re awake but the area to be operated on is numbed. If you get local anesthesia, you’ll also receive medicine to help you relax.
The surgeon takes these carotid endarterectomy steps:
Make a 4-inch cut (incision) in your neck at the site of the blockage.
Assess the need to keep blood flow going to that side of the brain. If needed, they’ll insert a tiny tube to temporarily reroute blood flow around the blockage or narrowing and isolate the area during blockage removal.
Make an incision along the portion of the artery containing the plaque.
Remove the plaque and stitch the opening closed. They’ll typically add a patch of material to widen the artery and prevent narrowing from happening again.
Restore blood flow to your brain through its normal path.
In a variation of this, a surgeon flips the carotid artery inside out (eversion) to remove the plaque. This may take less time and avoid the need for a patch.
What are the potential benefits and risks of this procedure?
A carotid artery endarterectomy can help prevent future strokes. Most people tolerate the procedure well. In a
study
of people over 80 who had this procedure, most were alive five years later. Most of those who didn’t live five years died from an unrelated illness.
With an experienced surgeon, there’s minimal risk. But as with any surgery, there’s a risk of complications from a carotid endarterectomy, including:
Bleeding
Infection
Blood clots
Nerve
damage
Seizures
Brain damage
Future artery blockage
Stroke
Heart attack
You can consider a carotid endarterectomy a major surgery because of the possibility of life-threatening complications. But the risks vary, depending on:
The severity of the carotid artery disease
The location of the blockage
Whether you’ve had a previous stroke
The presence of other medical conditions, like
heart disease
,
diabetes
or
kidney disease
Your age (older people are at a higher risk)
Your
sex
(women may have a higher risk of complications)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Carotid Artery Stenosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after carotid endarterectomy?
You’ll need to stay overnight in the hospital so your care team can monitor you after the surgery. You’ll probably be able to eat and drink several hours after surgery.
You may have a temporary drain in your neck to remove fluid from your cut (incision). This drain will usually only stay in for one day. It’s a common complication to have some neck pain for about two weeks afterward. But you can take standard, over-the-counter
pain medications
to relieve it.
You may need to start or resume taking aspirin,
clopidogrel
or other medicines to
prevent blood clots
.
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider will discuss the results of your procedure with you. For most people, this procedure helps prevent further brain damage and reduces the risk of stroke. But you may need to change some daily habits to prevent plaque buildup, clot formation and other problems in your carotid arteries.
Even with a successful procedure, your healthcare provider might recommend:
Eating
healthier foods
Being physically active (if it’s safe)
Not using tobacco products
Cutting down your
stress
level
Taking
medicine to lower your cholesterol
level
These steps can help keep plaque from building up again.
What is the recovery time?
Carotid endarterectomy recovery is rapid. Most people go home the day after the procedure. After you get home, it’s OK to shower. Just don’t scrub the surgical glue on the cut or let the stream of water hit it.
Check your incision daily and avoid putting any lotions on it. Avoid wearing clothes that rub against your incision.
You can go back to most of your normal activities (like working) in one or two weeks. You can drive after your incision heals and it doesn’t feel uncomfortable to turn your head. Before you fully recover, the area near your jawline and earlobe may feel
numb
for six months to a year.
Advertisement
Follow-up appointments
Your provider will want to see you one month after your carotid endarterectomy surgery. After that, you should have follow-up visits every six months for two years and then once a year. They’ll want to make sure your carotid artery doesn’t get narrow again. They’ll use ultrasound to check for this in both carotid arteries (even the one where you didn’t have a procedure).
The success rate of carotid endarterectomy is high. People usually don’t have narrowing in the same artery again.
You can expect to have a carotid endarterectomy scar about 4 inches long on your neck. It will likely be less noticeable in a few months.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you have:
Chills
or
fever
Blood or yellow or green
mucus
when you cough
Trouble swallowing
Chest pain
Swollen
legs
Difficulty being able to see
Dizziness
, weakness or numbness
Shortness of breath
Redness on your incision or green or yellow discharge coming out of it
A
headache
,
confusion
or difficulty speaking or understanding others’ words
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between carotid endarterectomy and a stent?
A carotid endarterectomy removes plaque buildup from your carotid artery. A
stent
(mesh tube) keeps your carotid artery open. A provider puts in a stent after an
angioplasty
procedure that pushes plaque against your carotid artery walls. All of these improve blood flow in your carotid artery.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Our brains control so much of what we do — even things we don’t have to think about. So, it’s understandable to feel frightened about blood having trouble reaching your brain. But a carotid endarterectomy can improve blood flow to your brain and help prevent a future stroke. Ask your provider questions about anything that isn’t clear. They can draw on their experience to explain more.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When the carotid arteries in your neck are blocked, you’re at risk for a stroke. Cleveland Clinic’s experts are world renowned in treating this condition.
Carotid Artery Stenosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment