Herd Immunity: History, Vaccines & What It Means
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Herd Immunity
Advertisement
Advertisement
Herd Immunity
Herd immunity is when enough people in an area have immunity to (protection from) a disease that it no longer spreads easily. It usually takes a large number of people getting vaccinated against or infected with the germ to achieve herd immunity. It can protect people from serious illness and potentially eliminate or eradicate a particular disease.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What Is Herd Immunity?
Herd immunity means that enough people in a group or area have immunity to a
germ
(for instance, a
virus
) that it no longer spreads easily. Immunity means your
immune system
has learned to fight off a specific infection so it doesn’t make you sick.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Herd immunity — also called population immunity — often results from a combination of people getting vaccinated and people getting infected with the germ (
natural immunity
). Both natural and vaccine immunity cause your body to make
antibodies
and immune cells that recognize a specific germ. Your body can then fight the germ off more easily the next time it sees it. It usually takes a large percentage of people with immunity to achieve herd immunity.
The benefits of herd immunity include the potential to:
Stop a disease from spreading in a particular area (elimination)
Stop a disease from spreading worldwide (eradication)
Protect people from serious illness and death
Protect people who can’t get vaccinated or don’t develop immunity when they get vaccinated or infected
Herd immunity isn’t permanent. Unless a disease no longer exists anywhere in the world, it can start spreading again. This usually happens if someone without natural or vaccine immunity gets infected while traveling to an area where the disease still spreads. They can then spread it to others who don’t have immunity.
What are some examples of herd immunity in history?
Herd immunity has been achieved in the past for:
Diphtheria
Measles
Polio
Rubella
Smallpox
Most of these have been eliminated in many countries worldwide thanks to vaccination and other public health efforts. But until a disease has been eradicated, it can begin spreading again to people who haven’t been infected or vaccinated.
Advertisement
Some of these diseases have started spreading again after achieving herd immunity. Smallpox is the only disease that’s been eradicated worldwide.
Challenges in reaching herd immunity
Herd immunity isn’t possible with every infectious disease. Some reasons herd immunity might not be possible for certain diseases include:
The germ changes (mutates) frequently
: This means you can get immunity to one version, but that may not protect you from a newer variant. There can also be multiple different versions of a germ that circulate at one time (like
norovirus
).
Immunity to the germ doesn’t last long enough
: Immunity has to last a long time to prevent spread. For example, immunity from both infection and vaccination for some viruses lasts only a few months. This usually isn’t long enough to achieve herd immunity.
The germ can spread when you have no symptoms
: Germs spread more easily when people don’t know they’re infected. This makes it much less likely to get herd immunity without vaccination.
The germ is found in nature
: Herd immunity only works for diseases that spread from person to person. Some germs naturally live in soil or water (think
tetanus
bacteria or
infectious fungi
). Vaccines can protect you personally from some of these infections, but population immunity can’t be achieved.
Flu
,
RSV
and
COVID-19
are all viruses that we might not be able to get herd immunity to because they mutate too often, they spread without symptoms or immunity doesn’t last very long (or a combination of these).
Tetanus shots
, on the other hand, last a long time. But we can’t reach herd immunity because the bacteria live in the environment, not exclusively in people.
Can herd immunity be achieved without vaccines?
Without vaccination, herd immunity might only be achieved if a very large number of people get sick — and potentially die — very quickly. Otherwise, not enough people would be immune all at once. The disease would just keep spreading as new people got infected. It’s unethical to allow new and potentially deadly diseases to spread this way on purpose.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Herd immunity probably isn’t something you think about in your day-to-day life. But it’s an important part of public health, both locally and worldwide. It protects people from serious illnesses and sometimes eliminates diseases completely. And while it’s not possible to get herd immunity to all contagious diseases, it can be powerful and lifesaving when achieved.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment