Penectomy: Purpose, Procedure, Results & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Penectomy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Penectomy
A penectomy is a surgical procedure that removes part of or all of your penis. Healthcare providers most commonly perform the procedure to treat penile cancer. They may need to relocate your urethra so you can pee comfortably. Your recovery depends on many factors, including how much of your penis providers must remove.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Penile Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What is a penectomy?
A penectomy (peh-NEK-tuh-mee) is the surgical removal of your
penis
. A surgeon may remove part of your penis (partial penectomy) or your entire penis (total penectomy). Surgeons typically perform penectomies to treat a condition that affects your penis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What does it treat?
Penectomy is an effective treatment for
penile cancer
. Healthcare providers recommend the procedure if penile cancer:
Causes a large tumor
Spreads to surrounding tissue
Is likely to come back (cancer recurrence)
In rare cases, you may need the procedure to treat
Fournier’s gangrene
or a traumatic injury to your penis.
How common is this procedure?
Penectomy isn’t a common procedure. That’s because penile cancer is relatively rare. Penile cancer affects fewer than
1 in 100,000 males
each year in North America and Europe. And healthcare providers may first recommend other cancer treatments before a penectomy. These may include:
Ablation therapy
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
Putting cancer drugs directly on your skin (topical therapy)
Procedure Details
How should I prepare for a penectomy?
Before a penectomy, you’ll meet with healthcare providers. They’ll recommend tests to determine what kind of penile cancer you have and its stage. Tests may include:
Biopsy
Blood tests for cancer
Imaging tests, including CT scans, PET scans, MRIs, ultrasounds and X-rays
Once they get the results of your tests, they’ll discuss whether a partial or total penectomy is best for you.
Healthcare providers will also check your general health. This ensures you’re healthy enough for surgery. It includes taking your vital signs — body temperature, pulse and blood pressure.
Advertisement
It’s important to tell your provider about any prescription or over-the-counter (OTC) medications you take. This includes vitamins and herbal supplements. Some medications, vitamins and supplements can increase your bleeding risk. They can also interact with medications you may need to take after the procedure. You may need to stop taking certain medications for a little while before surgery. But check with your provider before stopping any medications.
You should also tell your provider about any allergies you have. These include:
Foods
Latex
Medications
Skin cleaners like iodine or isopropyl alcohol
Your provider will also give you specific directions on eating and drinking before your penectomy. Eating or drinking after midnight the night before your surgery can increase the risk of fluids or food getting into your airways (aspiration). If you must take medications, you should take them with a small sip of water.
Who performs this procedure?
In general, your penectomy care team includes:
A
urologist
An
anesthesiologist
Nurses
What happens during a penectomy?
Your anesthesiologist will put you under (sedate you) with general anesthesia. You won’t be awake, move or feel any pain during the procedure.
Nurses may place you flat on your back (supine position) or on your back with your legs held in the air by stirrups (lithotomy position). They’ll also insert a urinary catheter into your urethra and guide it up to your urinary bladder. The catheter drains pee and also helps your care team locate your urethra during the procedure.
If your urologist performs a partial penectomy, they’ll remove the affected tissue. They’ll leave as much of your shaft as they can. They’ll also do their best to ensure that you can still stand to pee and retain as much sexual function as possible. If they remove the tip of your penis (glans), they may take skin from another area of your body (usually your thigh) to make a new glans. This is a skin graft.
If you need a total penectomy, your urologist will remove your entire penis, including the root (radix). Three masses of
erectile
tissue make up the root of your penis, and it attaches to your pelvis.
If you’re having a penectomy because of penile cancer, your urologist may remove
lymph nodes in your groin
to see if cancer has spread.
How long does it take?
It depends on many factors, including whether you need a partial or total penectomy. But in general, a penectomy should take less than two hours to complete.
What happens after a penectomy?
After a penectomy, nurses will cover your incision sites with bandages or skin glue.
The anesthesiologist will stop putting anesthesia in your body. You’ll be conscious (awake) within a few minutes. But you’ll likely feel groggy.
Nurses will then move you to a recovery room. They’ll wait for you to wake up more fully and track your overall health. Once you’re fully awake and alert, they’ll treat your pain. Anesthesia can make some people feel like they may throw up. They may also give you medication to treat it.
Advertisement
Your hospital stay may depend on why you need a penectomy. But in general, after the procedure, you:
May be in the hospital for up to three days
Will have a catheter in place to drain your pee for up to two weeks
May have a surgical drain to allow blood to drain from the surgical site
Should be able to eat and drink as you did before
Will have swelling that takes time to heal
How do you pee if your penis is cut off?
Your urologist will reroute your urethra to your perineum (
perineal urethrostomy
). So, your pee will come out through a new hole in the area between your anus (butthole) and genitals. You’ll need to sit when you pee.
Can I get a new penis?
It’s not possible in all total penectomy cases. But there’s a chance your urologist may be able to create a new penis for you. They’ll use skin and tissue from other areas of your body. This procedure is a
phalloplasty
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Penile Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of a penectomy?
The main benefit of a penectomy is that it’s an effective penile cancer treatment. It usually gives you the best
survival rate
.
How successful is this procedure?
It depends on many factors, including:
The stage of cancer
Where the cancer is in your penis
How quickly you get a diagnosis and treatment
Healthcare providers will give you a better idea of what to expect.
What are the risks or complications of this procedure?
Every surgery comes with risks. Possible penectomy risks include:
Advertisement
Bleeding
Blood clots
Infection
Narrowing of your urethra (urethral stricture)
Penile cancer comes back
Swelling (lymphedema) in your legs or scrotum
Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
A penectomy can also have a serious impact on your quality of life. Having a healthy penis is important to your sexual and emotional health. Many
males
experience mixed feelings after a penectomy. It’s an effective cancer treatment. But changes to the size and appearance of your penis and changes to your peeing habits can affect how you feel. They can affect your feelings of self-confidence, self-image and self-worth. This can cause complications like:
Anxiety
Depression
Stress
Suicidal thoughts
Can I still have sex?
It depends. You can’t have penetrative sexual intercourse after a total penectomy.
If you get a partial penectomy, you may still be able to get an erection, have penetrative sexual intercourse and orgasm. But a partial penectomy may remove some of the most sensitive areas of your penis. These sensitive areas include the head,
frenulum
and
foreskin
. A lack of sensitivity can make it difficult to get or maintain an erection that’s hard enough for penetration or masturbation.
It’s important to remember that there are other ways to express your sexuality. Talking to a
sex therapist
can help you work through your sexual difficulties. This includes discovering other sensitive areas of your body, like your scrotum and prostate.
Advertisement
It’s also a good idea to have open talks with your partner(s) about the best ways to be intimate through nonpenetrative sex. Some examples include kissing, cuddling and rubbing.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time?
Every person recovers at a different rate. Your healthcare provider will give you an idea of what to expect before surgery.
But in general, you should expect to:
Be in the hospital for one to three days
Miss about a month of work or school
Avoid lifting anything heavier than 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) — about a gallon of water — for several weeks
Wear compression stockings, take medications or do both to prevent blood clots
Have swelling for several weeks
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call a healthcare provider if you:
Develop signs of an infection, including a fever, chills, fatigue or headache
Have a lot of bleeding
Have pain that doesn’t go away after taking pain relievers
Have signs of
sepsis
Are concerned about any new or worsening symptoms
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s normal to feel a wide range of emotions before any type of surgery. But a penectomy is a treatment in one of the most sensitive areas of your body. You might feel angry, lonely, sad or frustrated. You might feel optimistic. Or you may not feel anything at all. All of these responses are normal.
It’s important to find a urologist who has a lot of experience performing these surgeries and understands what you’re going through. Get as much information as possible before surgery so you know what to expect. It’s also important to have a support system in place that you can lean on. This can be your family and friends. Or you can reach out to support groups and postoperative services for help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Penile cancer can be curable if caught early. Cleveland Clinic provides the diagnosis, treatment and support you need to keep enjoying life.
Penile Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment