Viral Hepatitis: What It Is, Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Viral Hepatitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Viral Hepatitis
Viral hepatitis causes inflammation that damages your liver. There are five different types. Most cause symptoms like fatigue or dark-colored pee. You get viral hepatitis by having contact with blood or bodily fluids from someone who has it. Vaccines can help prevent some types of viral hepatitis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is viral hepatitis?
Viral hepatitis is a
viral infection
that affects millions of people worldwide. It causes
inflammation in your liver
. Viral hepatitis can be acute (short-term) and cause symptoms that last from a few weeks to a few months. But you can have a form of chronic (long-term) viral hepatitis that doesn’t go away.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You get the infection after exposure to hepatitis
viruses
. These viruses are different but have some symptoms in common. Viral hepatitis may not cause symptoms right away. You can have and spread the condition without knowing you’re sick.
Contact with infected blood or bodily fluids is the main way these viruses spread. Without treatment, the viruses can lead to life-threatening
liver disease
. There are vaccines that help prevent some types of viral hepatitis.
There are five known types of viral hepatitis. The most common types are hepatitis A, hepatitis B and hepatitis C:
Hepatitis A
. The hepatitis A virus (HAV) causes this infection. You can get hepatitis A from eating contaminated food or water that contains the virus.
Hepatitis B
. This type of hepatitis is the most common liver infection in the world. The hepatitis B virus (HBV) often causes short-term illness. But it can become chronic.
Hepatitis C
. This virus often spreads when people who have it share needles and syringes. This virus is more likely to become chronic.
Hepatitis D
. People who have hepatitis B may get hepatitis D. The hepatitis D virus (HDV) needs HBV to survive and spread.
Hepatitis E
. The hepatitis E virus (HEV) typically goes away without treatment. But you’ll need treatment if you’re pregnant. Hepatitis E in pregnancy can cause
pregnancy complications
or
liver failure
.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of viral hepatitis
Common symptoms of the different types of viral hepatitis include:
Aching
joints
Dark-colored pee
Fatigue
Feeling
sick to your stomach
Fever
Loss of appetite
Pale or clay-colored poop
Skin or white of your eyes looks yellow (
jaundice
)
Stomach pain
Viral hepatitis symptoms develop over time as the condition progresses. Healthcare providers consider your symptoms and other factors to stage viral hepatitis.
Acute viral hepatitis stages
All types of hepatitis can be acute (short-term) illnesses that go away. Acute viral hepatitis goes through four general stages:
Incubation
. You have a type of viral hepatitis, but you don’t have symptoms. Hepatitis A, B, C and D are contagious. That means you can pass the virus on to other people even though you don’t feel sick. The
incubation period
varies. On average, incubation lasts between two weeks and three months.
Prodromal
. You have general symptoms like fatigue, loss of appetite, or nausea and vomiting. This stage or phase typically lasts three to 10 days.
Icteric
. You may notice your pee is darker than usual. Your skin and the whites of your eyes turn yellow. These are jaundice symptoms. This stage lasts one to two weeks.
Recovery
. Your jaundice symptoms get better as your body overcomes the virus. The recovery stage can last two to four weeks.
Chronic viral hepatitis stages
Healthcare providers use different standards to set chronic viral hepatitis stages:
Hepatitis B
. There are four stages of hepatitis B. Providers base stages on how your
immune system
reacts to the virus.
Hepatitis C
. Chronic hepatitis C has five stages that cause fibrosis (scar tissue).
Hepatitis D
. You get hepatitis D along with hepatitis B. The viruses take turns duplicating in your body. Hepatitis D has three stages based on the virus’s activity.
Viral hepatitis causes
Viral hepatitis happens when you have exposure to any of the viruses that cause it. That can happen if you have contact with bodily fluids like blood and pee from someone who has the virus.
The most common cause for
hepatitis A
is
food poisoning
. That can happen if you eat food or drink water that contains traces of contaminated poop. You can also get it from sharing needles or having unprotected sex with someone who has the virus.
Hepatitis B
can spread through unprotected sex, sharing needles or syringes, or during childbirth, when it can pass to the newborn.
The most common way to get
hepatitis C
in the U.S. is sharing needles and syringes to inject intravenous drugs. You’re also at risk when getting a tattoo or body piercing with unsterile equipment.
You can get
hepatitis D
if you already have hepatitis B or have exposure to both viruses at the same time. Hepatitis D spreads through unprotected sex and sharing of needles.
Hepatitis E
isn’t contagious. You may have exposure to the virus by drinking water that contains traces of poop from someone with the virus, eating undercooked meat or being born to someone who has the virus.
Advertisement
Complications
Viral hepatitis can lead to more serious issues like:
Becoming a chronic disease
Cirrhosis
Liver failure
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose viral hepatitis
A healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
. They’ll ask about your symptoms. They may do
blood tests
to check for signs of specific viruses. They may also do
liver function
tests.
Management and Treatment
How is viral hepatitis treated?
Treatment varies depending on factors like the type of virus you have and your symptoms. There are treatments to manage viral hepatitis symptoms. A healthcare provider may prescribe an antiviral medication if you have hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
Treatments that manage symptoms include:
IV fluids
IV nutrition
Pain medication
Hepatitis C is the only viral hepatitis for which there’s a cure.
Recovery time
Viral hepatitis can cause acute (short-term) illness that goes away very quickly. But sometimes, it can take months for your
liver
to heal from the damage that hepatitis does. And some chronic forms of viral hepatitis never go away. Talk to your healthcare provider about recovery time in your situation.
When should I seek care?
You should seek care if you:
Know you’ve had close contact with someone who has viral hepatitis
Have symptoms that you think may mean you have viral hepatitis
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have viral hepatitis?
That depends on your situation. For example, your body can fight off hepatitis A and hepatitis E infections without medication. Medication can cure hepatitis C. But hepatitis B and hepatitis D are chronic diseases. You may need medication to keep them from getting worse.
Advertisement
What can I do to feel better?
There are many things you can do as you recover:
Avoid beverages that contain alcohol. Alcohol puts stress on your liver.
Eat well by
choosing food
that gives your liver the nutrients it needs.
Get extra rest so your body has energy to fight off or cope with viral hepatitis.
Prevention
Can viral hepatitis be prevented?
There are
vaccines that prevent viral hepatitis A and B
. You can reduce your risk of developing other types of viral hepatitis if you:
Use a
condom
during sex
Don’t share needles to take drugs
Practice good personal hygiene, like thorough
handwashing
with soap and water
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Viral hepatitis is a common condition that can have life-threatening consequences. You can prevent some viral hepatitis infections by receiving vaccinations. There aren’t vaccines for all types of viral hepatitis. But there are ways to reduce the risk you’ll get those viruses. Start by understanding how the viruses spread. Then, take steps to avoid activities that put you at risk. You may not be able to avoid some situations. Talk to a healthcare provider if there’s a chance you have viral hepatitis. They’ll recommend treatment that’s right for your situation.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Untreated hepatitis can cause liver damage or failure. Cleveland Clinic’s expert providers offer you the latest treatments and caring support.
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us