Autoimmune Pancreatitis: Symptoms, Types, Testing & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Autoimmune Pancreatitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Autoimmune Pancreatitis
Autoimmune pancreatitis is an uncommon disorder that causes your immune system to attack your pancreas. Symptoms are similar to pancreatic cancer, including abdominal pain, nausea, jaundice and weight loss. Anti-inflammatory drugs can help calm the inflammation and stop it from damaging your pancreas.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Autoimmune Pancreatitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Autoimmune Pancreatitis?
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) is a rare disorder that causes your
immune system
to attack your
pancreas
. It triggers ongoing inflammation in your pancreas (
pancreatitis
), which damages it over time. You might not feel it until it causes significant damage to your pancreas.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Autoimmune disorders
happen when your body confuses healthy cells for germs and tries to remove them. AIP can be hard to diagnose. That’s because it’s rare, the symptoms are sometimes vague and findings on imaging can mimic other conditions — particularly,
pancreatic cancer
. Fortunately, AIP often gets better quickly with the right diagnosis and treatment.
Types of autoimmune pancreatitis
There are two types of autoimmune pancreatitis. They can affect your body in different ways.
Type 1 autoimmune pancreatitis
Type 1 AIP is the most common form. This type is part of a larger autoimmune disorder called IgG4-related disease. IgG4 is an
antibody
your body produces. It normally blocks other antibodies to dampen immune responses. But if you have type 1 AIP, complexes of IgG4 and another immune cell called
plasma cells
pass through your pancreas tissue, causing swelling and scarring. It can cause inflammation and damage to many other organs besides your pancreas.
These may include your:
Bile ducts
Kidneys
Liver
Lungs
Lymphatic system
Salivary glands
Tear ducts
Thyroid
Most people only have inflammation in some of these parts. Some people only have it in their pancreases. Inflammation in any organ can cause swelling and damage. But not everyone notices any symptoms.
Advertisement
Type 1 AIP is also called:
IgG4-related AIP
: Healthcare providers will detect high levels of IgG4 antibodies in your blood.
Nonalcohol-related destructive AIP
: It affects your pancreas similarly to how alcohol use does.
Lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing pancreatitis (LPSP)
: Immune cells (
lymphocytes
and plasma cells) pass through your pancreas, causing inflammation. The inflammation eventually causes scarring (sclerosis).
Type 1 AIP is more common in
males than females
by a ratio of 3:1. It tends to develop after age 60.
Type 2 autoimmune pancreatitis
Type 2 AIP doesn’t typically involve high IgG4 levels, and it doesn’t affect other organs. But about 30% of people with type 2 also have inflammatory bowel disease. These conditions are separate but related.
Type 2 may cause repeat episodes of acute pancreatitis. These are times when inflammation increases. You might notice your symptoms more during these times. Then, they might seem to go away.
Type 2 is also called:
Idiopathic duct-centric chronic pancreatitis (IDCP)
: “Idiopathic” means it happens for unknown reasons. “Duct-centric” means the inflammation happens mostly inside your pancreatic ducts.
Granulocyte-positive epithelial pancreatitis
: Immune cells called
granulocytes
trigger the inflammation in type 2 AIP. These cells pass through the lining (
epithelium
) of your pancreatic ducts.
Type 2 AIP appears at younger ages than type 1. It’s more evenly divided between the sexes.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of autoimmune pancreatitis
Autoimmune pancreatitis may not cause symptoms until you’ve had it for a long time. The first symptom to appear is often painless jaundice (a yellow tint to your eyes and skin). Some people also have upper abdominal pain or back pain. This is because your pancreas lies between your stomach and your spine.
Other symptoms can include:
Dark-colored pee and light-colored poop
Fatigue
Indigestion
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Unexplained weight loss
You might also have symptoms in other parts of your body, depending on the type of AIP you have.
What causes autoimmune pancreatitis?
Researchers aren’t sure exactly why autoimmune diseases occur. They believe it’s a combination of things. Part of it might be in your genes. But it also involves other, more random factors (environmental factors) that put stress on your immune system. For example, a bad infection might trigger your immune system to overreact. It might get so caught up in fighting it off that it forgets how to stop.
Risk factors
Both types of autoimmune pancreatitis tend to occur more often in people who already have another autoimmune disease. Some of the most common of these include:
Hashimoto’s disease
Ulcerative colitis
Primary biliary cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Sarcoidosis
Sjögren’s syndrome
Advertisement
Complications of autoimmune pancreatitis
Inflammation that lasts a long time can damage your organs. It causes scar tissue to develop. This stops the blood flow to your organs and stops them from working. Scar tissue in your pancreas can stop it from making the hormones and enzymes your body needs. This can lead to problems with digestion and controlling your blood sugar. Eventually, it can lead to
exocrine insufficiency
and diabetes.
Other complications can include:
Biliary stricture
: The pipes that drain bile from your liver (bile ducts) run through the head of your pancreas before emptying into your intestine. Inflammation, swelling and scarring in the head of your pancreas can block the part of the bile duct that runs through your pancreas. Because bile can’t empty into your intestine, it seeps out into nearby blood vessels instead, leading to jaundice.
Pancreatic cancer
: People with chronic pancreatitis have a higher risk of developing pancreatic cancer (about 1% to 2%). You might not notice the symptoms because they’re so similar to AIP.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose autoimmune pancreatitis
It takes a lot of tests to diagnose autoimmune pancreatitis and to figure out which type you have. This is partly because many other conditions can cause the same signs and symptoms. Autoimmune pancreatitis can also look like pancreatic cancer in imaging tests (radiology). So, healthcare providers must look for evidence of AIP in many different ways. Some of these might include:
Advertisement
Blood tests
: Blood tests can check for IgG4 antibodies and markers of pancreatitis, like
elevated liver enzymes
or
elevated pancreatic enzymes
. They can also help rule out pancreatic cancer.
Imaging tests (radiology)
: An MRI or CT scan can show signs of swelling or scarring in your pancreas and other organs. A special MRI called an
MRCP
can examine your pancreatic ducts.
Biopsy
: Your provider might need to take a tissue sample from your pancreas or bile ducts to examine in a lab. They can do this through a procedure called an
endoscopic ultrasound
.
Treatment trial
: Your provider might suggest starting treatment for autoimmune pancreatitis with
corticosteroids
to see if your condition improves. If it does, it can confirm the diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for autoimmune pancreatitis?
Corticosteroids like
prednisone
or
prednisolone
treat autoimmune pancreatitis. These medications reduce inflammation and calm your overactive immune system. Treatment usually starts with a high dose of corticosteroids. You’ll gradually lower your dose as your symptoms improve. Your provider might prescribe other
immunosuppressant
medications to help you wean off corticosteroids.
If you have complications — like narrowing of your bile ducts — you might need other treatments. For example, your provider might need to place a
stent
to open your bile duct. In some cases, they may need to surgically connect the normal bile duct above your pancreas to your small intestine. This will bypass the obstruction. In other cases, they may recommend surgically removing the affected part of your pancreas. They particularly recommend this when they aren’t sure whether the abnormal imaging findings are due to AIP or cancer.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis for autoimmune pancreatitis?
Autoimmune pancreatitis usually gets better quickly with treatment. It typically takes just a few weeks of corticosteroids to notice improvement. Many people can eventually stop their medications. But sometimes, symptoms can come back after you stop treatment (relapse). This is more common with type 1 AIP. Some people may need to take corticosteroids for years. Taking them long-term can have side effects.
Your healthcare provider will adjust your treatment plan based on how you respond to it. If you experience relapses or side effects, you might need to try different medications to find a better fit.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Autoimmune pancreatitis can be a sneaky disease. You might not notice symptoms until it’s been active for years. When you do have symptoms, they might be vague and confusing. It can take time to get to the right diagnosis and finally learn what’s happening in your body. And you might be alarmed when you do. But you can take comfort in knowing AIP is very treatable, and you can expect to feel better soon.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us