Parathyroid Hormone: What It Is, Function & Normal Levels
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Parathyroid Hormone
Advertisement
Advertisement
Parathyroid Hormone
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is a hormone your parathyroid glands release to control calcium levels in your blood. It also controls phosphorus and vitamin D levels. If your body has too much or too little parathyroid hormone, it can cause symptoms related to abnormal blood calcium levels.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parathyroid Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is parathyroid hormone?
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is a
hormone
that your
parathyroid glands
make and release to control the level of
calcium in your blood
, not your bones.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Calcium is one of the most important and common minerals in your body. PTH also helps control the levels of phosphorus (a mineral) and vitamin D (a hormone) in your blood and bones.
Your hormones are chemical messengers that work hard behind the scenes to keep you healthy. And parathyroid hormone is no different. It keeps your blood calcium levels in check so your
nerves
,
muscles
and
heart
can function properly.
What is the function of parathyroid hormone?
Your parathyroid gland releases parathyroid hormone (PTH) when your body detects low calcium levels in your blood. These glands are embedded in the back of your
thyroid
.
PTH regulates calcium levels in your blood by affecting the following parts of your body:
Bones
. PTH triggers the release of small amounts of calcium from your bones into your bloodstream.
Kidneys
. PTH enables the production of active vitamin D (calcitriol) in your kidneys. PTH also signals your kidneys to keep calcium in your body rather than flushing it out through your pee.
Small intestine
. PTH signals your small intestine to absorb more calcium from the food you eat.
How does my body control parathyroid hormone levels?
Your body controls your parathyroid hormone levels by identifying how much calcium is in your blood. This is known as a feedback loop. In other words, low blood calcium levels trigger parathyroid hormone release. High blood calcium levels prevent your glands from releasing PTH.
Advertisement
But sometimes, an issue with your parathyroid glands can cause them to release too much or too little PTH, regardless of the feedback loop.
What conditions are related to parathyroid hormone issues?
When your parathyroid hormone levels are off balance, it causes certain health conditions.
High PTH levels (
hyperparathyroidism
) cause:
High blood calcium levels (
hypercalcemia
)
Low levels of phosphorous in your blood (
hypophosphatemia
)
Hyperparathyroidism has several possible causes. Some causes include
parathyroid cancer
,
parathyroid adenoma
and
kidney disease
.
Low PTH levels (
hypoparathyroidism
) cause:
Low blood calcium levels (
hypocalcemia
)
High levels of phosphorous in your blood (
hyperphosphatemia
)
Hypoparathyroidism is rare. About 3 out of 4 cases (75%) are from accidental damage to your parathyroid glands from neck or
thyroid surgery
. Certain
genetic
and
autoimmune conditions
can cause it as well.
Symptoms of abnormal PTH levels
PTH mainly controls the amount of calcium in your blood. So, the symptoms of low or high PTH levels are actually the symptoms of low or high blood calcium levels.
Low blood calcium can cause symptoms like:
Brain fog
or
confusion
Dry skin
and brittle nails
Muscle cramps
Tingling in your lips, fingers or feet
High blood calcium can cause symptoms like:
Fatigue
Headaches
Joint pain
and
bone pain
Peeing more frequently
and being thirsty
You should see your healthcare provider if you have symptoms of low or high blood calcium levels.
What test checks parathyroid hormone levels?
Your healthcare provider can check your parathyroid hormone levels with a
blood test
. Healthcare providers and laboratories call this test “PTH, intact.”
What are normal parathyroid hormone levels?
In general, the normal range for a PTH blood test is 15 to 65 picograms per milliliter (pg/mL). A picogram is one-trillionth of a gram.
Normal ranges for parathyroid hormone levels can vary from lab to lab. Always reference the lab’s normal range on your blood test report.
If you need a PTH level test, your healthcare provider will assess your result. They’ll let you know if you need further testing.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Parathyroid hormone is an important hormone that’s in charge of managing your blood calcium levels. If you’re experiencing symptoms of hypercalcemia or hypocalcemia, like issues with your muscles and mental function, it’s important to contact your healthcare provider. They can run some simple tests to see if your parathyroid hormone levels are the culprit.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic treats all parathyroid diseases, including cancer, and their side effects. We’ll create a personalized treatment plan that meets your needs.
Parathyroid Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes