Patellar Subluxation: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Patellar Subluxation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Patellar Subluxation
A patellar subluxation is the partial dislocation of your kneecap (patella). It happens when your kneecap briefly slides out of a groove in your knee. The condition can be painful and make your kneecap feel unstable. Treatment is necessary to strengthen your knee and prevent it from progressing to a complete dislocation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knee Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is a patellar subluxation?
A patellar subluxation (pronounced “suhb-luhck-SAY-shuhn”) occurs when your kneecap (
patella
) partially dislocates. It’s different from a
patella (kneecap) dislocation
, which means your kneecap has completely slid out of place.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Between your thighbone (
femur
) and shinbone (
tibia
), your patella slides up and down along a vertical groove called the trochlear groove. With a subluxated patella, it briefly pops outside of this groove. Most of the time, your kneecap will move toward the outside of your leg, but it can also slide toward the inside.
A subluxated patella can be very painful and make it uncomfortable to walk. Repeated patella subluxations increase your risk for
arthritis
,
cartilage
injury and overall instability of your knee, which can lead to other knee injuries. Even if your patella slides back into place, you should see your healthcare provider for treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a patella subluxation?
Patellar subluxation symptoms may include:
Visible deformity
Severe
knee pain
Swelling
Popping sound or sensation
Buckling or catching of your knee
Locking of your knee
Instability of your knee
Inability to squat or walk up and down stairs
Feeling of your knee “giving away”
When you have a patella subluxation, your kneecap still tracks in the groove and you can still walk, but it may feel uncomfortable or unsteady, and you may hear a popping noise as it moves.
What are the complications or long-term effects of patella subluxations?
Patella subluxations often happen repeatedly. They also frequently lead to complete dislocations. In addition, the instability of your kneecap can cause damaged cartilage. Over time, this can contribute to
knee osteoarthritis
.
Advertisement
What causes patellar subluxations?
Injuries — like a direct blow to your kneecap — are the most common cause of patella subluxations. People who participate in contact sports like football are especially prone to the condition. It can also occur when you suddenly twist your knee while your lower leg is planted to the ground.
In addition, general looseness of the ligaments and tendons in your knee joint (
patellar instability
) can often lead to a subluxated patella.
What are the risk factors for patellar subluxation?
Patellar subluxations can affect anyone, but they’re especially common in people who have weak
leg muscles
and more
tendon
laxity. They’re also common in people who are:
Between the ages of 10 to 20 years old
Physically active
Female
Athletes or participate in sports
Tall
If you’ve had a previous surgery for kneecap subluxation or dislocation, you have a higher chance of experiencing the condition again.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a patella subluxation diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will perform a
physical examination
, bending and straightening your leg and palpating (feeling) around your kneecap. They’ll ask you about your symptoms, and they’ll also want to know what occurred that led to your kneecap sliding out of place.
Your provider may perform tests on your kneecap (subluxation tests), and they may request imaging tests, including:
Knee X-ray
MRI scan
CT scan
Management and Treatment
How is a patellar subluxation treated?
Your healthcare provider may want to try conservative (nonsurgical) methods, especially if this is your first subluxation. Nonsurgical patellar subluxation treatment options include:
RICE method
. Rest, ice, compression and elevation.
NSAIDs
. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, like ibuprofen (Advil®).
Immobilization
. A
knee brace
or
cast
to keep your knee immobilized, depending on the severity of the injury.
Walking/mobility aids
.
Crutches
, a
cane
or a
walker
to keep weight off your knee, or the use of a functional knee brace, like a J-brace or patella-stabilizing sleeve.
Orthotics
. Special shoes to reduce pressure on your patella.
Physical therapy
. To help stretch and strengthen the muscles surrounding your knee and improve balance (proprioception).
If your symptoms continue for several months or you’ve had more than one patellar subluxation, your provider may recommend surgery. Surgical options include:
Lateral release
. A procedure that cuts the lateral retinaculum of your knee to improve patella positioning. It’s usually performed with other realignment procedures.
Medial patellofemoral ligament (MPFL) repair
.
A procedure to repair and strengthen the ligaments that hold your patella in place.
MPFL reconstruction
. An
arthroscopic surgery
in which the medial patellofemoral ligament of your knee is reconstructed using your
hamstring muscle
.
Osteotomy
.
A common procedure that involves cutting your tibia at certain angles for realignment of your tibia, patella, femur and connective tissues.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see your provider if you have any symptoms that might indicate a patellar subluxation. Signs to look out for include:
Pain and swelling
An inability to put weight on your leg
A popping or buckling sensation
The kneecap appears to be popping out of its groove
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your provider include:
What treatment options do you recommend?
Will I need surgery?
How likely am I to experience a recurrence?
What can I do to prevent another subluxated patella?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knee Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does it take to recover from a patella subluxation?
Recovery time for a subluxated patella depends on a few factors, including:
If this is your first or a subsequent subluxation
The severity of your condition
What kind of treatment you received
If the subluxation was your first, it was minor and you didn’t need surgery, you may see a full recovery within four to six weeks. Your healthcare provider will likely recommend physical therapy, and your
physical therapist
can help you determine a timeline.
If you’ve had more than one subluxation, major damage or needed surgery, your recovery time will take longer. You may be able to resume light activities within six to eight weeks. But it could take a year or more before you’re able to play sports.
Prevention
How can I prevent patellar subluxation?
Injuries are the most common cause of patellar subluxation, and you can’t always prevent them. But there are ways you can keep the connective tissue that surrounds your kneecap strong. You can prevent a subluxated patella by:
Advertisement
Getting physical activity that strengthens all your leg muscles
Wearing knee pads when playing contact sports
Wearing a knee brace to prevent injuring your kneecap again (if you’ve injured it before)
Following your healthcare provider’s instructions if they’ve prescribed physical therapy
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A patellar subluxation can be a debilitating condition. It’s painful and can make your kneecap feel unstable. Although you may be able to pop your patella back into place, you should still see your healthcare provider. Repeated subluxations can lead to complete dislocations over time. Your provider can help prevent that from happening. They’ll recommend treatment options that’ll strengthen your knee and get you back on your feet.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knee pain can keep you from doing the things you love. Cleveland Clinic experts can craft a treatment plan to get you back to the regular pace of your life.
Knee Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment