PUPPP Rash: Symptoms, Causes, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
PUPPP Rash
Advertisement
Advertisement
PUPPP Rash
PUPPP is an extremely irritating hive-like rash that can affect you during pregnancy. It’s harmless to both you and your baby, but it can be a pain to manage in the meantime. Your healthcare provider can recommend treatments to relieve the itching. PUPPP usually goes away on its own after your baby is born.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is PUPPP Rash?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is PUPPP Rash?
PUPPP causes an itchy hive-like rash on your belly, thighs, breasts and arms. It usually goes away once your baby is born.
PUPPP is an itchy rash that can happen during
pregnancy
. The letters PUPPP stand for “pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy.” PUPPP rash is a patch of itchy, hive-like bumps that form in the
stretch marks
on your belly. It can spread to other parts of your body, like your thighs,
breasts
and arms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
PUPPP is harmless to both you and your baby. It usually shows up late in your pregnancy and lasts from four to six weeks. It goes away within a few weeks of your baby being born. PUPPP rashes are one of the most common skin conditions during pregnancy. They appear in about 1 in every 160 pregnancies.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of PUPPP rash
PUPPP rashes look and feel a lot like
hives
. Here are some signs that you may have PUPPP:
You have scattered, itchy bumps on your belly, sometimes forming raised patches of
skin
.
The rash spreads to your thighs, butt, breasts and arms.
There’s no sign of the
rash
in the area right around your belly button.
On light skin, the bumps or patches may look pink or red.
On dark skin, the bumps or patches may be the same color as your skin or slightly darker than your skin.
The itching from your rash makes it tough to focus on daily activities and disrupts your sleep.
PUPPP rash causes
No one knows for sure what causes PUPPP, but the cause may have something to do with stretch marks. The most popular theory is that your belly gets so big so fast that your skin cells can’t keep up. That’s when you see stretch marks. Stretching damages your skin’s
connective tissue
and causes
inflammation
. This leads to a bumpy rash to form on your skin.
Advertisement
Another theory suggests that hormone changes during pregnancy cause PUPPP.
Regardless of the cause, PUPPP rash is an unpleasant annoyance when you’re
pregnant
.
Risk factors
PUPPP shows up late in pregnancy, usually around week 35 in your
third trimester
. Less commonly, PUPPP rashes appear shortly after
delivery
. Your chances of getting PUPPP increase if:
You’re white
You’re carrying a male fetus
This is your first pregnancy
You’re carrying
twins or triplets
PUPPP doesn’t usually show up during the first and
second trimesters
. If you notice an itchy rash, see your provider to rule out other skin conditions, like
contact dermatitis
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose PUPPP rash
Your provider will do a physical exam to see if you have PUPPP. If there’s a question about whether you have PUPPP or a different skin condition, your provider may order tests to be sure. Your provider may order any of the following:
Complete blood count
Liver function test
Metabolic panel
Serum cortisol test
Serum
hCG
test
If it’s tough to tell for sure whether your rash is PUPPP, your provider may order a
biopsy
to test a skin sample.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
PUPPP usually lasts for about four to six weeks. It usually goes away on its own within a few days to a few weeks after your baby is born. Scratching doesn’t spread PUPPP, but it can make the itching worse.
While you wait for your rash to disappear, medication and home remedies can help ease your symptoms.
Home remedies
Take care of your skin by:
Taking
oatmeal baths
Taking cool baths or showers
Applying fragrance-free moisturizer
Wearing lightweight cotton clothes
Using cold compresses on your bumps or rash
Medication
If home remedies don’t help, your provider can recommend medications. Keep in mind that your pregnancy care provider should approve any medications you’re taking when you’re pregnant, even over-the-counter ones. Your provider may suggest you try:
Anti-itch creams
Antihistamine
pills
C
orticosteroids
Antihistamines and corticosteroids usually ease the itching within a day or two.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your pregnancy care provider if you think you have PUPPP. They can suggest at-home treatments or medications that are safe for pregnancy. It’s best to get their approval for any medications you use during pregnancy, even over-the-counter ones.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have PUPPP rash?
PUPPP can be irritating while it lasts, but there’s a light at the end of the tunnel. PUPPP rashes go away after your baby is born. It usually doesn’t leave scars. Also, having PUPPP rash during one pregnancy means that you’re less likely to have it in future pregnancies. While you do have PUPPP, work with your provider to ease the itching. Don’t take or use medications until you talk to your pregnancy care provider.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having an itchy PUPPP rash appear right when you’re feeling the most impatient for your baby to arrive can feel agonizing. If you’re noticing signs of PUPPP, don’t wait to get relief for your symptoms. Your provider can help with your diagnosis and suggest ways to manage your itching so it doesn’t keep you up at night. PUPPP can be an annoyance, but it’s a temporary one. Most rashes go away shortly after your baby is born.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment