Angiogenesis Inhibitors in Cancer Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Angiogenesis Inhibitors
Advertisement
Advertisement
Angiogenesis Inhibitors
Angiogenesis inhibitors are medications that prevent tumors from forming blood vessels that help tumors grow. They work by interfering with angiogenesis — the process that allows new blood vessels to form from existing ones. These drugs stop tumors from growing. They’re usually taken alongside other cancer treatments. But they come with risks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What are angiogenesis inhibitors?
Angiogenesis inhibitors are medications that prevent
blood vessels
that supply
cancerous tumors
from forming. They’re also called anti-angiogenics, anti-angiogenic agents and anti-angiogenic therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Tumors
need a steady supply of nutrient-rich blood to grow and spread. When they’re small, tumors can absorb
blood
from nearby healthy tissue. But by the time a tumor reaches 1 to 2 millimeters, it needs to sprout blood vessels to “feed” and grow.
Angiogenesis inhibitors interfere with the process that tumors use to make blood vessels. They slow tumor growth and, in some cases, shrink tumors. Although this treatment can’t get rid of cancer for good, it can slow tumor growth and allow you more time with your loved ones.
How do angiogenesis inhibitors work?
These drugs block a process called
angiogenesis
. Usually, angiogenesis is part of your body’s normal healing process. In response to an injury, damaged cells release a signal, like an SOS. The signal triggers the formation of new
capillaries
out of existing blood vessels. The capillaries supply blood to the area, helping it heal.
But tumors can also use angiogenesis to grow capillaries. These new blood vessels nourish the tumor, helping it grow and spread.
Angiogenesis inhibitors disrupt the signaling process that drives angiogenesis. Most work by blocking a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Think of VEGF as the primary SOS signal that damaged cells (and tumors) release. When VEGF binds to VEGF receptors, it spurs the formation of blood vessels.
Advertisement
Depending on the specific drug, angiogenesis inhibitors disrupt signals by:
Preventing VEGF from binding to receptors.
Some drugs bind to VEGF so it can’t attach to the VEGF receptors on
cancer
cells. Bevacizumab (Avastin
®
), a type of
monoclonal antibody
, is an example.
Preventing VEGF receptors from sending signals
. Drugs called
tyrosine kinase inhibitors
block VEGF receptors from sending signals. Examples include sorafenib (Nexavar
®
) and sunitinib (Sutent
®
).
Blocking other signaling processes
. Some drugs block other signals involved in tumor angiogenesis. Examples include
immunomodulators
, like thalidomide (Synovir, Thalomid
®
) and lenalidomide (Revlimid
®
).
What conditions are treated with angiogenesis inhibitors?
Healthcare providers most often prescribe angiogenesis inhibitors to treat advanced or
recurrent cancers
. Types include some forms of:
Brain cancer
Breast cancer
Cervical cancer
Colon cancer
Fallopian tube cancer
Kidney cancer
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Lymphoma
Multiple myeloma
Pancreatic cancer
Peritoneal cancer
Stomach cancer
Thyroid cancer
Uterine (endometrial) cancer
Providers also prescribe anti-angiogenics to treat
eye diseases
that involve abnormal blood vessel growth. These drugs are also known as VEGF inhibitors. They specifically block vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Treatment Details
What happens during treatment?
Healthcare providers usually prescribe angiogenesis inhibitors alongside other
cancer treatments
, like
immunotherapy
and
chemotherapy
. The anti-angiogenics starve tumors of their blood supply. The other treatments kill the actual cancer cells.
Depending on the drug type, you may need to take a pill once or twice a day. Or you may get regular infusions through an IV.
How long will I need anti-angiogenic therapy?
Your treatment schedule will depend on the type of drug you need. Most people take anti-angiogenics until they stop working. Some people stop once the side effects become unmanageable.
Your healthcare provider will help you weigh the benefits of treatment against potential side effects.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the potential benefits of this treatment?
Angiogenesis inhibitors starve tumors of the nutrients they need to grow and spread. They can slow cancer progression so you can live longer.
How successful are angiogenesis inhibitors?
Medical experts continue to research ways to make angiogenesis inhibitors more effective. Over time, cancers often build up resistance to the drugs. This treatment can also cause unpleasant side effects.
Still, angiogenesis inhibitors may be one part of an effective treatment plan to keep cancer at bay.
What are the risks or complications of this treatment?
Many potential health risks involve issues with bleeding and blood clots. In rare cases, side effects of angiogenesis inhibitors can be life-threatening. They include:
Advertisement
High blood pressure
Internal bleeding
Slow wound healing
Gastrointestinal perforation
An
underactive thyroid gland
Toxic hepatitis
or liver damage
Serious
blood clots
(some could lead to heart problems or a stroke)
Your healthcare provider will monitor your health to reduce your risk of complications.
Recovery and Outlook
How can I take care of myself?
The most important thing you can do is understand potential side effects and risks before you start taking an angiogenesis inhibitor. Knowing what to expect can help you become more aware of your body so you know when to contact your healthcare provider. Your provider can advise you on how to manage side effects. Or they can change your dosage or medication.
Are there natural angiogenesis inhibitors?
Certain foods contain compounds that block some of the signals involved in angiogenesis. Many of these foods are a part of the
Mediterranean diet
. These natural angiogenesis inhibitors include:
Asparagus
Dandelion root
Green tea
Olive oil
Peanuts
Red wine
Red grapes
Safflower
Medical experts are studying ways to use these compounds to create new anti-angiogenic drugs. But this research is still in the early stages.
It’s important to remember that these foods aren’t a substitute for cancer drug therapies. (In other words, eating more red grapes or peanuts won’t stop tumors from growing.)
Advertisement
Still, eating nutrient-rich foods is an important part of nourishing your body. And nourishing your body is essential when it comes to cancer treatment and prevention.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you’re experiencing unexpected symptoms during treatment. Seek emergency care if you notice signs of a life-threatening complication, like a
stroke
or
heart attack
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Angiogenesis inhibitors stop tumors from hijacking your body’s natural healing process in order to make more cancer cells. This treatment can’t cure cancer, but it can slow its spread. It can help you live longer. Ask your healthcare provider about how this medicine fits into your overall treatment plan if they recommend it.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials