Baby Developmental Milestones By Month
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Baby Developmental Milestones (Infant Milestones)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Baby Developmental Milestones (Infant Milestones)
Baby milestones are things your baby does that show they’re growing and developing as expected. Examples include smiling back at you by 2 months, “cooing” by 4 months, rolling from their tummy onto their back by 6 months and looking for things they drop by 9 months. Pediatricians track your baby’s milestones at routine well-check visits.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What are baby developmental milestones?
Baby developmental milestones are things most babies can do by a certain age. From holding their head up during tummy time to reaching for toys, there’s a lot your baby might start to do that captures your attention. These special moments are signs your infant is growing and developing as expected.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
pediatrician
will track your baby’s milestones at
well-checks
. They’ll do a physical exam and interact with your baby to see how they move, play and make sounds. These routine visits are also a chance for you to bring up any concerns about your baby’s development.
Experts
updated
the infant milestone list in 2022 to reflect things that at least 3 out of every 4 babies can do. If your baby hasn’t reached certain milestones by the expected age, your pediatrician may suggest screenings to check for
developmental delays
. They’ll also talk to you about
early intervention
if they feel it’s appropriate. Early intervention provides
physical
,
occupational
and
speech
therapy.
Types of developmental milestones
Developmental milestones for babies and children fall into four main groups. There’s some overlap — not every milestone falls neatly into just one group. But knowing these groups can help you track milestones and discuss them with your pediatrician.
Social and emotional milestones
: How your baby shows emotions and engages in back-and-forth interactions (like smiling back at you or looking at you when you say their name)
Language and communication milestones
: How your baby makes sounds and uses nonverbal communication (like “cooing” or raising their arms so you’ll pick them up)
Cognitive milestones
: How your baby thinks, learns and solves problems (like putting an object in their mouth to learn about it)
Motor milestones
: How your baby moves and develops physically (like propping up onto their elbows during tummy time or pulling up to stand)
Advertisement
What are the baby milestones in order?
Your baby will go through many stages from birth to 12 months. Infant milestones are exciting to witness — and even more exciting for your baby, who’s starting to discover the world around them.
Keep in mind that these milestones are just guidelines, and you shouldn’t necessarily worry if your baby seems to need more time. Each baby is unique and develops at their own pace. Your pediatrician can tell you more if you have any concerns.
Your baby’s milestones are exciting to watch. If you notice your baby doesn’t hit a certain milestone, tell your pediatrician.
Below are lists of baby milestones by month.
2 months
Most 2-month-old babies:
Spend a few seconds looking at a specific object, like a toy
Watch your movements
Lift up their heads when they’re resting on their bellies (tummy time)
Move their arms and legs
Open up their hands for a few seconds at a time
Make noises besides crying
React if there’s a loud noise around them
Stop crying or calm down when you talk to them or pick them up
Look at your face
React happily to seeing you
Smile back if you smile or talk to them
4 months
Most 4-month-old babies:
Open their mouths when they’re hungry and see their usual source of food (breast or bottle)
Show an interest in looking at their hands
Hold their heads up on their own when you’re holding them
Hold an object you put in their hands
Swing at things (like toys) with their arms
Lift their hands to their mouth
Prop themselves up on their elbows when they’re on their tummy
Make “cooing” noises like “ooo” and “ahh”
Respond with sounds when you say something to them
Turn their heads if they hear your voice
Smile on their own
Make little chuckle sounds when you do something to make them laugh
Try to keep you focused on them by moving, making noises or looking at you
6 months
By 6 months, most babies:
Bring their lips together to show they’re done eating
Put objects in their mouths to learn more about them
Reach for toys they want
Roll from their tummies onto their backs
Prop themselves up with straight arms when they’re on their tummy
Lean on their hands for support when sitting up
Have a “conversation” with you by making sounds back and forth
Stick their tongues out to “blow raspberries”
Make squealing sounds
Recognize familiar people
Enjoy seeing themselves in a mirror
Make a full laughing sound (not just a little chuckle)
9 months
By 9 months, most babies:
Look for things they drop
Bang objects together — like hitting a spoon against a pot
Sit up by themselves
Stay in a seated position without any support
Use their fingers to move food closer
Switch objects from one hand to the other
Make sounds that involve repeated syllables like “mama-mama”
Raise their arms when they want you to pick them up
Seem shy or afraid when around strangers, possibly clinging to you
Make different facial expressions to show emotions like happiness, sadness or surprise
React to hearing their names
Cry or reach out for you if you try to leave
React to you covering your face with your hands and then removing your hands (“peek-a-boo!”) with smiles or laughs
Advertisement
12 months
Most 12-month-old babies:
Place smaller things into larger containers — like putting a toy train into a bucket
Look for objects they see you hide — like when you put their stuffed animal behind your back
Pull themselves up to a standing position by grabbing onto something near them
Walk around while holding onto steady objects, like furniture (this is commonly called “cruising”)
Use their thumbs and pointer fingers to pick up small things, like cereal
Wave when they’re leaving someone
Say “mama” or another name for a parent or caregiver
Know what “no” means
Play simple games with you
How can I keep my baby safe as they grow and develop?
Your baby’s first year is a time of discovery. As they start moving around more, they’ll also grow more curious about the things around them. Never leave your baby unattended. Make sure they’re with a responsible adult at all times while they’re awake. But even supervision isn’t enough to cover all the bases. Accidents and injuries can happen quickly if you don’t take the right precautions.
Here are some things to do — and
not
to do — to keep your infant safe.
DO:
Adjust your water heater to 120 degrees Fahrenheit (48 degrees Celsius) to avoid accidental burns
Check the bathwater temperature and learn other
safety tips for bath time
Choose toys that are strong, don’t come apart, aren’t sharp and are larger than your baby’s mouth
Gate or close off any open stairways (choose gates with straight, vertical slats rather than diamond-shaped slats, which provide footholds for climbing)
Install
smoke detectors
and carbon monoxide detectors and follow the instructions for proper use
Learn
car seat safety
(the same goes for anyone who will drive your baby)
Limit your baby’s sun exposure, and use
sun-protective clothing
(plus
sunscreen
starting at 6 months)
Make sure your baby sits (and doesn’t stand) in their
high chair
Put small objects, sharp objects, breakables and anything that could
poison
your child (medicines, cleaners, soaps) out of reach or in a locked cabinet — the number for poison control (U.S.) is 1-800-222-1222
Put your infant to sleep on their back on a firm mattress and take other steps to
lower the risk
of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
Secure cords on window blinds and drapes to prevent accidental strangulation
Advertisement
DON’T:
Drink or hold hot liquids while holding your baby
Give
water
to babies younger than 6 months
Leave your baby
alone in a car
Let your baby play in the kitchen while you’re cooking
Put a necklace, pacifier or toy around your baby’s neck
Take babies younger than 6 months into a
swimming pool
Use
infant walkers
, which are dangerous
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What are newborn milestones?
Newborn milestones are things most babies can do by one month after birth. The updated infant milestone list starts at 2 months of age. But
traditionally
, pediatricians expected newborns to do these things by 1 month of age:
Raise their hands close to their face
Move their head from side to side when they’re on their tummy
Ball up their hands into fists
Make
reflex movements
Turn toward voices or other sounds they recognize
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Infant milestones fill your heart with joy — and they probably fill up your phone with photos! But if your baby doesn’t reach a certain milestone, you might start to worry. Share any concerns with your pediatrician. They’ll track your baby’s milestones and let you know if your baby needs a little extra help along the way.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us