Cholera: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cholera
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cholera
Cholera is a disease you get from bacteria (Vibrio cholerae) in contaminated shellfish or water. It can cause mild or severe watery diarrhea that can quickly lead to life-threatening dehydration. If you’re unable to replenish fluids, cholera can be fatal. Access to clean water and toileting facilities can prevent cholera outbreaks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Cholera can cause sudden, severe diarrhea that causes you to lose fluids quickly. It can be fatal if you get dehydrated.
What is cholera?
Cholera is a
bacterial infection
in your gut that can cause severe, watery
diarrhea
. It can cause you to quickly lose
electrolytes
(important minerals that help your body work) and become dehydrated.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cholera can be fatal if left untreated. Start drinking plenty of fluids if you have diarrhea. Go to the emergency room if you have severe diarrhea, severe vomiting or signs of
dehydration
.
Cholera most often spreads in areas without access to clean water or toileting facilities. But you can also get it from eating raw shellfish. Outbreaks can happen after heavy rainfalls and natural disasters, like earthquakes and hurricanes.
Where is cholera found?
Throughout history, there’ve been cholera outbreaks in almost every part of the world. In recent years, most outbreaks have happened in:
Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
The Caribbean
How common is cholera?
About
1 million to 4 million people
around the world get cholera every year. Anywhere from 20,000 people to over 100,000 people die from it each year.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of cholera?
The main symptom of cholera is watery diarrhea. It’s usually gray and slightly cloudy with bits of mucus in it (often called “rice water stool”). Episodes of diarrhea can quickly become severe and lead to life-threatening dehydration. Other symptoms include:
Vomiting
Extreme thirst
Fatigue
Muscle cramps
or weakness
Dizziness
Peeing very little
Fast heart rate
Many people with cholera don’t have symptoms.
What causes cholera?
The
bacteria
Vibrio cholerae
(
V. cholerae
) causes cholera.
V. cholerae
live in warm, mildly salty (brackish) water. When you drink water or eat food contaminated with
V. cholerae
, the bacteria stick to the walls of your
small intestine
. There, they release toxins that cause diarrhea.
Advertisement
How do you get cholera?
You can get cholera from:
Eating raw shellfish
Drinking water contaminated with poop (feces) containing
V. cholerae
Eating food prepared with water containing
V. cholerae
Can cholera spread from person to person?
Cholera spreads from person to person indirectly (it doesn’t spread through casual contact, coughing or sneezing, like many contagious diseases). In areas without running water or ways to sanitize water, infected poop can contaminate water. When people drink the water, use it to prepare food or use it to wash their hands, the infection spreads.
What are the risk factors for cholera?
Outbreaks of cholera are more likely to happen in areas without running water, toileting facilities or ways to sanitize drinking and cooking water. They can also happen in areas affected by a natural disaster (like an earthquake or flood).
While anyone who ingests
V. cholerae
can get infected, some people are at higher risk. You might be at increased risk for cholera if you:
Are
female
Have
type O blood
Have low stomach acid, or
hypochlorhydria
(for example, if you take
antacids
or
proton pump inhibitors
)
Have had a
gastrectomy
Have an
H. pylori
infection
What are the complications of cholera?
Cholera is dangerous because of the risk of dehydration and
losing electrolytes
. This can cause complications that can quickly be fatal, including:
Hypovolemic shock
Heart rhythm issues
Organ failure
Diagnosis and Tests
How is cholera diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose cholera by testing a
stool (poop) sample
for
V. cholerae.
Your provider may also get
blood tests
done.
Management and Treatment
How is cholera treated?
Treatment for cholera includes drinking plenty of fluids or getting
intravenous fluids
to prevent dehydration. Healthcare providers also sometimes prescribe
antibiotics
like doxycycline, erythromycin or azithromycin to help you feel better.
Providers also treat kids between the ages of 6 months and 5 years with zinc supplements.
Antidiarrheal medicines aren’t recommended for cholera and could make symptoms worse.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What happens if you get cholera?
If you have cholera — or any illness that causes diarrhea or vomiting — it’s critical that you drink plenty of fluids before you get dehydrated. Water, broth and oral rehydration solutions (like Pedialyte® or Ceralyte®) are the best choices to keep you hydrated. Avoid sports drinks, fruit juices and soda — the high sugar content can make diarrhea worse. You should also avoid anti-diarrheal medications.
When should I go to the ER?
Diarrhea can quickly dehydrate you. If you have severe bouts of diarrhea or vomiting, don’t hesitate to go to the emergency room or seek emergency medical attention. Call 911 or get to the ER right away if you’ve had diarrhea or vomiting and experience:
Advertisement
Muscle cramps
Extreme thirst
Peeing very little or not peeing at all
Dizziness
Weakness
Fast heart rate
Confusion
or altered mental state
Can cholera go away on its own?
Yes, you can recover from cholera without antibiotics. But you do need to manage the symptoms by getting plenty of fluids and replacing electrolytes to avoid getting severely ill.
What’s the mortality rate for cholera?
With treatment — managing fluids to prevent dehydration —
the mortality (death) rate of cholera is less than 1%
. Without treatment, it’s over 50%.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It might be helpful to ask your provider:
What’s the best way to stay hydrated?
What should I do if I think I’m getting dehydrated?
How can I prevent spreading cholera?
Prevention
Can cholera be prevented?
Drinking water that’s been sanitized and washing your hands with clean water and soap are the best ways to reduce your risk of cholera. Drink and cook with bottled water if you’re unsure whether the water where you are is safe to consume.
If you live in or are traveling to a place where you’ll be at higher risk for cholera, there are oral vaccines available. They can help reduce your risk of getting sick, but don't eliminate your risk entirely.
On a larger scale, the best way to prevent cholera is for people to have access to clean drinking water and toilet facilities. This requires global humanitarian and public health efforts.
Advertisement
Living With
How can I protect myself if I plan to be in an area with cholera?
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has a website where travelers can check for outbreaks of cholera and other diseases. (Visit their
Travel Health Notices
website.)
If you live in an area with cholera or plan to travel to one, make sure you’re careful about the water you drink. Wash your hands and prepare food carefully. The following supplies might help:
Bottled water
Chlorine tablets
Household bleach
Iodine tablets
Prepackaged foods
If you have severe diarrhea from cholera or another cause, contact a healthcare provider immediately. You must replace fluids and electrolytes to avoid dehydration. This complication can cause serious health problems and even death.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have severe diarrhea from cholera or another cause, contact a healthcare provider immediately. You must replace fluids and electrolytes to avoid dehydration. This complication can cause serious health problems and even death. While you might not hear about it often, cholera is still a major health concern worldwide. There are coordinated public health efforts to reduce cholera outbreaks and deaths in the most impacted regions.
You can take care of yourself and others by getting vaccinated if you’re traveling to areas where cholera is widespread. Treat diarrhea right away by drinking plenty of water, broth or oral rehydration solutions. And don’t hesitate to get emergency help if you’re not sure if you can stay hydrated.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/25/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment