Cancer Cachexia: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cancer Cachexia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cancer Cachexia
Cancer cachexia is when cancer affects your appetite, so you lose skeletal muscle and fat. In cancer cachexia, you don’t eat enough food to meet your body’s energy needs. Symptoms include significant weight loss, weakness and fatigue. It can be a life-threatening condition. Treatment focuses on nutrition, like eating small meals with lots of protein.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
What is cancer cachexia?
Cancer cachexia is a type of
cachexia
(wasting syndrome). It’s a common complication of
cancer
that causes you to lose significant amounts of
skeletal muscle
and
body fat
. That weight loss can change your appearance, resulting in feeling self-conscious. Cancer cachexia can affect your quality of life and may affect your ability to receive cancer treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Experts estimate cancer cachexia affects 50% of people with cancer and 75% of people with advanced (Stage IV) cancer and is responsible for 25% of cancer deaths. Cachexia can be present in all types of cancer. But it’s most common in people with the following kinds of cancer:
Colorectal (colon) cancer
.
Lung cancer
.
Melanoma
.
Pancreatic cancer
.
Healthcare providers can’t
cure
cancer cachexia. But treatment focuses on boosting the amount of food that you eat, with special emphasis on high-protein, high-calorie foods.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of cancer cachexia
The most significant symptom of cancer cachexia is losing more than 10% of your total body weight, including muscle mass and fat, over the past six to 12 months. Other symptoms may include:
Fatigue
and weakness
: Cancer cachexia can make you feel like you don’t have the strength to work, take care of your family or take care of yourself.
Muscle loss
: Healthcare providers may call this muscle wasting or
muscle atrophy
.
Anorexia
: In anorexia, you don’t feel hungry and lose interest in eating at all. Anorexia in cancer cachexia is different from the eating disorder
anorexia nervosa
.
Anemia
: You may develop anemia because your body reacts to
inflammation
by releasing a protein that affects red blood cell production.
Frequent infections
: Cancer cachexia may affect your
immune system
so your body can’t fight off infections.
Advertisement
What causes cancer cachexia?
Cancer makes your
metabolism
speed up so your body needs more of the energy that food provides. At the same time, cancer and cancer treatment can affect your appetite. The result is that you’re eating much less food at the same time your body needs more nutrition. Specific issues that lead to cancer cachexia include:
Certain
cytokines
: Cytokines are chemicals that manage how and when your immune system reacts to intruders like
viruses
. In cancer cachexia, your immune system releases specific cytokines that cause inflammation that speed up how much fat and muscle you lose. The rush of cytokines adds to the inflammation that
cancerous tumors
cause.
Cancer symptoms and side effects:
Cancer can cause pain, nausea and vomiting, so you eat less. Having cancer may make you feel depressed, which can affect your appetite.
Cancer treatment side effects
: Surgery and treatments like
radiation and chemotherapy
, and
opioids
can cause difficulty swallowing, or keep your body from absorbing nutrients.
Insulin resistance
: Insulin resistance is when your muscles and fat don’t react to insulin as they should. Insulin resistance in cachexia may increase muscle loss.
Increased protein turnover
: Protein turnover refers to the way older proteins in your cells are replaced with new proteins. This happens through protein degradation (breaking down proteins). In cancer cachexia, proteins in your cells break down too quickly to be replaced with new proteins. This leads to muscle loss.
Complications of cancer cachexia
The condition can be life-threatening: It’s the primary cause of death in 20% to 25% of people with
metastatic
solid tumors, like tumors in your lungs or prostate that are spreading to other areas of your body. Other potential complications include:
Impact on cancer treatment
: Your body needs muscle and fat to recover from cancer treatment. Losing fat and muscle can affect your ability to receive cancer treatment.
Mental health issues
: A cancer cachexia diagnosis may mean you only have a few months to live. That knowledge may make you feel anxious and depressed.
Impact on family and friends
: Cancer cachexia can put pressure on your relationships with family and friends. Just like it may be hard for you to see the changes in your body, the people who care for you may become increasingly concerned about your health. Studies show family members often react to loved ones’ cancer cachexia symptoms by urging them to eat, which can create conflict and add to an already stressful situation.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose cancer cachexia?
Your
oncologist
and/or
palliative care
provider will do a
physical examination
. They may ask you to complete a questionnaire about your eating habits and do tests to evaluate your overall fitness and muscle strength.
Advertisement
They may order imaging tests like a computed tomography (
CT
) scan or a dual X-ray absorptiometry (
DXA
) scan. This test measures the amount of lean tissue in your arms and legs and is a way your oncologist can estimate your muscle mass. Test results will help your oncologist establish the condition stage.
Stages of cancer cachexia
There are three cancer cachexia stages:
Pre-cachexia
: In this stage, you’re losing weight even though you’re eating well. Your weight loss over the past six to 12 months is less than 5% of your overall weight. If you have
obesity
, your weight loss may not be as noticeable, but tests show metabolic changes that indicate you’re losing muscle along with fat.
Cachexia
: You’ve lost more than 5% of your body weight in the past six to 12 months, or you’ve lost more than 2% of your body weight and your body mass index (
BMI
) is less than 20kg/m. Tests may show signs of muscle loss and inflammation.
Refractory cachexia
: You’ve lost more than 20% of your usual weight and your BMI is less than 27 kg/m. Your weight loss causes a drastic change in your appearance and you may not be strong enough for cancer treatment. In some cases, cancer treatment stops working.
Management and Treatment
What are treatments for cancer cachexia?
Your treatment will focus on ways to improve nutrition. For example, your oncology and palliative care teams may recommend that you:
Advertisement
Eat well
: Focus on having frequent small meals and snacks that involve foods that are high in calories, fat and protein. You get more calories by eating small amounts of food. Ask your nutritionist to recommend food choices that help you get the most benefit out of every bite you take.
Try supplements
: Ask your oncologist or nutritionist to suggest nutritional supplements that you can drink or eat in between meals.
Get some exercise
: Light exercise may slow down muscle loss.
Lean on your team
: Your palliative care team can help you with issues like mental health and spiritual support.
Are there medications to treat cachexia?
Not at the moment. While research shows the drug megestrol acetate may improve your appetite so you eat more and gain weight, the drug doesn’t have U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for cancer cachexia treatment. In some situations, your provider may prescribe
corticosteroids
that you’ll take for a short period of time.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have cancer cachexia?
That depends on your situation, including the cachexia stage and
cancer stage
. For example, if you have pre-cachexia, changes in what you eat may slow down how much fat and muscle you lose. Unfortunately, increasing how much you eat can’t stop the loss or restore the muscle and fat you’ve lost.
Advertisement
If you have advanced cancer, cachexia or refractory cachexia, your oncologist may tell you that
end of life
is near. If you’re receiving treatment for cachexia, your healthcare team is your best resource for information about what you can expect.
What is the life expectancy for someone with cancer cachexia?
Life expectancy will vary. While cancer cachexia typically affects people with advanced cancer, you can develop pre-cachexia symptoms at any cancer stage. In that case, you may live for years with cancer and complications like cachexia. But research suggests that having refractory cancer cachexia reduces cancer survival rates by 30%.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Cancer cachexia happens because the disease makes your metabolism use up energy from food faster than normal. At the same time, cancer and cancer treatment can make it hard for you to eat as much as you should. Because of this, you lose significant weight and muscle mass, which can affect your appearance (and your self-esteem), your energy and your quality of life.
While there aren’t medical treatments for cancer cachexia, there are steps you can take to ease its symptoms. If this is your situation, ask your oncology team for help. They understand the challenges that come with living with cancer cachexia and will do everything that they can to help you manage those challenges.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/30/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials