Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
ARVC
Advertisement
Advertisement
ARVC
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), a rare condition, carries a high risk of abnormal heart rhythms that can be fatal. Most people with this disorder have a genetic variation. Early diagnosis and treatment is best so your healthcare provider can help you avoid irregular heart rhythms with medicines and procedures.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is ARVC?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is ARVC?
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy
(ARVC) is a rare genetic condition that affects your heart. Fat and/or fibrous (scar) tissue replaces damaged heart muscle in your right ventricle. That heart chamber stretches out, becomes thin and contracts poorly. As a result, your heart can’t pump blood as well. This makes it hard to breathe and may make you faint or feel your heart flutter.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The fat or fibrous tissues can get in the way of heartbeat signals and cause abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmias
). This can increase your risk of sudden cardiac arrest or death. You may need medications or a procedure to help you avoid these.
ARVC has other names, like arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD) or right ventricular dysplasia. Because it can affect your left ventricle as well, it’s often called arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM).
ARVC occurs in about 1 in 2,000 to
1 in 5,000
people. It often runs in families, but can happen with no family history of it.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of ARVC
You may not have arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy symptoms early on. Symptoms may start before age 40 or as early as your teens. But there’s still a risk of
sudden cardiac death
, and it can be the first sign of ARVC. This is because many people with ARVC have irregular heart rhythms that start in their ventricles (
ventricular arrhythmias
).
ARVC symptoms may include:
Supraventricular arrhythmias
, most often atrial fibrillation
Heart palpitations
, or fluttering in your chest
Dizziness, lightheadedness or fainting
Fatigue
Chest pain
Shortness of breath
Swelling in your legs, ankles, feet or belly
Heart failure
Advertisement
ARVC causes
A
genetic variant
often causes arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Experts have found at least 13 genes with variants that cause this condition.
These abnormal genes harm proteins that help heart muscle cells connect to each other and communicate. Because of this, heart muscle cells in your right ventricle can separate and die. This can happen more often during times of stress or exertion.
A family history of ARVC is present in up to 1 out of 2 cases. Because of this, a healthcare provider should check all first- and second-degree family members (parents, siblings, children, grandchildren, uncles, aunts, nephews and nieces) of someone who has ARVC. Relatives who are teens or older should see a provider even if they don’t have symptoms.
You can inherit arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy in these ways:
Autosomal dominant
:
One parent has a genetic variant. Their children have a 50% chance of inheriting the condition. But the symptoms and age of onset can differ between family members.
Autosomal recessive
:
With this less common pattern, both parents have the genetic variant, but no symptoms. One form, Naxos disease, may cause thick skin on the palms of your hands and soles of your feet, and thick, “wool-like” hair.
Risk factors
Healthcare providers usually see arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy in teens or young adults. They typically diagnose ARVC in people between age 20 and 40.
This condition is the reason some young athletes have sudden cardiac arrest. ARVC happens more often in
males
.
How to lower your risk
Getting screened early for ARVC is the best way to reduce your risk if a relative has the condition. Noninvasive tests can tell you if you’re at risk of abnormal heart rhythms. If you’re at risk, your healthcare provider can work with you to make a treatment plan.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose ARVC
Your healthcare provider can diagnose arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy based on your medical history, physical exam and tests.
They look for a mix of certain issues that make up the ARVC diagnostic criteria:
Abnormal right ventricle function (echocardiogram, MRI)
Fatty or fibrous-fatty tissue in your right ventricle heart muscle (MRI)
Abnormal
electrocardiogram
(ECG/EKG)
Certain arrhythmias, especially with exertion
Family history of ARVC
Depending on how many of these you have, your provider may make a definite, borderline or possible diagnosis. Your provider may recommend genetic testing if your family is at risk.
Healthcare providers prefer a heart MRI for diagnosis. Other tests to diagnose arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy include:
Advertisement
Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG)
Echocardiogram
Heart monitor
Cardiac computed tomography
(CT)
Stress test
Electrophysiology testing
Tissue sample (biopsy)
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy doesn’t have a cure. But your healthcare provider will work to manage your arrhythmias and heart failure. They’ll also help you prevent
blood clots
.
You may need more than one type of treatment for this condition during your lifetime. ARVC treatments include these medicines and procedures:
Antiarrhythmic drugs
: These prevent sustained ventricular arrhythmias and/or sudden death.
Blood pressure medicines
: These include diuretics or beta-blockers that ease your heart’s workload.
Anticoagulants
: Medicines like warfarin (Coumadin® or Jantoven®) can prevent blood clots.
Catheter ablation
: This procedure is for frequent arrhythmias that don’t get better with medication.
Cardioversion
: This procedure returns your heart to a normal rhythm.
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator
(ICD)
: This device is for people at risk for sudden death.
Heart transplant
: A donated heart is an option if other treatments don’t work. People with this condition rarely need new hearts.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have ARVC, you’ll need regular appointments for the rest of your life. Going to follow-up visits will help your healthcare provider catch any issues that develop with your condition. Your provider will want to make sure you’re getting the right treatment and the right doses of medicine. They’ll also need to check your ICD regularly if you have one.
Advertisement
Questions to ask your provider may include:
Can I be physically active or take part in sports? If so, which sports?
What’s the best treatment for me?
Do I need an ICD at this time?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have ARVC?
ARVC life expectancy varies, depending on when you get a diagnosis. It’s best to get a diagnosis at an early age and get the treatment that prevents irregular heart rhythms. The condition gets worse with time. It may progress faster with physical activity that involves high intensity or endurance.
Without treatment for arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy, your right ventricle can fail. Then, your left ventricle can fail later. This can lead to heart failure and atrial fibrillation. Your outlook may be worse when this condition affects both ventricles.
With treatment, you can get the help you need to lessen the burden on your heart and prevent dangerous heart rhythms.
Today, the long-term outlook for people with ARVC is good. This is because of advanced imaging like CT and MRI that allow for an earlier diagnosis and treatment.
But sudden death can happen to people who don’t know they have this condition or aren’t getting the treatment they need. ARVC is second on the list of most common causes of sudden cardiac death in people
younger than 35
.
Advertisement
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
To make things easier on your heart, you can make some changes in how you live. Things you can do include:
Limiting how much alcohol you drink
Avoiding tobacco products
Eating nutritious foods
Limiting how much caffeine you eat and drink
Staying at a weight that’s normal for you
Taking your medications as prescribed
Limiting strenuous physical activity to 30 minutes a day
Because exertion makes ARVC worse, check with your healthcare provider before physical activity. You shouldn’t take part in competitive sports, except possibly low-intensity ones.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having heart rhythm issues is a scary thing, especially if you’re young and active. But your healthcare team is there to treat ARVC and help keep it from progressing. It may be hard to let go of your identity as an athlete, but your care team can guide you on how much physical activity is safe.
You’ll have the best outlook when you get treatment early, before this condition progresses. It may give you peace of mind if the people who live with you get CPR training. That way, they’ll know what to do if you need help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic offers personalized diagnosis and the latest treatments for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment