Melatonin: What It Is, What It Does & How It Works
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Melatonin
Advertisement
Advertisement
Melatonin
Melatonin is a natural hormone that’s mainly produced by your pineal gland in your brain. It plays a role in managing your sleep-wake cycle and circadian rhythm. Scientists still have a lot to learn about all of its effects on the human body. Synthetic melatonin supplements aren’t approved to treat or manage any conditions or symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sleep Disorders Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Function
Conditions and Disorders
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Melatonin is best known for its role in your sleep-wake cycle, but it also has other health benefits.
What is melatonin?
Melatonin is a
hormone
that’s an important part of your ability to sleep. The
pineal gland
produces it. Natural melatonin your body makes is also known as endogenous melatonin. It helps regulate your body’s natural sleep-wake cycle, which makes you feel tired at the end of the day and wake up after resting.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Melatonin can also be made synthetically in a lab and sold as a dietary
supplement
. It’s called exogenous melatonin.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sleep Disorders Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Function
What does melatonin do?
Melatonin helps control your
circadian rhythm
. This is your sleep-wake cycle that happens automatically about every 24 hours.
Melatonin helps your body get ready to fall asleep. It’s not a magic potion that makes you sleepy, but it’s an important chemical change in your body that happens each day.
Your pineal gland releases the most melatonin when there’s darkness and decreases melatonin production when you’re exposed to light. In other words, you have high melatonin levels at night when you’re sleeping and less in your
blood
during the daylight hours.
The longer the night, the longer your pineal gland secretes melatonin. That’s why some people feel sleepy earlier or more often in winter months. In winter, there’s less sunlight in the day and it stays dark longer, so your body naturally releases more melatonin in response.
How does melatonin work?
Melatonin is a chemical messenger that tells your body it’s time to relax and get ready to rest. Your pineal gland automatically releases extra melatonin around the same time every day. This usually happens when the sun goes down.
Melatonin affects cells in your brain’s
hypothalamus
. It tells your hypothalamus it’s time to slow activity down for the day. Once it gets the message, your hypothalamus dials back the functions it controls — like your body temperature, blood pressure and mood — to get you ready for sleep.
Advertisement
In your
eyes
, melatonin changes your
retinas
to get ready for rest and being less active. Melatonin helps your retinas become less responsive to light, which helps you wind down and feel less alert. When there’s more natural light the next morning, your retinas automatically become more active and your body stops releasing as much melatonin.
What are the benefits of melatonin?
Melatonin plays an important role in making sure you get enough sleep. Your body needs that natural, chemical reminder to feel tired each night. Getting enough
sleep
is important for every part of your health and body, including your:
Hair
Internal organs
Mental and emotional health
Skin
Melatonin’s biggest job is regulating your sleep-wake cycle. But it works in other areas of your body, too:
Melatonin helps maintain regular
menstrual cycles
.
Melatonin can also protect your brain health and prevent brain cells from breaking down. This breakdown can lead to
dementia
(including
Alzheimer
’
s disease
) and conditions like
Parkinson
’
s disease
.
One study
found that surgically removing the pineal gland caused people to age faster than usual. Because of this, some scientists think natural melatonin may have anti-aging properties.
What are normal melatonin levels?
Your natural melatonin level can vary depending on your age and
sex recorded at birth
. Females typically have higher melatonin levels than males.
The level of melatonin your body produces changes throughout your life.
Newborn babies don’t produce their own melatonin. Before birth, they receive melatonin from the
placenta
. After birth, they can receive it through
breast milk
or formula. Babies develop a melatonin cycle when they’re 3 to 4 months old.
Melatonin levels are highest in kids and teens right before starting
puberty
. After puberty, there’s a steady decrease in melatonin levels until it evens out in your late teens. The level is stable until around age 40, followed by a natural decline for the rest of your life.
You may never know your melatonin level if you don’t experience any symptoms or need tests to measure it. If you do need a melatonin test, your healthcare provider will let you know if your levels are within normal ranges.
Conditions and Disorders
Which conditions are related to melatonin issues?
The two main conditions that involve melatonin issues are hypomelatoninemia (lower-than-usual levels of melatonin) and hypermelatoninemia (higher-than-usual levels of melatonin).
Hypomelatoninemia
Hypomelatoninemia happens when you have lower-than-normal nighttime melatonin levels. It can also happen if your body produces a total amount of melatonin that’s less than expected for your age.
Hypomelatoninemia can play a role in
circadian rhythm sleep disorders
. These
sleep disorders
disrupt your natural sleep-wake cycle. These can affect:
Advertisement
When you fall asleep and wake up
How well you sleep
How you feel and function while you’re awake
Hypermelatoninemia
Hypermelatoninemia is when there’s too much melatonin in your blood. Taking too much synthetic melatonin from supplements is the most common cause. It can also happen if your pineal gland produces excess melatonin (but this is rare).
Having hypermelatoninemia can increase your risk of some health conditions, including:
Anorexia nervosa
(and other
eating disorders
)
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
(when your body doesn’t produce enough
estrogen
or
testosterone
due to an issue with your
pituitary gland
or hypothalamus)
Polycystic ovary syndrome
(a hormone imbalance that causes
irregular periods
and potentially
infertility
)
Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome
(a rare genetic condition that causes severe
insulin resistance
and
high blood sugar
)
Spontaneous hypothermia hyperhidrosis
(a sudden, unexpected case of
hypothermia
and
excess sweating
)
Additional Common Questions
Should I take melatonin as a supplement?
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) doesn’t regulate supplements. Researchers are studying the potential benefits of synthetic melatonin.
It’s important to know that a melatonin supplement isn’t a “magic pill” that can solve sleep issues. It’s not FDA-approved to treat health conditions, manage symptoms or give any proven health benefits.
Advertisement
It’s always a good idea to see a healthcare provider before starting any new supplements, especially if you’re taking other medications. Talk to a provider about any sleep issues you’re experiencing. They’ll help you figure out what’s causing them and how you can get good, refreshing rest.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Melatonin is an important part of your daily routine, even if you don’t know it. It helps your body get ready to sleep at night and wake you up in the morning. If something throws your melatonin out of whack, you might notice symptoms of a sleep disorder. Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re having trouble sleeping (or waking up).
Synthetic melatonin supplements are available over the counter, but they’re not guaranteed to help your health. Talk to your provider before starting a new supplement. They’ll help you make the best choices for you and your health.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you can’t fall or stay asleep or drift off during the day, you want answers. Cleveland Clinic’s sleep disorders experts can help you get them.
Sleep Disorders Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment