Gorlin Syndrome (Nevoid BCC Syndrome)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Gorlin Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Gorlin Syndrome
Gorlin syndrome (nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome) is a rare genetic disorder that increases your risk of a type of skin cancer called basal cell carcinoma. It also can cause benign growths. Taking extra care to prevent skin cancer is essential if you have this condition. You’ll need regular screenings to catch cancer early, when it’s curable.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Cancer Genetic Counseling and Testing
Find a Genetic Counselor
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is Gorlin syndrome?
Gorlin syndrome — also called basal cell nevus syndrome, nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) and Gorlin-Goltz syndrome — is a rare
genetic disorder
that increases your risk of developing
cancerous
and
benign (noncancerous) tumors
. With this condition, a harmful change (mutation) in one of your genes makes you especially likely to develop
basal cell carcinoma
. This is the most common type of skin cancer.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There’s no
cure
for Gorlin syndrome. But with careful monitoring to diagnose and treat cancer in the early
stages
, a person living with this condition can live as long as someone without it. Gorlin syndrome doesn’t have to impact your lifespan or your quality of life.
How common is Gorlin syndrome?
Gorlin syndrome is rare. Experts estimate fewer than
50,000
people in the United States have NBCCS. Still, the actual number may be higher. That’s because people with mild symptoms may not know that they have the condition. Most people develop symptoms in their teens or early adulthood.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of Gorlin syndrome?
Signs of Gorlin syndrome vary. The most common ones include:
Several basal cell carcinomas
.
Skin cancer
usually appears in sun-exposed areas (like your face or neck). With nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, it usually occurs during adolescence or early adulthood.
Odontogenic keratocysts
. A type of benign
cyst in your jawbone
, these painless growths are commonly diagnosed in children and young adults with NBCCS.
Pits or small indentations in the soles of your feet or palms of your hands
. The pitting most commonly appears in your 20s and is permanent.
Changes to your skeleton
. There may be differences in the way your rib and spine bones are made.
Advertisement
Less commonly, signs and symptoms of Gorlin syndrome include:
Brain tumors
, including
medulloblastoma
(cancerous) and
meningioma
(usually benign)
Fibromas
in your heart or
ovaries
, which are noncancerous (and typically harmless) tumors
Eye problems
, including crossed eyes (
strabismus
), rapid eye movements (
nystagmus
) and
cataracts
Severe bone changes
, like an incompletely formed spine (
spina bifida
)
Atypical facial features
, like wideset eyes (
hypertelorism
), a
congenital anomaly
causing a separation in your upper lip and roof of your mouth (
cleft lip/palate
) and tiny, white bumps on your face (
milia
)
An enlarged head (
macrocephaly
)
Intellectual disabilities
Seizures
What causes Gorlin syndrome?
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome occurs because of a
mutation
in one of three genes that are supposed to stop
tumors
from forming —
PTCH1
(most common),
PTCH2
or
SUFU
. They’re called
tumor suppressor genes
. Certain cells grow abnormally if these genes aren’t working as they should. This is what causes symptoms like tumor growth. Most people inherit the mutation from a biological parent. But in some cases, people develop a mutation that arises spontaneously before birth.
People who inherit the mutation for NBCCS do so in an
autosomal dominant pattern
. This means you inherit one normal copy of a gene from one parent and one mutated gene from the other parent. You only need one copy of the
PTCH
or
SUFU
gene mutations to have Gorlin syndrome.
Scientists propose that people with Gorlin syndrome don’t develop
cancer
unless the normal copy of tumor suppressor gene also changes. For example, sun damage can cause a mutation in the normal gene. When this happens, neither gene works properly to prevent tumors from forming. This can lead to skin cancer. With NBCCS, damage to other cells in your body that already have one copy of the mutation can lead to other cancers.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Gorlin syndrome diagnosed?
To diagnose Gorlin syndrome, your healthcare provider will check for signs of the condition. This may include:
A
physical exam
to look for skin cancer
Imaging tests
to check for jaw cysts, fibromas or musculoskeletal issues
A
biopsy
to test tissue samples for cancer cells
A
genetic test
to see if you have a mutation associated with NBCCS
Management and Treatment
How is Gorlin syndrome treated?
While there isn’t a treatment for Gorlin syndrome itself, you may need treatment if you develop cancer or other growths that cause issues. For example, you may need surgery to remove skin cancer or a jaw cyst. You may need other
cancer treatments
, like topical creams or
photodynamic therapy
, to destroy cancer cells.
Because of your increased cancer risk, your healthcare provider may recommend applying strong/complete sunblock and wearing long sleeves and hats when you’re in the sun. Also, your providers will only do
X-rays
sparingly. Generally speaking, cancer specialists (
oncologists
) avoid
radiation therapy
altogether as a cancer treatment if you have Gorlin syndrome. The radiation can increase your cancer risk.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Cancer Genetic Counseling and Testing
Find a Genetic Counselor
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook if I have NBCCS?
Most people with nevoid basal cell carcinoma manage it by taking steps to prevent skin cancer and getting regular checkups. Following your healthcare provider’s recommendations about how often you need
cancer screenings
can help catch any issues early. People with Gorlin syndrome have the same life expectancy (and can have the same quality of life) as those without it.
Also, it’s important to remember that not everyone with NBCCS develops cancer or has issues. It varies from person to person. Your provider can advise you on your
prognosis
based on your symptoms.
Prevention
Can I prevent Gorlin syndrome?
There’s no way to control the
genes
you’re born with, which means you can’t prevent Gorlin syndrome. But you can reduce your cancer risk by taking steps to avoid skin cancer. You can see your healthcare provider regularly to catch cancer in the early stages when it’s curable.
Speak to a
genetic counselor
if you have Gorlin syndrome (or if it runs in the family) and you’re worried about passing it on to a child. They can help you understand potential risks if you and your partner plan to conceive.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
If you have Gorlin syndrome, you should take special precautions to
prevent skin cancer
, like:
Avoiding tanning beds
Staying inside when the sun’s rays are strongest (between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.)
Wearing a broad-spectrum sunscreen with at least 30 SPF daily and reapplying regularly
Covering your skin with UV-protective clothing and wearing a wide-brimmed hat when you’re outside
Advertisement
You’ll also need to see various healthcare providers to screen for cancers and other conditions. The frequency of your visits depends on whether they find growths or other abnormalities. Visits may involve:
Skin checks with a
dermatologist
Dental exams and imaging tests to check for jaw cysts
Imaging tests to check for fibromas, brain tumors or
vision
issues
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you suspect that you or your child has basal cell carcinoma — the most common sign of Gorlin syndrome. Like other types of skin cancer, be on the lookout for new lumps or bumps that don’t fade or grow bigger.
Most cases of skin cancer aren’t related to Gorlin syndrome. Still, no matter the cause, it’s important to get checked.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you’re diagnosed with Gorlin syndrome, you may want to ask your provider:
What are the signs of cancer that I should know about?
How often will I need cancer screenings?
What can I do to reduce my cancer risk?
Will I need treatment for benign growths?
What are the chances that I’ll have a child with Gorlin syndrome?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Gorlin syndrome poses challenges that people without the condition don’t have to experience. If you have NBCCS, you and your healthcare providers will have to be extra vigilant to diagnose and treat any basal cell carcinomas that arise.
Advertisement
But the good news is that early treatment can cure basal cell carcinomas. And benign growths usually don’t cause issues. If they do, a healthcare provider can remove them or recommend other treatments. You can live a long and full life with Gorlin syndrome.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic offers the latest cancer genetic counseling and testing to help you understand your cancer risk and make the most of your health.
Schedule Cancer Genetic Counseling and Testing
Find a Genetic Counselor
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials