Urinary Catheter: Purpose, Types, Placement & Complications
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Urinary Catheter
Advertisement
Advertisement
Urinary Catheter
Urinary catheters are medical devices that drain urine from your bladder if you have a condition that makes it difficult or impossible to urinate. There are many different types. You may only have to use one periodically throughout the day, or it may remain in your bladder for a longer period.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Many types of urinary catheters enter through your urethra and travel up to your bladder to drain urine.
What is a catheter and what is it used for?
A urinary catheter is a thin, flexible, rubber or plastic tube. It drains urine (pee) from your
urinary bladder
when you can’t pee on your own. They come in different sizes and shapes, so anyone can use them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What are the parts of a urinary catheter?
The parts of a urinary catheter may include:
Insertion tip
. This is the narrow end of a catheter that usually enters your
urethra
to reach your bladder. The tip may be softer and straight or slightly more rigid with a small curve (coudé tip). A curved tip helps move through blockages or narrow areas in your urethra.
Drainage holes
. These are tiny holes in the tube near the insertion tip that make it easier to drain your pee.
Tubing
. The tubing may be a basic, hollow tube, or it may have two or three separate pathways (channels). The largest channel allows pee to drain from your bladder. Healthcare providers use the others as access pathways to your bladder.
Balloon
. A balloon attaches to the insertion tip. Once the insertion tip reaches your bladder, a provider will use an access pathway in the tubing to inflate the balloon with sterile water. The full balloon holds the catheter in place in your bladder. Not every type of urinary catheter has a balloon.
Drainage port
. The drainage port is at the opposite end of the tube from the insertion tip. It connects to a urine bag.
Urine bag
. Pee flows out of your bladder, through the catheter and into a urine bag (collection bag or drainage bag) outside of your body.
Advertisement
What are the different types of catheters?
There are two main types of urinary catheters:
Intermittent catheters
Indwelling catheters
Intermittent catheters
An intermittent catheter is a basic, single-channel tube. You only use an intermittent catheter when you need to drain your bladder — usually several times a day. A healthcare provider inserts it into your bladder through your urethra. A provider may also teach you how to drain it yourself (
self-catheterization
). Once you drain your bladder, you remove the catheter.
Indwelling catheters
An indwelling catheter remains in your bladder for a longer period — you should change it every month. It collects pee in a collection bag, which you wear under your clothes.
The most common type of indwelling catheter is a
Foley catheter
. It enters your body through your urethra. It usually has two pathways — one to drain your pee, and the other to inflate a balloon in your bladder to hold it in place. Sometimes, Foley catheters have three pathways — providers use the third pathway if they need to flush your bladder out with sterile saline solution (
continuous bladder irrigation
) or deliver medication to your bladder.
A
suprapubic catheter
is another type of indwelling catheter. It accesses your bladder through a small cut (incision) in your belly. It isn’t as common as a Foley catheter.
What is a urinary catheter used for?
Healthcare providers regularly use urinary catheters to drain your bladder when you can’t pee on your own. Causes may include:
Urinary retention
Certain types of urological surgery
Urinary incontinence
Prostate enlargement (
benign prostatic hyperplasia
or BPH)
Scarring
Bladder stones
Blood clots
in your pee
Spinal cord injury
Medical conditions such as
dementia
or
multiple sclerosis
(MS)
Providers may also use a urinary catheter to:
Drain your bladder during surgery
Determine how much pee you’re making in a hospital setting
Control bleeding that occurs during surgery or from an injury
Deliver medicine directly to your bladder
Treatment Details
What happens during urinary catheter placement?
Before catheter placement, a healthcare provider will clean your genital area with an antiseptic to help prevent
infection
. Then, they’ll apply a numbing gel or cream (such as
lidocaine
) and lubricant (lube) to reduce discomfort.
Once you’re
numb
, the provider will insert the catheter through your urethra. Once the catheter enters your bladder, pee will drain into the collection bag. They may secure the catheter in place with a balloon or remove the catheter once you finish peeing.
Before suprapubic catheter placement, a provider will take
X-rays
or an
ultrasound
to make sure it’s safe to place the catheter. Then, they’ll clean your belly with an antiseptic and apply a local
anesthetic
so you won’t feel much pain. Once you’re numb, they’ll make a small incision, place the catheter in your bladder and secure it in place.
Advertisement
Do you still have to pee with a catheter?
No, you won’t need to squeeze any muscles to make yourself pee if you have a urinary catheter in. Pee will flow automatically from your bladder, through the catheter and into your collection bag. You can’t control the force or speed like a typical urine stream.
How do I care for a urinary catheter?
Keep the area around your catheter clean. To prevent an infection, be sure to wash your hands with antibacterial soap and clean water before you touch your catheter or handle your collection bag.
Clean the catheter tubing at least twice a day with soapy water and a wet paper towel or washcloth. Gently pat the tubing dry with a clean towel.
How do I empty a collection bag?
If you have a collection bag, empty it every two to three hours. If you have a larger collection bag, empty it every eight hours.
To empty the bag:
Wash your hands
Remove the stopper or open the clamp that keeps your collection bag shut
Empty the collection bag into a toilet
Clean the drainage port with soap and water, and wipe away (down) from the drainage port to push
germs
away
Pat the drainage port dry
Replace the stopper or clamp
Wash your hands again
A healthcare provider may give you a container to measure how much pee you remove from your collection bag. If you have this container, empty your collection bag into the container, record the amount and empty the container into a toilet.
Advertisement
How do I change a collection bag?
To change the collection bag:
Wash your hands
Empty the collection bag (if you have a measuring container, measure the amount of pee first)
Use soap and water to clean the connection between your catheter and the collection bag, and wipe down to push germs away
Pinch the catheter tubing with your fingers just above the connection
Disconnect the bag from the catheter
Connect the new bag and release the tube
A healthcare provider will give you specific directions if you need to use a collection bag for a long period. If you’re going to use a urinary catheter for longer than a week or if it starts to smell, wash the collection bag with soap and water. You can also rinse the bag with 1 ¼ cups of white vinegar in 2 quarts of water to deodorize the bag and prevent infection.
How long does a catheter usually stay in?
It depends on the type of catheter you’re using and why you need it. Sometimes, you only need to have a catheter in a few times a day, for a few minutes at a time, while you recover from a treatment or condition. But you may need to keep it in for hours, days or even months at a time. In some cases, you may need to use a catheter permanently. A healthcare provider will tell you what to expect.
If you need to use a catheter long-term, be sure to change it out at least every month to help prevent infection.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the potential benefits of a urinary catheter?
Urinary catheters allow you to drain your bladder. Not being able to drain your bladder may cause:
Urinary tract infections
(UTIs)
Abdominal pain
Bladder stones
Bladder swelling
Permanent bladder damage or kidney damage
Leakages
What are the risks or complications of urinary catheters?
Possible urinary catheter risks or complications include:
UTIs
Bladder
muscle spasms
Leakages
Bleeding
Accidentally removing the catheter
Twists or kinks in the tube that prevent drainage
How painful is getting a catheter?
Sometimes, inserting a urinary catheter can be uncomfortable or painful. But using a numbing gel can reduce pain.
What should I avoid while wearing a catheter?
If you have a urinary catheter, it’s a good idea to check with a provider before you:
Use scented soaps, moisturizers or lotions, antiperspirants or perfumes in the area
Take baths — it’s better to take a shower
Swim
Exercise
Have sexual intercourse, including
masturbation
Recovery and Outlook
Is there anything I can do to make urinary catheters easier on me?
You can help reduce discomfort or pain by:
Coating a urethral catheter with lots of lube before you insert it to reduce friction
Taking
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDS) as needed for pain (check with a healthcare provider before you start taking NSAIDs)
Switching to another type of catheter size, material or brand
Drinking lots of water
Performing
Kegel exercises
to strengthen your
pelvic floor muscles
and relieve bladder spasms
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you have any questions or problems with your urinary catheter.
Call a provider right away if:
You have a
fever
You have
cloudy urine
Your pee smells strong or foul
You’re leaking pee around your catheter
You have pain in your abdomen, or you feel full
You notice blood clots or blood in your pee (
hematuria
)
Pee isn’t flowing into your collection bag
Your catheter comes out
Additional Common Questions
Can you feel yourself pee with a catheter?
You usually won’t feel like you need to pee with a catheter in place, and you won’t feel the pee draining into your urine bag.
Can you get erect with a catheter?
Yes, you can get an
erection
with a catheter. But it might be uncomfortable or painful.
What happens if you come while wearing a catheter?
It’s natural for people to have questions about their sexual activity if they have a urinary catheter in place. Talk to a provider before you engage in any sexual activity, including masturbation, to determine if it’s safe for you.
It’s possible to
ejaculate
(come or cum) if you have a
penis
and have a urinary catheter in.
Semen
won’t exit your penis through the catheter. The catheter enters your bladder from your urethra. Semen contains sperm from your testicles and fluids from your
seminal vesicles
and
prostate gland
, which empty into your urethra from your ejaculatory ducts. Upon ejaculation, your semen will leak out of your urethra around your catheter. This may be uncomfortable or painful.
It’s also possible to
orgasm
if you have a
vulva
and have a urinary catheter in. But there’s a risk of accidentally pulling your catheter out during sexual activity.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Urinary catheters are important medical devices that empty pee from your bladder. They also help reduce the risk of infections and damage to your bladder or kidneys. Using a catheter can be uncomfortable — it can feel weird if it’s in your urethra, and you may feel awkward if you have to use a collection bag. You may even be nervous about hurting yourself or accidentally pulling it out while you’re just living your life. Healthcare providers understand how you’re feeling, and they can address all of your concerns.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your urinary system, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment