Childhood Apraxia of Speech (CAS): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Childhood Apraxia of Speech
Advertisement
Advertisement
Childhood Apraxia of Speech
Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) is a motor speech disorder. Your child knows what they want to say. But a disruption in the nerve pathways between their brain and mouth muscles makes it hard for them to form the words. A speech-language pathologist can help your child improve their communication skills.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Speech Therapy for Adults
Find a Speech Therapist
Schedule Speech Therapy for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Childhood Apraxia of Speech?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Childhood Apraxia of Speech?
Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) is a
motor speech disorder
that makes it difficult for your child to speak. The disorder affects the
nerve
pathways that send messages from your child’s brain to their mouth. Because of this, your child has trouble carrying out the movements their mouth needs to make to speak clearly and accurately.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
CAS isn’t a cognitive (thinking) disorder — your child knows what they want to say. The problem is in how their
brain
tells their
mouth
muscles to move.
Other names for childhood apraxia of speech include:
Developmental apraxia of speech
Developmental verbal dyspraxia
There’s no cure for childhood apraxia of speech. But with early diagnosis and a special kind of
speech therapy
, many children make significant progress and learn to speak clearly.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the early signs of childhood apraxia of speech?
Early signs of apraxia of speech may clue you in that your child has a motor speech disorder. Children younger than 3 years old may:
Not make babbling or cooing sounds, or make a limited variety of babbling sounds
Have trouble putting sounds together
Say their first words later than expected
Say words differently each time
Take long pauses between sounds
Use only a few different sounds
Have problems with eating
What are the symptoms of childhood apraxia of speech?
Childhood apraxia of speech symptoms vary from child to child. In general, children with CAS usually understand language but have difficulty with speaking and communicating. Symptoms of childhood apraxia of speech may include:
Attempting to say a word several times before saying it correctly
Difficulty coordinating the movement from one syllable of a word to the next syllable
Distorting sounds or deleting sounds
Making errors in the tone, stress or rhythm of speech
Making inconsistent errors in speech
Advertisement
Children who are older than 3 years old may:
Be hard to understand, especially for people who don’t know your child
Grope, or search, for words by moving their mouth a few times before speaking
Have a flat or choppy speech pattern
Have difficulty saying longer words clearly
Have more trouble speaking when nervous
Have trouble imitating what other people say
Childhood apraxia of speech causes
Researchers don’t know the exact cause of childhood apraxia of speech. Children with CAS have interruptions in certain nerve pathways in their brains. These nerve pathways are responsible for planning the movements that are necessary for speech. In children with apraxia of speech, the messages from their brain to the parts of their mouth used for speech aren’t being sent correctly.
In some cases, CAS is the result of an acquired
brain injury
, like a
stroke
, which causes nerve pathway interruptions in a person’s brain. There’s also evidence that genetic factors may contribute to childhood apraxia of speech. Scientists have linked more than 20 different
genes
to the disorder.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose childhood apraxia of speech
A
speech-language pathologist (SLP)
diagnoses childhood apraxia of speech. SLPs have extensive training and skills in treating speech disorders.
To diagnose CAS, an SLP will learn about your child’s history, including any known medical problems. The SLP may also test your child’s
hearing
, oral-motor skills, speech melody (pitch) and the way they say sounds.
The SLP will also test your child’s ability to speak by:
Checking for signs of mouth muscle weakness
Checking how well your child makes consonant and vowel sounds
Looking at nonspeech oral motor skills like blowing, smiling, rounding lips and how quickly your child can move their mouth
Observing how well others can understand what your child is saying
Observing how your child pauses or changes the pitch of their voice
Genetic testing
can also determine if there’s a
genetic variant
that’s responsible for causing symptoms of the disorder. A healthcare provider will take a sample of your child’s blood to identify any abnormalities in their genes.
Management and Treatment
How is childhood apraxia of speech treated?
Treatment for CAS may require more intense treatment than other speech sound conditions. Some children will visit their speech-language pathologist three to five times per week so they can develop their speaking ability.
If your child has severe CAS symptoms, they may need treatment for several years, especially if they miss language
development milestones
throughout early childhood.
Childhood apraxia of speech treatment includes:
Enrolling in speech therapy to address syllables, words and phrases at a pace unique to the needs of your child
Learning alternative means of communication, like sign language or using electronic communication devices
Practicing repetitive language exercises at home and outside of speech therapy
Advertisement
When should my child see a healthcare provider?
Contact your child’s healthcare provider for a referral to a speech-language pathologist if:
You notice symptoms or signs of apraxia of speech
Your child is missing language development milestones, like saying their first words or naming common objects
Your child is showing signs of frustration with their communication when someone doesn’t understand them
If your child has trouble eating and coordinating movement with their mouth apart from speech, visit their provider immediately.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Speech Therapy for Adults
Find a Speech Therapist
Schedule Speech Therapy for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has apraxia of speech?
As your child grows, they may miss language development milestones, like saying their first words and using short sentences to express themselves. Developmental delays could prevent your child from learning in the classroom at the same level as their peers.
But your child will be working with a speech-language pathologist. They’ll address your child’s unique symptoms and develop a plan to improve their speech over time.
Does childhood apraxia go away?
There’s no cure for CAS, but early treatment can relieve frustration that your child may show if they want to say something but are unable to communicate that message.
Many factors come into play, but with appropriate treatment, most children with the disorder will eventually be able to speak normally to some degree.
Advertisement
Is there anything I can do to help my child?
Offering your child support as they grow is the best way you can take care of your child. Your child will likely participate in one-on-one sessions with a speech-language pathologist. Your child’s SLP may offer homework for your child to practice between visits. Just like homework from a math class, it’s important to help your child complete their speech assignments at the same rate as their educational assignments.
Follow up with your child’s SLP to keep track of how much your child is improving and offer encouragement along their journey.
Prevention
How can I prevent childhood apraxia of speech?
There’s no way to prevent childhood apraxia of speech. But some cases of CAS link to genetic variants. So, if you plan on becoming pregnant, you may want to ask your provider about
genetic counseling
to assess your risk of having a child with a genetic condition.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might feel frustrated if you can’t remember the name of a person you’ve met several times. If your child has apraxia of speech, they may experience a similar frustration when they know a person’s name but are unable to formulate the correct sounds to express it. Your child’s speech therapy treatment will be long-term to help them communicate, and treatment will significantly improve their symptoms. Continue to offer support and encouragement as your child reaches new milestones for communication each day.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Speech, language, comprehension and swallowing issues can make daily life harder. Cleveland Clinic speech therapists can help you overcome these problems.
Schedule Speech Therapy for Adults
Find a Speech Therapist
Schedule Speech Therapy for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us