Burning Mouth Syndrome: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Burning Mouth Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Burning Mouth Syndrome
Burning mouth syndrome is a painful condition that affects your tongue, lips and other areas inside your mouth. Anyone can get it, but it’s most common in postmenopausal people. There’s no cure, but treatment can help you manage painful symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
If you have burning mouth syndrome, you might experience symptoms like altered taste, dry mouth or pain.
What is burning mouth syndrome?
Burning mouth syndrome (BMS) is when your
tongue
, roof of your mouth or lips feel like they’re burning. It can also occur anywhere else in your
mouth
or
throat
. BMS can happen fast, and you might not know why. It might feel like something really hot (like coffee) burned your tongue. The medical term for burning mouth syndrome is “glossodynia” (pronounced “glaa-sow-DI-nee-uh”).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you have BMS, the burning feeling might get worse as the day goes on. Your mouth might feel fine when you first wake up, but then start to burn later. When you go to sleep, the pain might fade. But then, when you wake up, it starts all over again.
Along with the burning feeling, your mouth might taste bitter or metallic. Some people have the sensation of dry mouth even though they have enough
saliva
. The burning can get so bad that it causes people to feel depressed or anxious.
It’s frustrating to have pain and not know why. Treatment can’t cure burning mouth syndrome, but it can help manage your symptoms. And learning more about possible triggers can help reduce the frequency of flare-ups.
Types of burning mouth syndrome
There are two types of burning mouth syndrome:
Primary BMS
is when your mouth feels like it’s burning, but there’s no clear reason why.
Secondary BMS
is when your mouth burns because of another condition. If you fix that condition, the burning mouth sensation usually goes away, too.
Who is most at risk for burning mouth syndrome?
Burning mouth is most common in
postmenopausal people
over 60. That’s because lower
estrogen
levels cause decreased
taste bud
sensitivity.
Your genetic ability to taste also plays a role. You might be a:
Nontaster
who doesn’t taste things very strongly
Medium taster
who tastes things the way most other people do
Supertaster
, who tastes things really strongly
Advertisement
A lot of people with burning mouth syndrome are supertasters who don’t taste things as strongly as they used to. Research shows that many people with BMS also grind their teeth. This can make the burning feeling worse.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of burning mouth syndrome?
Burning mouth syndrome symptoms include:
Altered taste
Dry mouth
Mouth pain that feels like tingling, scalding or burning
Numbness
in your mouth that comes and goes
Burning mouth syndrome doesn’t cause visible symptoms like bumps or discoloration.
What causes burning mouth syndrome?
Researchers believe the cause of primary BMS is
nerve
damage affecting the area of your tongue that controls taste and pain. This makes your mouth feel like it’s burning and changes how things taste to you. Researchers think the nerve damage comes from factors like stress, certain medications, nutritional deficiencies or underlying medical conditions.
Medical conditions that can cause secondary BMS include:
Acid reflux
Allergies
to certain foods or dental products
Dry mouth
Hormonal changes
Nerve damage
Oral infections like
thrush
Stress
Teeth grinding
or jaw clenching
Risk factors
You’re more likely to develop burning mouth syndrome if you:
Are in postmenopause
Have certain health conditions like
diabetes
or
Sjögren’s syndrome
Have chronic
anxiety
and/or
depression
Have
geographic tongue
Have nutritional deficiencies (a lack of iron, zinc or vitamins B6 and B12, for example)
Take certain medications prescribed for depression or
high blood pressure
Are
female
Diagnosis and Tests
How is burning mouth syndrome diagnosed?
If you have symptoms, see a
dentist
first. They can start with a visual exam and refer you to a specialist if needed. A healthcare provider will need to run tests to rule out other conditions. Possible tests include:
Allergy test
Blood test
Imaging tests like
dental X-rays
,
CT scans
or
MRI
Oral swab test
Saliva test
Tissue
biopsy
Management and Treatment
How is burning mouth syndrome treated?
These burning mouth syndrome remedies may help ease general discomfort:
Mouth rinses with mild numbing effects
Pain relievers
like
acetaminophen
(Tylenol
®
) or
ibuprofen
(Advil
®
)
Saliva substitutes like Biotene
®
Some
antidepressant
and
antiseizure
medications
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) hasn’t approved any drugs specifically for BMS. But the medications mentioned may help manage your symptoms. Sometimes, it can take a while to find the medication that works best. Your healthcare provider can help.
If your healthcare provider knows what’s causing burning mouth syndrome, treating that cause can help. For example, if you grind your teeth, your dentist can make you a custom
mouth guard
for you to wear. If
menopause
triggers BMS,
hormone replacement therapy
may help.
Identifying the root cause isn’t always possible. But when it is, it may help find treatment quicker.
Advertisement
How can I get instant relief from burning mouth syndrome?
You may be able to ease burning mouth pain by doing the following:
Chew sugar-free gum. (This encourages saliva production.)
Drink cold water.
Sip on cold beverages throughout the day.
Suck on ice chips.
These actions won’t get rid of burning mouth syndrome. But they can help reduce pain during flare-ups.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Will burning mouth syndrome ever go away?
Without treatment, burning mouth syndrome can last for months or even years. That can be a long time to live with mouth pain. BMS treatment can provide relief within days or weeks. Talk to your healthcare provider about your specific treatment and when you can expect to feel better.
Prevention
Can burning mouth syndrome be prevented?
You can’t prevent BMS. But you can reduce your risk for flare-ups by avoiding anything that irritates your mouth, including:
Beverages containing alcohol
Extremely hot foods or beverages
High-acidic foods or drinks (like citrus juices)
Hot and spicy foods or drinks
Mouthwash containing alcohol
Smoking
or
vaping
Also, make sure you’re getting enough
vitamin B12
,
folate
and
iron
.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider if the burning in your mouth:
Comes with additional symptoms like swelling or blisters
Gets worse
Lasts longer than a few days
Occurs for no apparent reason
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Here are some questions you might want to ask your healthcare provider if you have burning mouth syndrome:
Advertisement
Do you know what might have caused this flare-up?
What tests will I need?
What kind of treatment do you recommend?
How long should I try one treatment before trying another?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When your mouth feels like it’s on fire, it can be hard to think about anything else. Burning mouth syndrome (BMS) is frustrating — and it can take a while to find a remedy that works. Treatment can’t get rid of the condition for good, but it can help with pain and other symptoms. If you think you might have burning mouth syndrome, talk to a dentist first. They can help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have conditions affecting your ears, nose and throat, you want experts you can trust. Cleveland Clinic’s otolaryngology specialists can help.
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/21/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment