Crimean Congo Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever
Advertisement
Advertisement
Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever
Crimea-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is an illness you get from a virus. Many cases are severe. It spreads through ticks and the body fluids of infected people or animals. It’s found in many areas of the world, including parts of Europe, Asia, Africa and the Middle East.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever?
The Crimean-Congo
hemorrhagic fever
(CCHF) is a tick-borne virus that can lead to severe illness in humans. CCHF commonly spreads in (is endemic to) Africa, Asia, the Middle East and parts of Europe. But given the high rates of global travel, it’s possible for transmission to occur in other places, too.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever can be fatal.
If you think you may have been exposed to CCHF and have symptoms, seek immediate medical attention at your local emergency room. Tell them right away that you may have been exposed to CCHF.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever?
Symptoms of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever include:
High
fever
Muscle
, back or belly pain
Headache
, often severe
Nausea and vomiting
Diarrhea
Pink eye (
conjunctivitis
)
Low blood pressure
(hypotension)
Flushing
Yellow skin or eyes (
jaundice
)
Nosebleeds
or bleeding gums
Mood changes
Confusion
Sensitivity to light (
photophobia
)
Symptoms start one to 13 days after infection. Three to five days after the initial symptoms start, you might also have heavier or more widespread bleeding and large bruises. Some people are infected but don’t have any symptoms.
What causes Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever?
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever is caused by the CCHF virus. It’s usually caused by a bite from an infected tick, though you can also get it by coming into contact with infected animals or humans. CCHF is a member of the
Bunyavirdae
family, which is known to cause fevers and, sometimes, rashes.
How does Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever spread?
CCHF spreads through the bite of infected ticks, contact with blood and other body fluids from infected animals, and human-to-human contact. Infected body fluid or tissues can include:
Advertisement
Blood
Spit (saliva)
Pee (urine)
Poop (feces)
Semen
Vaginal fluids
Respiratory droplets
Is Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever contagious?
Yes, CCHF transmits from person to person. You can get it through contact with someone infected with the virus, like shaking hands or hugging. You can also get it from touching things like towels or other personal items used by someone infected with the virus.
What are the risk factors for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever?
You’re at a higher risk for CCHF if you:
Live in an area where it spreads and have close contact with livestock — for instance, if you’re a veterinarian or work in a slaughterhouse
Are caring for someone with CCHF
Live with someone who has CCHF
Work in a basic science lab that studies or tests for CCHF, but your lab should have exposure plans in place
What animals carry Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever?
Livestock and farm animals like cattle, sheep and goats can carry CCHF. Infected animals may not appear sick. This is why wearing protective clothing and equipment is important when handling animals, especially in areas where ticks spread CCHF.
What are the complications of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever?
Complications of CCHF include:
Severe bleeding
Shock
Organ failure
Bleeding in your brain
(cerebral hemorrhage)
Death
CCHF has a high mortality rate. People who study infectious diseases (epidemiologists) suggest that about
30% to 50%
of people who get CCHF end up dying from the illness. But it might be higher if you get the infection while you’re in a hospital (
nosocomial
) rather than from a tick or animal.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose CCHF with a
blood test
. Let your provider know if you’ve traveled to an area where CCHF spreads or have had contact with a person or animal who could have the infection.
Management and Treatment
Is there a cure for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever?
There’s no specific cure for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever. Providers often treat it with the
antiviral medication
ribavirin. You might also need:
A
blood transfusion
Supplemental oxygen
or
mechanical ventilation
Intravenous (IV) fluids
Medications to manage symptoms, like pain or nausea
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the nearest emergency room right away — and let them know you might have CCHF — if you have severe symptoms, including:
Chest, neck or stomach pain
Difficulty breathing
Severe vomiting or diarrhea
Seizures
Confusion
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It might be helpful to ask a healthcare provider:
How do I prevent spreading the virus?
What are my treatment options?
How do I take care of myself?
How long will it take to feel better?
What new or worsening symptoms should I look out for?
When should I follow up with you?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever?
If you’re severely ill with CCHF, your provider will treat you in the hospital to manage your symptoms and any complications. You’ll be isolated from others to prevent spreading the virus.
It may take several weeks for you to start to feel better. During your recovery, you may feel weak and continue to have flu-like symptoms. You may also have poor vision, hearing and
memory loss
. You should get these things back, but it can take time. Talk with your doctor if you have concerns about lasting symptoms.
Advertisement
What causes death in Crimea-Congo hemorrhagic fever?
There’s not a lot of research into the causes of death from CCHF. That said, some studies suggest that potential causes of death could include:
Multiple organ failure
Issues with blood clotting
Your immune system doesn’t respond properly to the virus
Can you recover from it?
Yes, some people recover from mild CCHF infections. In some cases, people only develop mild symptoms. But for reasons that experts don’t yet fully understand, some people develop more severe illnesses that can be deadly.
Prevention
Can Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever be prevented?
If you live in an area where CCHF spreads, you can reduce your risk of getting and spreading it by:
Avoiding tick bites.
Wear protective clothing, use mosquito nets and wear bug spray that’s approved to repel ticks. If you work or play in areas where ticks are present, check yourself, your loved ones and your pets often for ticks. If you find one burrowed into your skin, see a healthcare provider.
Avoiding direct contact with human blood and body fluids.
Wear proper personal protective equipment (PPE) if you care for someone who may have Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus. Proper PPE includes gloves, goggles, aprons and masks. Avoid touching any of their body fluids, and wash your hands after contact, even if you wear gloves.
Avoiding contact with body fluids and tissues of animals.
Wear protective equipment if you have to handle animals (dead or alive) that could be infected, even if they don’t appear sick.
Isolate yourself from others if you could have CCHF.
When you seek medical attention, let your healthcare provider know right away that you could’ve been exposed.
Advertisement
Is there a Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever vaccine?
No, there isn’t a vaccine available for CCHF at this time. But scientists have been developing vaccines for CCHF for over a decade. They’re currently studying their safety and effectiveness in clinical trials.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever can cause very serious illness. If your work, hobbies or travel put you at risk for CCHF, talk to a healthcare provider about what you can do to protect yourself. They can let you know if preventive measures are available and what to do if you develop concerning symptoms.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/06/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment