Neurorehabilitation: Definition & Techniques
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Neurorehabilitation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Neurorehabilitation
Neurorehabilitation is a program you’ll complete after an illness or injury to your nervous system. Common conditions include traumatic brain injury, stroke, Alzheimer’s disease and multiple sclerosis. The goals are to improve brain function and decrease the impact of symptoms. Treatment could be temporary or long-term depending on your needs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Neurorehabilitation?
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
What Is Neurorehabilitation?
Neurorehabilitation involves participating in different forms of therapy to help you recover.
Neurological rehabilitation, or neurorehabilitation, is a program to help you recover after an injury or diagnosis that affects your nervous system. Your nervous system contains your brain, spinal cord and nerves.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The goals of this treatment are to:
Improve or maintain the function of your brain and nerves
Reduce the impact that symptoms have on your body
Improve quality of life for you and your caregivers
What conditions does neurorehabilitation treat or manage?
A healthcare provider might recommend this treatment if you experience one of the following neurological conditions:
Alzheimer’s disease
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS)
Dementia
Huntington’s disease
Mild cognitive impairment
Multiple sclerosis
(MS)
Parkinson’s disease
Stroke
Traumatic brain injury
or head trauma
What are the types of neurorehabilitation?
There are several different types. Some of the most common include:
Cognitive neurorehabilitation
: Treatment to improve brain function, problem-solving, attention, learning and memory.
Developmental neurorehabilitation
: Treatment to address developmental, physical or intellectual disabilities.
Intensive neurorehabilitation
: Treatment for multiple parts of your body and nervous system. It’s usually long-term.
Pediatric neurorehabilitation
: Treatment for children diagnosed with a neurological condition before age 18.
Treatment Details
What happens during neurorehabilitation?
During treatment, you’ll meet with expert healthcare providers to assess how an illness or injury affects your nervous system. For example, does it affect how you speak or remember information, how well you can hold a pencil or your ability to walk? These are things that treatment can help you with.
Advertisement
Your providers will create a treatment plan to meet your personal goals. These will focus on your physical, mental and emotional needs. Your treatment plan can help you:
Complete daily activities like getting dressed, eating and preparing meals, bathing and writing
Increase your range of motion, strength and balance (to reduce risk of falls)
Learn how to use adaptive equipment like prosthetics
Relearn skills that you mastered but lost after illness or injury (speaking, walking, etc.)
To reach these goals, you may participate in:
Cognitive therapy
: Rebuilding brain function and memory
Occupational therapy
: Improving muscle control and coordination
Physical therapy
: Exercising and improving mobility
Psychotherapy
: Developing mental health, stress and emotional health management skills
Speech therapy
: Practicing articulation, swallowing and communication skills
In addition, your care team can help educate you and your loved ones about the illness or injury that affects you, and how others can help you stay safe.
Neurorehabilitation techniques
With advanced technology in healthcare, your providers may use one or several of the following techniques to help you reach your goals during treatment. Some of the most common techniques include:
Computer-assisted programs
: Virtual reality and game-oriented exercises to stimulate physical and mental activity
Constraint-induced movement therapy
: Practicing movement on the affected side of your body (in the case of injury to one side) while preventing movement from the unaffected side of your body
Noninvasive brain stimulation
: Sending electrical or magnetic currents through your scalp to increase brain activity
Robotic rehabilitation
: Learning how to work with wearable devices that support and help you move or complete exercises
What are the potential benefits of neurorehabilitation?
While it isn’t a cure, this type of treatment is a collaborative effort to help you manage your symptoms and feel well enough to go about your daily routine safely. It may help you:
Improve your mental functioning, mental health, self-esteem and self-confidence
Learn new skills or how to adapt after an illness or injury
Regain independence
Strengthen your muscles
How successful is neurorehabilitation?
Many studies show the success of this treatment. The success may vary based on how active and involved you are in your treatment program.
You’ll learn and develop skills during each session. After learning them, you’ll need to practice incorporating these skills into your daily life and routine. This isn’t an easy process, but with the help and support of your caregivers, you’ll work together to reach your goals.
Advertisement
What are the risks or complications of neurorehabilitation?
Complications are uncommon. You’ll be in the care of highly trained healthcare providers who’ll make sure you’re safe. Possible risks could include:
Fatigue
Injuries and falls
No symptom relief
Physical or emotional
stress
Sore muscles
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
How long will I need neurorehabilitation?
The amount of time you’ll need to participate in this treatment varies. Every person’s body heals differently, and it depends on your diagnosis and the severity. Some people participate in programs for several weeks, while others need long-term care that could last for months to years. Your healthcare provider will be able to give you the best time estimate that meets your goals.
Is there anything I can do to make neurorehabilitation easier for me?
Treatment takes hard work and effort. Like an athlete, you’ll need to train to regain your mental and physical strength after an illness or injury that took it from you. Your care team will encourage you to practice the skills you learn outside of treatment. It takes time and energy to master these skills. If you don’t feel safe practicing on your own, especially if you’re at risk of falls or injury, let your healthcare team know. They may have advice to improve your safety.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you notice new or worsening symptoms after starting treatment. If you experience a fall or injure yourself, contact 911 or your local emergency services number.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What should I look for in a quality neurorehabilitation program?
An excellent program provides an expert team approach. Each program is different and offers a variety of solutions.
Quality programs create personalized care plans that may include medications, physical activity, daily living skills, nutrition, cognitive rehabilitation, mental health care and clinical trials (if appropriate).
Physical, occupational and speech therapists with specialized neurology training can make a big difference. These professionals use the latest technology, custom exercises and skill-building techniques to help people with neurological conditions improve their quality of life.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Neurorehabilitation helps you recover after an injury or illness that affects your mind-body coordination. But progress takes time and effort. It’s normal to feel stuck or frustrated, as everyone learns at their own pace. Even if you don’t see it, each day brings you closer to your goals. Stay in touch with your healthcare team — they can track your progress and keep you motivated.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment