Ambiguous Genitalia: Definition & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Atypical Genitalia (Formerly Known as Ambiguous Genitalia)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Atypical Genitalia (Formerly Known as Ambiguous Genitalia)
Atypical genitalia, formerly known as ambiguous genitalia, is a rare condition where your newborn’s external genitals don’t look typically male or typically female. Ambiguous genitalia (intersex genitals) is a difference of sexual development caused by hormonal irregularities during pregnancy. Treatment includes hormone therapy or surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is ambiguous genitalia (now known as atypical genitalia)?
Atypical genitalia, formerly known as ambiguous genitalia, is a rare disorder in which your newborn’s external genitals aren’t clearly defined. Your infant may not have the typical genitals of a male or a female. Your infant’s genitals may not have developed completely, or they may have features of both sexes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Infants with atypical (intersex) genitals may have external genitals that don’t match their internal sex organs or genetic sex. Atypical genitalia is a difference of sexual development (DSD).
How common is atypical genitalia (ambiguous genitalia)?
Atypical genitalia occurs in about 1 in every
1,000
to
4,500
births.
Symptoms and Causes
How do the sex organs normally form?
Fetal sex organs
develop
in three steps. First, genetic sex is determined when the sperm fertilizes the egg. The biological mother shares an X chromosome and the biological father shares either an X or a Y chromosome. The fetus is
female
if an XX chromosome forms. The fetus will be male if an XY chromosome forms.
After fetal genetic sex is determined, the sex organs (gonads) form. A female fetus develops ovaries, and a male fetus develops testes. After that, their baby’s inner reproductive system (internal genitalia) and external genitals form. Hormones from the ovaries or testes shape your the external genitals.
If the process unfolds differently, a difference of sexual development (DSD) can occur. Hormones cause differences of sexual development. Either parent can pass down these hormones, or they can have no clear cause.
What causes atypical genitalia (ambiguous genitalia)?
Hormonal irregularities during
pregnancy
generally cause atypical genitalia. These irregularities interfere with your fetus’s developing sex organs. Causes vary depending on the number or combination of sex chromosomes that are present.
Advertisement
46 XX DSD
With 46 XX DSD, your baby’s internal sex organs include ovaries and a uterus, but their external sex organs may resemble a penis and testicles. 46 XX occurs when your baby is exposed to too many male hormones (
androgens
) when their external genitals are forming. The most common cause of 46 XX DSD is a disorder called
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)
. In this condition, your baby’s adrenal glands produce excessive amounts of androgens.
46 XY DSD
With 46 XY DSD, your baby’s internal
sex organs
are male but external sex organs are unclear. 46 XY occurs when your baby’s testes don’t develop properly, they don’t make enough testosterone or your baby’s body can’t use the testosterone correctly.
Disorders of gonadal differentiation
With disorders of gonadal differentiation, your baby’s sex organs don’t develop completely into testes or ovaries. Mixed gonadal dysgenesis means the sex organs (testes or ovaries) may not fully develop. Partial gonadal dysgenesis means your baby’s sex organs form only some testicular tissue and the testes won’t work properly. Gonadal dysgenesis means both gonads stay premature and they won’t develop into testes or ovaries.
Ovotesticular DSD
With ovotesticular DSD, your baby’s sex organs have ovarian and testicular tissue, or your baby has one ovary and one teste. This is very rare.
What does ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia) look like?
Ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia) will look different depending on the sex chromosomes affected. Ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia) in genetic females may have the following features:
An enlarged clitoris that looks like a small penis
The urethral opening (where urine comes out) may not be in the typical place
The “lips” of the vagina (
labia
) may be fused and look like a scrotum (a pouch that normally contains the testicles)
A lump of tissue within the labia that looks like a scrotum with testicles
Ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia) in genetic males may have the following features:
A penis doesn’t form or is very small and looks like an enlarged clitoris
The urethral opening (where urine comes out) may be at the base of the penis instead of the tip
A small, separated scrotum that looks like labia
Undescended testicles
What are the symptoms of atypical genitalia (ambiguous genitalia)?
The most obvious sign of atypical genitalia is the presence of sex organs that don’t look like a typical penis or vagina. Other symptoms may include:
Hormonal imbalances
Menstruation
begins early, late or not at all
Hypospadias
— a condition that occurs when the urethral opening isn’t at the tip of the penis
Diagnosis and Tests
How is ambiguous genitalia diagnosed?
Most babies receive a diagnosis of ambiguous genitalia at birth. When it’s unclear if your newborn is male or female, your baby’s healthcare provider will order further tests to determine a diagnosis.
Advertisement
What should I expect at my child’s appointment?
Your baby’s healthcare provider will ask about your family’s medical history and examine your baby’s external genitals. They may order several tests to determine the correct diagnosis. Your baby’s healthcare provider may order:
A blood test to check your baby’s hormone levels and chromosomes
Imaging tests, including
ultrasounds
, X-rays or a
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
A
biopsy
or
laparoscopy
to examine tissue from your baby’s sex organs
Sometimes, your baby’s healthcare provider can make a quick diagnosis, but sometimes it can take longer. A clear diagnosis is important for defining your baby’s sex and determining the correct treatment.
Management and Treatment
How is ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia) treated?
The first step of management is to identify the cause of atypical genitalia. Then, your baby’s healthcare provider will put together a treatment plan and sex assignment based on hormone tests and other test results.
You may work with a team of healthcare providers to help you make decisions about your baby’s sex and treatment. Make sure to seek out healthcare providers with expertise in this area. Experts in this area can help advise you on how best to proceed with treatment for your baby. Your team may include a:
Neonatologist
Geneticist
Endocrinologist
Surgeon
Urologist
Psychologist
Advertisement
Together with your baby’s healthcare providers, you’ll consider the correct treatment for your baby’s long-term well-being, future sexual function and potential for fertility. Treatment depends on many factors, including:
The cause of your baby’s condition
The appearance of your baby’s genitals
Your family’s preferences and cultural beliefs
Treatment options may include:
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
: Hormone therapy alone may help treat a hormonal imbalance.
Reconstructive surgery
: Your baby’s healthcare team, in consultation with you, may suggest surgery while your baby is still an infant. But reconstructive surgery for atypical genitalia is controversial. Sometimes, it’s medically necessary, such as when your child is born without a urinary drainage opening. But if it’s more about appearance, some parents choose to forego surgery until their child is old enough to make the decision themselves.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia)?
Ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia) can have profound physical, social and psychological effects on your child. Your child’s genitals can shape the way they understand themselves. The decision to seek surgery can affect your child’s quality of life, which is why it’s a good idea to speak to a counselor who specializes in this area. While a diagnosis of ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia) can be distressing, your team of healthcare providers can help you determine the best possible course of treatment.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I seek care for my child’s atypical genitalia (ambiguous genitalia)?
Your baby’s healthcare provider usually discovers atypical genital (ambiguous genitalia) at birth or at their first
well-child exam
. Their healthcare provider will talk to you about diagnosis and treatment options.
What questions should I ask my child’s healthcare provider?
Does my child need treatment immediately, or can we wait and make a decision later?
What specialists should my child see?
Should we speak with a genetic counselor?
What will my child’s future look like?
Are there support groups for people with ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia)?
Additional Common Questions
Will my child be able to reproduce?
Future fertility and sexual function depend on the cause of ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia). Some studies have shown:
Females with congenital adrenal hyperplasia can get pregnant after taking hormonal therapy.
Males with at least one normal working testicle can be fertile.
People with ovotesticular DSD with a normal working ovary can be fertile.
People with testicular dysgenesis with a well-developed uterus can hold an implanted embryo.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A diagnosis of ambiguous genitalia (atypical genitalia) in your newborn can be very distressing for you and your family. You need to discuss many medical, ethical and psychological issues with your family and healthcare team. Your team of healthcare providers can provide the information and counseling you need to help you make decisions about your baby’s sex and treatment. This way, you can provide the best quality of life and achieve the best possible outcomes for your child.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/09/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us