Surgery: Types, Why It’s Done, Considerations
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Surgery
Advertisement
Advertisement
Surgery
Today’s surgeons use advanced tools and techniques to perform many procedures without large cuts. But some situations still call for open surgery, especially when speed, access or complexity matters most.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Surgery is how
surgeons
fix or explore problems inside your body. They use tools — and sometimes advanced technology — to remove, repair or replace parts that aren’t working right. It usually involves cutting your
body tissues
. But they also use lasers, electric currents and other methods.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
People have surgeries for many different reasons. Some surgeries are lifesaving. Others help improve how your body works or how you feel day by day. Your healthcare provider might recommend surgery to:
Find out what’s causing a problem
Remove diseased or damaged tissue
Repair an injury or defect
Replace something that’s not working, like a joint or valve
Surgeries can be major or minor, depending on the risk and recovery time involved. And not every surgery fits neatly into these buckets:
Major surgery usually means staying in the hospital afterward and getting
general anesthesia
.
Minor surgery is often an outpatient procedure. That means you go home the same day. It may involve
local or regional anesthesia
. Your surgeon may make smaller cuts.
Types of surgery
You may hear your surgeon discuss your surgery in several different ways. These may include:
Elective surgery
Elective surgery is a procedure that you and your doctor discuss and plan for in advance. It’s optional and not lifesaving.
Examples include:
Joint replacement
Prolapse repair
Scheduled C-section
Cosmetic surgery
Emergency surgery
Emergency surgery is a procedure you need as soon as possible to prevent serious harm. You may not have time to discuss it in advance.
Examples include:
Advertisement
Appendectomy
for appendicitis
Trauma surgery after an accident
Exploratory laparotomy
for internal bleeding
Amputation
of a body part that has died
Many surgeries fall in between these two poles.
Semi-elective surgery is a procedure your doctor recommends you have relatively soon to prevent your condition from getting worse.
Examples include:
Carotid
endarterectomy
for plaque in your artery
Gallbladder removal for gallbladder disease
Kidney transplant for chronic kidney failure
Surgery to repair broken bones
Open surgery
Open surgery means your surgeon makes a large cut through your skin so they can see and work directly on your organs and tissues.
Examples include:
Open abdominal surgery
Open chest surgery
Open heart surgery
Open brain surgery
Minimally invasive surgery
Minimally invasive surgery
uses small cuts and special tools. Surgeons look inside with a camera and operate through small openings.
Examples include:
Laparoscopic surgery
Robotic surgery
Endovascular surgery
Endoscopic surgery
Preparing for surgery
Even minor surgery is hard on your body. And some surgeries need more prep than others. In general, your surgical team will talk with you about how to:
Be as healthy as you can be going into surgery
Plan for what your body needs in the days and weeks after surgery
Get your body ready for the procedure
Optimizing health for surgery
Before you have surgery, your healthcare provider will check your overall health. Some conditions may make anesthesia unsafe for you or make recovery difficult. You may need some medical tests. Based on the results, your provider might want to try to improve your health in the months or weeks before your surgery.
They might suggest:
Stopping alcohol, tobacco or pain medications (like NSAIDs)
Adjusting your eating habits, taking nutritional supplements or getting nutrition therapy
Treating another condition that may interfere with your recovery
Talking with your other healthcare providers about how to stop certain medications that can interfere with anesthesia, blood clotting or recovery
Once they clear you for surgery, your surgeon will talk with you about the goals, risks and what to expect. If possible, they’ll ask for your
informed consent
before moving forward.
Making plans for after surgery
Your provider may also advise you on how to prepare for your recovery.
You may need to:
Make things in your home more accessible
Arrange for someone to help you around the house
Arrange for childcare and time off from work
Some procedures need more preparation than others. Your provider will tell you what you need to do.
Day of procedure instructions
In the days leading up to your procedure, you may get special instructions to prepare for it.
Advertisement
You may need to:
Stop eating and drinking at a particular time
Clean out your bowels
with a special formula
These preparations help reduce the risks of surgery.
Surgery risks and benefits
All surgeries have some risks. Healthcare providers weigh the potential risks against the potential benefits of the treatment before recommending it. In general, they won’t recommend surgery unless the chance of complications occurring is very small compared to the likely benefits of the procedure.
Some general risks of surgery include:
Accidental injury to an organ, vessel or nerve
Heavy bleeding
Infection
Reactions to the anesthesia
Specific surgeries may have other risks that your provider will discuss with you.
Some factors that can affect your risk include:
Pre-existing conditions and medical history
How long or complex the operation is
What kind of anesthesia you have
Your health at the time you have surgery
Surgical teams watch you closely during and after surgery to handle complications quickly.
Some complications can develop later during your recovery. Complications from extended bed rest after surgery can include:
Blood clots
Lung infections
Muscle stiffening (
contracture
)
Muscle loss (
sarcopenia
)
After surgery
After surgery, you’ll spend time in a recovery room until you’re stable. Your healthcare team will make sure you’re well enough to continue your recovery without such close monitoring.
Advertisement
You may have some medical tubes or devices connected to your body, like:
A breathing tube
A catheter to drain your pee
An IV line for fluids and medicine
A pain pump
A pulse oximeter on your finger
Pads on your chest to monitor your heart
Your healthcare team will remove these when you no longer need them.
Depending on the type of procedure you had, you may go home the same day. Or you may stay in the hospital for several more days. You’ll stay until you can:
Eat and drink normally
Pee and poop normally
Breathe and walk on your own
Manage your pain at home
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your provider if you develop warning symptoms at home, like:
Worsening pain
Colored discharge from your wound
A fever
Pain and swelling in one leg
A bad cough or trouble breathing
Confusion or delirium
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Surgery today is safer and easier on you than it’s ever been. But getting surgery is still a big deal. Whether it’s planned or urgent, it’s something you’ll want to feel ready for. Choosing an experienced hospital or surgical team can also help you feel confident in your care — especially if you’re having a rare or complicated procedure.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us