Aspiration Pneumonia: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Aspiration Pneumonia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Aspiration Pneumonia
Aspiration pneumonia is an infection caused by inhaling something other than air into your lungs. This could be food, liquid, saliva or stomach contents. Many people don’t know they’ve aspirated something. Symptoms include fever, shortness of breath, coughing up blood or pus, chest pain and tiredness. Providers treat it with antibiotics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Aspiration pneumonia is an infection that causes the air sacs in your lungs (alveoli) to swell and fill with fluid.
What is aspiration pneumonia?
Aspiration pneumonia is a
bacterial infection
in your lungs. It can happen when you aspirate, or inhale, something other than air into your
respiratory tract
. This can be food, liquid, saliva, stomach acid, vomit or even a small foreign object.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You’ve probably had something “go down the wrong pipe” — meaning that food or liquid went down your
windpipe
(toward your lungs) instead of your
esophagus
(toward your stomach). When this happens, your body reacts and you cough it out. But for some people, they’re unable to get it out, and something ends up in their lungs that doesn’t belong there. This can cause bacteria to grow, causing an infection (
pneumonia
).
Many people with aspiration pneumonia don’t realize this has happened — called
silent aspiration
. The infection can develop days or even weeks after aspirating.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of aspiration pneumonia?
Symptoms of aspiration pneumonia include:
Fever
Shortness of breath (dyspnea
) or
wheezing
Coughing up blood
or pus
Chest pain
Bad breath
Extreme tiredness
How long does it take for aspiration pneumonia to develop?
It may take days or weeks for symptoms of pneumonia to develop after you aspirate something. Remember that people with aspiration pneumonia often don’t realize that they aspirated anything.
What causes aspiration pneumonia?
Inhaling something into your lungs that shouldn’t be there can lead to aspiration pneumonia — especially if you’re unable to cough it out (or you don’t notice). Anything that’s not air can bring
bacteria
with it, which causes the infection.
Things that can get into your lungs that can cause pneumonia include:
Advertisement
Saliva
and
mucus
from your mouth and nose
Stomach acid
Vomit
Food or beverages
Small objects
Who’s at higher risk for aspiration pneumonia?
You’re at a higher risk for aspiration pneumonia if you:
Have had general
anesthesia
or dental procedures recently
Have trouble coughing or swallowing (
dysphagia
), which can happen after
stroke
or
brain injury
, or if you have a nervous system disorder like
Parkinson’s disease
or
multiple sclerosis
Are impaired by alcoholic beverages or drugs
Are older than 65 or younger than 5
Live in an assisted living facility or nursing home
Have a weakened immune system
What are the complications of aspiration pneumonia?
Aspiration pneumonia can lead to
sepsis
— a life-threatening reaction to an infection — and
respiratory failure
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is aspiration pneumonia diagnosed?
To diagnose aspiration pneumonia, your provider will ask you about your symptoms and your medical history. They may ask about any conditions that affect your ability to swallow or cough. Tests that can help providers diagnose aspiration pneumonia include:
Imaging.
This could include
chest X-rays
or a
CT scan
.
Blood tests
.
Blood tests can look for signs of infection.
Sputum tests
. You cough up
mucus
from your lungs for your provider to test for bacteria.
Bronchoscopy
.
A provider uses a thin tube (bronchoscope) to look inside your lungs.
Swallowing studies
. Your provider might recommend an evaluation by a
speech pathologist
or an
esophagram (barium swallow test)
to diagnose swallowing issues.
Management and Treatment
How is aspiration pneumonia treated?
Providers usually treat aspiration pneumonia with
antibiotics
. Depending on how severe your symptoms are, you might also need
oxygen therapy
or
mechanical ventilation
while the antibiotics work.
If you have an ongoing condition that increases your risk for aspiration, you might need treatment for the underlying cause. Depending on the cause, treatments could include:
Speech therapy
Tube feeding
ACE inhibitors
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long will it take me to recover from aspiration pneumonia?
It might take you a week or so after starting antibiotics to start to feel better. Many people are still tired up to a month into recovery.
If you have an underlying medical condition that causes frequent aspiration, you’ll need to work closely with a healthcare provider to manage it.
What are the chances of surviving aspiration pneumonia?
Most people survive aspiration pneumonia. Mortality (death rate) depends on the severity of the disease and other health conditions (comorbidities).
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you often feel like you’re choking or you have difficulty swallowing, see your provider. You may need to see a specialist who can help diagnose and treat underlying conditions.
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 or your local emergency services number or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms like chest pain, fever and difficulty breathing. Pneumonia can get worse quickly.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It might be helpful to ask your provider:
What caused this?
Could it happen again?
What are my treatment options?
Do I need additional tests to look for conditions that lead to aspiration?
When should I follow up with you?
Prevention
Can aspiration pneumonia be prevented?
To reduce your risk of aspiration (which can lead to pneumonia), you can:
Manage any underlying medical conditions that can lead to aspiration, which include
GERD
(chronic acid reflux) and conditions that affect your ability to swallow or cough
Avoid drinking alcohol to excess
Stay upright when you’re eating and drinking
Chew slowly and completely
Avoid
smoking
,
vaping
and using nicotine products
Avoid illegal drug use and misusing prescription drugs
Practice good dental hygiene and visit your dentist regularly
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between aspiration pneumonia and aspiration pneumonitis?
Aspiration pneumonia is sometimes confused with aspiration
pneumonitis
. An infection causes aspiration pneumonia. Aspiration pneumonitis is inflammation in your lungs without an infection.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The feeling of something going down the wrong way is something we all can relate to. But when that “something” breeds bacteria and turns into aspiration pneumonia, it can become a serious situation.
If you have a condition that makes aspiration more likely, it’s especially important to be on the lookout for symptoms of pneumonia. Talk to your provider about any concerns you have or if you need help managing your condition.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/06/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment