Aniridia (Absence of Iris): What It Is, Causes & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Aniridia (Absence of Iris)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Aniridia (Absence of Iris)
Having aniridia means your child might have permanently impaired vision. Talk to your provider about how often you should see an eye care specialist. It’s important to get any changes in your child’s eye checked as soon as possible. This will help you catch complications like glaucoma and cataracts right away.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Pediatric Eye Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Aniridia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Aniridia?
If your child has aniridia, their pupils will look larger than usual
Aniridia is a condition that causes babies to be born without
irises
(the colored part of your eye). Some babies are missing their entire irises. Others only have part of an iris in each eye.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Aniridia always affects both of your child’s eyes (it’s a bilateral condition).
A healthcare provider will probably diagnose aniridia when your child is born. They’ll be able to see the missing iris in your child’s eyes. No matter how much of your baby’s irises are missing, aniridia will affect their
vision
and can eventually lead to other issues in their
eyes
later in life.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of aniridia
Because your child is missing their irises, their
pupils
will look larger than usual. Their pupils might be unevenly shaped. They’ll have a hard time adjusting to changes in lighting. This can lead to symptoms like:
Blindness
or partial vision loss in one or both eyes
Blurry vision
Eye pain
Low vision
Light sensitivity (photophobia)
What causes aniridia?
Aniridia is
genetic disorder
. It happens when a
genetic change
affects the
PAX6
gene
. This gene helps form your baby’s eyes and parts of their
brain
,
spinal cord
and
pancreas
. The genetic change that causes aniridia usually happens between the 12th and 14th week of
pregnancy
.
Risk factors
Aniridia is more common in children whose biological parents have it. If one parent has aniridia, there’s a 50/50 chance their biological child will, too.
So, if you have aniridia, that doesn’t guarantee that your biological children will have it. It just means they’re more likely to.
Advertisement
Aniridia can also happen on its own (sporadically) even if neither biological parent has it. This happens in around 1 in 3 cases.
Complications of this condition
Other parts of your child’s eyes might be underdeveloped, as well, including their
optic nerves
and
retinas
.
Children with aniridia are likely to develop other eye issues as they grow up, including:
Cataracts
Cloudy
corneas
Glaucoma
Nystagmus
Children with sporadic aniridia have a higher risk of developing a
Wilms tumor
(a rare type of
kidney cancer
). The genetic change that causes sporadic aniridia is much more likely to impact other parts of your child’s body that the
PAX6
gene is responsible for.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is aniridia diagnosed?
Your provider will diagnose aniridia when your baby is born. You should be able to see the missing irises in your baby’s eyes.
If you’re pregnant and concerned about the fetus’s risk of aniridia (or other genetic disorders), talk to your provider about
prenatal genetic testing
. Your provider will use a
blood test
to tell how likely it is that the fetus could have a genetic disorder. They might also perform
amniocentesis
— removing and testing a small amount of your
amniotic fluid
.
Management and Treatment
How is aniridia treated?
Treating aniridia focuses on maintaining or improving your child’s vision.
Your child will need regular
eye exams
and visits with an
eye care specialist
. The sooner your provider diagnoses changes in your child’s eyes, the more likely they’ll be able to prevent symptoms or complications.
Your child might need a few treatments, including:
Glasses or
contact lenses
. Just like anyone with vision issues, wearing glasses or contact lenses can improve your child’s vision. Kids with aniridia sometimes wear specialized colored contacts that mimic the shape of an iris to cover their pupils and reduce light sensitivity.
Medications
. If your child develops glaucoma or cornea issues, your provider might prescribe medicated eye drops,
artificial tears
or other medications.
Surgery
. Children who develop cataracts may need
cataract surgery
to remove them. Your child might also need
glaucoma surgery
. They might be able to get implanted artificial irises. This is a relatively new treatment, so not every child is a good candidate for this type of surgery.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider as soon as you notice any changes in your child’s eyes or vision. You might want to ask your provider questions like:
How often will my child need eye exams?
Is my child a good candidate for artificial iris surgery?
What are the chances my child experiences complications?
Which changes or symptoms should I look out for?
Advertisement
Go to the emergency room if your child has any of the following symptoms:
A sudden loss of vision
Severe eye pain
Seeing new
flashes
or
floaters
in their eyes
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Pediatric Eye Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has aniridia?
You should expect your child to have vision issues. Your child will need regular eye exams throughout their life to monitor their eye health.
More than 8 in 10 children with aniridia have poor or impaired eyesight. Most people with aniridia develop glaucoma, usually when they’re 10 to 20 years old.
But this doesn’t mean every baby born with aniridia will definitely face these issues. Talk to your provider or eye care specialist about what to expect as your child gets older.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be scary to find out your baby has a condition that will affect their vision from birth. Aniridia can cause lots of issues, but treatments can help.
Regular visits with your healthcare provider or eye care specialist will be the key to keeping your child’s eyes healthy and protecting their ability to see. Talk to your provider as soon as you notice any changes in your child’s eyes. The sooner an issue is diagnosed, the better.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you need care for your child’s vision, it’s important to find someone you trust. Cleveland Clinic Children's experts focus on your child's needs.
Pediatric Eye Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment