Neoadjuvant Therapy: Types, Uses & Benefits
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Neoadjuvant Therapy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Neoadjuvant Therapy
Neoadjuvant therapy shrinks cancerous tumors before surgery. It’s treatment for many kinds of cancer. Chemotherapy, hormone therapy and radiation therapy are common types of neoadjuvant therapy. Treatment may last weeks, months or up to a year before surgery. Most people have surgery within a month after completing treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is neoadjuvant therapy?
Neoadjuvant therapy is a type of cancer treatment that you receive before you have surgery to remove a
cancerous tumor
. Your
oncologist
may call this treatment perioperative therapy or induction therapy. Neoadjuvant therapy shrinks
tumors
so they’re easier to remove. In some cases, neoadjuvant therapy eliminates tumors, so you don’t need surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Types of neoadjuvant therapy
There are several types of neoadjuvant therapies:
Chemotherapy
. Chemotherapy destroys cancer cells before they can multiply and make tumors grow.
Hormone therapy
. Some kinds of cancer need
hormones
to grow, multiply and spread. Neoadjuvant hormone therapy cuts off that supply so cancerous tumors stop growing.
Immunotherapy
.
Monoclonal antibody therapy
is an example of immunotherapy that you may receive before surgery.
Radiation therapy
. This treatment typically uses high-powered X-rays to kill cancer cells.
Your oncology care team may use different types of neoadjuvant therapy to treat the same kind of cancer. For example, they may combine chemotherapy and radiation (neoadjuvant chemoradiation).
While specific treatment varies, all neoadjuvant therapies involve treatment that may last weeks, months or up to a year before you have surgery. Most people have surgery within a month after completing treatment.
What conditions are treated with neoadjuvant therapy?
Oncologists
use neoadjuvant therapy for more than a dozen kinds of cancer, including common cancers like breast cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer and rectal cancer.
Breast cancer
Oncologists may use chemotherapy, Immunotherapy and/or hormone therapy as neoadjuvant therapy for:
Advertisement
Inflammatory breast cancer
Early-stage
ER-positive breast cancer
Some forms of
HER2-positive breast cancer
Some forms of
triple-negative breast cancer
Colon cancer
People with
colon cancer
that’s spread (
metastasized
) to their
liver
may receive chemotherapy before surgery to remove a tumor.
Lung cancer
Chemotherapy is a common type of neoadjuvant therapy for
non-small cell lung cancer
that’s spread (metastasized). Oncologists may also use chemoradiation. Researchers are also evaluating immunotherapy as a potential neoadjuvant therapy.
Prostate cancer
Oncologists may treat some forms of metastatic
prostate cancer
with hormone therapy. The hormone
testosterone
boosts cancer cell growth. Hormone therapy in prostate cancer works by reducing your testosterone levels or keeping testosterone from reaching cancer cells. Your oncologist may combine hormone therapy with radiation therapy.
Rectal cancer
Radiation therapy combined with chemotherapy is a common treatment for metastatic
rectal cancer
. Another treatment is total neoadjuvant therapy. This treatment is chemotherapy followed by chemoradiation.
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of neoadjuvant therapy?
Neoadjuvant therapy has several benefits:
Shrinks tumors
. The treatment can turn large tumors into smaller tumors that are easier to remove. For example, if you have breast cancer, shrinking a tumor may mean your surgeon oncologist can remove your tumor with a
lumpectomy
instead of a
mastectomy
.
Eliminates some tumors
. Neoadjuvant therapy may eliminate small tumors so you don’t need surgery.
Easier recovery
. Your surgeon oncologist can use smaller incisions (cuts) to get to the tumor. Smaller incisions may lead to an easier recovery from surgery.
Evaluates cancer treatment
. Neoadjuvant therapy can help your oncology team find out if a specific cancer treatment is effective. For example, if you’re receiving a specific type of chemotherapy before breast cancer surgery, your oncologist can see how quickly that chemotherapy works to shrink the tumor in your breast.
Reduces risk of micrometastases
. Micro metastases are very tiny cancer cells that break off from a tumor and move to other areas of your body. They’re so tiny that tests can’t detect them. Neoadjuvant therapy that affects your entire body gets rid of micrometastases.
Reduces risk of recurrence
. Some research suggests neoadjuvant therapy may keep certain cancers from coming back (
recurring
).
Neoadjuvant therapy side effects
Side effects vary depending on the treatment type. Some common side effects are:
Anorexia nervosa
Diarrhea
Fatigue
Loss of taste (
ageusia
)
Nausea
and
vomiting
You may be worried about treatment side effects. Your oncologist will explain how each treatment could affect you. More importantly, they’ll explain what they’ll do to help ease treatment side effects, including providing palliative care.
Palliative care
is specialized treatment for people with serious illnesses. In palliative care, you receive treatment to ease your symptoms and manage side effects.
Recovery and Outlook
What’s the outlook for cancer treated with neoadjuvant therapy?
The outlook is good as researchers find new ways to use different combinations of cancer treatments as neoadjuvant therapy. For example, one breast cancer clinical trial that combines chemotherapy and an immunotherapy drug doubled the instances where treatment put cancer into
remission
. Remission means you don’t have symptoms and tests don’t detect signs of cancer.
How successful is neoadjuvant therapy?
Successful treatment varies depending on the type of cancer,
cancer stage
, treatment type and overall health. But in general, research shows that neoadjuvant therapy:
Reduces the chance you’ll need surgery to remove a cancerous tumor
If you do need surgery, increases the chance that surgery and adjuvant (follow-up) therapy will put the condition into remission
Advertisement
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re receiving neoadjuvant therapy, you’ll see your oncologist often so you can ask questions about your treatment, and they can check on your overall health and progress. But there may be times when you have concerns. Don’t hesitate to contact your provider if:
If you experience treatment side effects that are more intense than you expect or that you can’t manage with medication. For example, talk to your provider if you have nausea and vomiting that disrupts your daily life even after you take medication.
You notice changes in your body that could be signs that your condition is worsening.
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between neoadjuvant therapy and adjuvant therapy?
Both are examples of treatments that support cancer surgery. The difference is neoadjuvant therapy happens before surgery and
adjuvant therapy
is treatment after cancer surgery.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you imagine cancer as a marathon, you could think of neoadjuvant therapy as the warm-up that helps you to run the race. This treatment shrinks cancerous tumors before surgery. If you have neoadjuvant therapy, you may not need surgery. If you do need surgery, you may be able to have less invasive surgery. But this treatment may do more, like increase the chance that cancer won’t come back after surgery.
Neoadjuvant therapy isn’t an option for every kind of cancer. But it may be an option in your situation, so don’t hesitate to talk to your oncologist. And participating in a clinical trial may be a way for you to get a head start in your race to overcome cancer.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials