PML (Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy (PML)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy (PML)
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare brain infection that affects the substance in your brain that protects nerve cells. PML gets worse over time and may lead to neurological disabilities. Timely treatment may slow disease progression.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is PML?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is PML?
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare brain infection that causes the cells that produce myelin to break down.
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare brain infection. It causes the cells that produce
myelin
to break down. Myelin is an oily substance. It protects the nerve cells (
neurons
) in the white matter of your brain and spinal cord (
central nervous system
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
PML stands for:
P — progressive.
The disorder is progressive, meaning it will get worse over time.
M — multifocal.
The disease is multifocal, which means it typically affects multiple parts of your brain.
L — leukoencephalopathy.
Leukoencephalopathy means the disorder primarily affects the myelin or white matter of your brain.
PML causes brain damage. This damage can lead to neurological issues. These include mental impairment, visual symptoms and difficulty moving. Because PML is a progressive disorder, it will get worse over time. Some people can slow the disease’s progression with timely treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the first signs of PML?
For most people, PML symptoms start subtly. The symptoms may vary depending on which part of your brain has the infection.
The first symptoms of PML may include:
Clumsiness or lack of coordination
Difficulty speaking or thinking
Weakness
As the infection progresses, you may experience:
Dementia
Speech loss
Vision loss
Personality changes
Some people may experience
headaches
or
epilepsy
, although these symptoms are rare. Eventually, PML usually gets worse. The condition is often fatal. But the outlook varies according to the underlying condition and your response to treatment.
What triggers PML?
PML occurs because of the JC virus (JCV) — named after the initials of the first person identified with it, John Cunningham. Another name for the virus is human polyomavirus 2.
Advertisement
Up to 85%
of all adults have the JC virus. Experts aren’t certain how people get JCV. There’s evidence that children may pick it up through food or water. The virus is also found in
urine (pee) tests
. So, it may be picked up through urine-oral (pee-mouth) contamination.
In most people, JCV remains inactive. It doesn’t cause any symptoms. But in people with a
weakened immune system
, the virus may progress into PML.
Risk factors for this condition
PML typically only occurs in people who have severely weakened
immune systems
. You may be at risk of developing PML if you have:
HIV/AIDS
Cancers in your blood and bone marrow, like
leukemia
Cancers of your lymphatic system, like
lymphoma
or
Hodgkin disease
Autoimmune diseases, like
rheumatoid arthritis
,
multiple sclerosis
or
lupus
You may also be at risk if you’re an
organ donor recipient
and have taken
immunosuppressant
medicines (drugs to keep your body from rejecting the organ).
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose PML
Your healthcare provider will perform a
physical exam
and check your symptoms. They can diagnose PML with tests that look at your brain and spinal cord. You may have a:
Brain MRI
, which can pick up images of white matter lesions on your brain
Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
, to sample and evaluate your cerebrospinal fluid (fluid that surrounds tissue in your brain and spinal cord)
Brain
biopsy
, in rare cases, to help in the diagnosis of PML
Management and Treatment
How is PML treated?
PML treatment focuses on strengthening your immune system. For example, if you have AIDS, you may take
antiretroviral therapy (ART)
. These are drugs to reduce HIV in your body. This treatment can restore some of your immune system’s function.
Other people may benefit from
plasma exchange
. This treatment involves removing some immunosuppressant drugs from your blood. The treatment may increase your immune system’s functioning so it can fight the JC virus more effectively.
Scientists are testing the effectiveness of several new drugs for the treatment of PML. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has given special permission for some people to use these drugs, but results have varied.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have a weakened immune system and you start to notice symptoms of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, you should get checked out by your healthcare provider.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may ask your provider:
What’s my risk of PML?
Can I do anything to minimize my risk?
What PML symptoms should I watch for?
What are the risks of immunosuppressant medications?
Are there other treatments for my condition?
What are the risks and benefits of the treatment options?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy of someone with PML?
PML is a progressive disease, meaning it will continue to get worse over time. PML disease life expectancy depends on the severity of infection and treatment received.
Between 30% and 50%
of people die within the first few months of diagnosis. People who live longer will continue to have symptoms that get worse. These symptoms will lead to issues like losing your ability to speak or see.
Advertisement
New studies have shown that a small number of people with HIV who have PML can stabilize and prolong their survival. Before the availability of ARTs for the treatment of HIV,
only 10%
of people with PML lived for more than one year. Now, with ARTs, the one-year survival rate has increased to 50%. ARTs allow your immune system to fight off the JC virus in certain cases.
Can a person recover from PML?
People who develop PML while taking immunosuppressant drugs may recover once they’ve stopped taking the drug. And people who were successfully treated with ART therapy can see recovery from PML. But
80% of PML survivors
don’t experience reversal of their symptoms. This is because new white matter doesn’t form in the areas that were affected. Permanent neurological dysfunction is common. But people can survive for up to 15 years after PML has cleared from their system.
What is the outlook for people who undergo plasma exchange?
If PML symptoms began because of an immunosuppressant, your symptoms may improve if you stop the medication. You may also have plasma exchange to remove some immunosuppressant drugs from your body. The goal of plasma exchange is to increase your immune system’s function. For some people, plasma exchange may slow the progression of PML and slightly increase their life expectancy. But the benefits are uncertain.
Advertisement
Even after stopping a medication or having plasma exchange, many people experience lingering PML symptoms. Others may develop neurological disabilities. And there are other risks to stopping a medication. Be sure to make decisions about your medicine with your healthcare provider.
Prevention
How do I know if I’m at risk for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML)?
If you have a condition that weakens your immune system, ask your healthcare provider about your risk for PML.
Do other conditions put me at higher risk of developing PML?
People who have
multiple sclerosis (MS)
or
Crohn’s disease
may also need a blood test to look for conditions like HIV that increase their risk for JCV infection.
Providers often prescribe the drug
natalizumab
(Tysabri®) to treat MS or Crohn’s disease. This medication can increase the risk of PML.
If you have JCV that isn’t active or causing symptoms, you may still be able to take natalizumab. But it’s important to talk with your provider about the risks and benefits.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare brain infection that occurs when something triggers the JC virus. Most people have the JC virus living dormant in their bodies. But it’s harmless in people who don’t have a weakened immune system. If you have a weakened immune system, it’s important to work with your provider to watch for signs of PML. The disease typically gets worse over time. But there are treatment options available to help slow its progression and prolong your life.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment