Pterygium (Surfer’s Eye): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pterygium (Surfer's Eye)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pterygium (Surfer's Eye)
Pterygium (surfer’s eye) is a raised, fleshy, triangular-shaped growth that starts in the corner of your eye. Long-term exposure to UV light is the main cause. It may not cause symptoms, but sometimes, it can irritate your eye, and if it grows too much, it can affect your vision. Treatments include eye drops and surgery, if necessary.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Pterygium, a raised fleshy growth, on your cornea.
What is a pterygium (surfer’s eye)?
A pterygium (
ter-IJ-ee-um
) is a raised, fleshy growth on your eye’s
conjunctiva
, the clear membrane that covers the
white part
of your
eye
. The growth may look whiteish or pinkish and may have visible
blood vessels
in it. It typically starts in the corner of your eye and grows toward your iris (the
colored part
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Pterygium typically has a triangular or wing-like shape. The word, “pterygium,” comes from the Greek words
pteryx
, meaning “wing,” and
pterygion
, meaning “fin.” Another name for pterygium is surfer’s eye. This is because surfers are often in the elements that cause pterygium — sun, wind, sand and salt.
Who gets pterygium (surfer’s eye disease)?
Surfers do get pterygia (the plural of pterygium) more often. But anyone can get one if they spend a lot of time outdoors without
eye protection
. It’s more common in older adults, who’ve had more exposure to the elements over time, and also in those who live near the equator, where sunlight is more intense.
How serious is a pterygium?
A pterygium isn’t an invasive growth. It’s
not cancerous
, and it won’t spread to other nearby tissues. But it can continue to grow across the surface of your eye. If it reaches your
cornea
(the clear part that covers the colored part), it can damage your
vision
. In this case, you might need surgery to remove it.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes a pterygium eye?
Pterygium is an overgrowth of your conjunctiva tissue. Causes include:
Long-term exposure to the sun’s ultraviolet (UV) light.
Chronic irritation from hot and dry weather, wind and dust.
Other possible risk factors include:
Age over 60.
Genetics.
Vitamin A deficiency
.
Human papilloma virus (HPV)
.
Advertisement
What symptoms can a pterygium cause?
You might not feel your pterygium at first. You might only notice a raised, fleshy, wedge-shaped growth at the corner of your eye. When symptoms do develop, they can be mild to severe. They might include:
Inflammation and swelling (
conjunctivitis
).
Redness or bloodshot eye
.
Dry eye
.
Watery eye
.
A feeling like there’s something in your eye.
Eye itching.
Eye burning
.
Eye pain
.
Over time, you might also notice:
An increase in the size and spread of the lesion.
Difficulties or discomfort with
contact lenses
.
Vision changes, like
blurred
or
double vision
.
Not everyone develops these symptoms. Some pterygia grow more than others.
What’s the difference between a pterygium vs. pinguecula?
A
pinguecula
is a different kind of growth on your eye’s conjunctiva. It develops from similar causes — generally, long-term exposure to environmental irritants, especially sunlight. But pingueculae are much more common than pterygia. Sometimes, what starts as a pinguecula later develops into a pterygium.
A
pinguecula vs. pterygium
:
Is more of a bump than a wedge.
Doesn’t grow onto the cornea (over the iris).
Is yellowish white rather than pinkish white.
May contain protein, fat or calcium, but not flesh or blood vessels.
Rarely causes symptoms or irritation.
Rarely needs removal.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a pterygium diagnosed?
Your
eye care provider
can diagnose a pterygium with a
slit lamp exam
. A slit lamp is a type of microscope that focuses a narrow line (slit) of bright light on your eye. It helps your provider look at the front and inside of your eye. This is part of a standard
eye exam
. They’ll recognize a pterygium on sight.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for pterygium?
Pterygium treatment depends on how much it’s affecting you. If it’s not causing you any symptoms, it probably doesn’t need treatment. But your eye care provider will keep an eye on it. They’ll schedule regular eye exams to check on how the pterygium is growing and whether it’s affecting your vision.
If the pterygium
irritates your eye
, your provider might prescribe:
Over-the-counter (OTC) eye drops or eye ointments.
A short course of steroid eye drops for severe symptoms.
Providers also recommend wearing hats and wraparound UV sunglasses to protect your eyes from further UV damage. This may help slow the growth of your pterygium or prevent it from growing faster. If your pterygium is growing toward your cornea, they’ll recommend removing it before it gets there.
How do you get rid of a pterygium?
The only way to get rid of a pterygium is with
eye surgery
. A pterygium won’t go away on its own. You may want to have your pterygium removed if it seriously irritates your eye, if it’s growing aggressively or if it’s already affecting your vision. You may also choose to have it removed for cosmetic reasons.
Advertisement
What’s involved in pterygium surgery?
An
ophthalmologist
can remove your pterygium. If you don’t have one, your
optometrist
can refer you.
During pterygium surgery, your ophthalmologist will:
Give you
anesthesia
, so you won’t feel anything.
Remove the abnormal tissue from the surface of your eye.
Cover the hole left in your conjunctiva with other tissue.
Surgeons use different methods for patching the hole left after they remove your pterygium.
Options include:
Conjuctival autograft
. Your surgeon may take a piece of conjunctiva tissue from elsewhere on your eyeball, usually from behind your upper eyelid, to patch the hole. This method leaves another wound behind your eyelid, but it’s well protected there and heals on its own.
Amniotic tissue graft
. Surgeons use
donated
amniotic membrane tissue (from a
placenta
) to cover the hole while it heals. This tissue acts as a bandage that protects your conjunctiva until it can grow back to cover the hole. This method is helpful when the gap is too big for an autograft.
Pterygium surgery takes about an hour. After surgery, you’ll wear an eye patch for a few days while you recover. It takes four to six weeks for your eye to heal completely.
Your provider will prescribe medications to take home with you, including
antibiotics
to prevent infection and steroid eye drops to prevent the pterygium from growing back.
Advertisement
What are the risks or complications of pterygium surgery?
The primary risk is recurrence (return of the pterygium after surgery). If this happens, you may need another surgery. Fortunately, with new and improved surgical techniques, rates of pterygium recurrence are declining. Current research suggests the rate of recurrence is somewhere between 2% and 15%.
Recurrence is more likely to occur if you don’t take your prescribed eyedrops as directed, or if your eye has direct sun exposure after surgery. It’s important to follow your provider’s instructions on this. You can still spend time outside, but if you do, make sure to wear protection, like a hat or sunglasses.
Some of the medications that providers prescribe to prevent recurrence can also have side effects. Antimetabolites like
mitomycin
can cause “melting” or thinning of your sclera (scleromalacia) after pterygium surgery. Steroid eye drops can raise your eye pressure or lead to cataracts forming.
What happens if a pterygium isn’t removed?
Most pterygia will continue to grow, but some grow much more slowly than others. It’s possible that your pterygium will never bother you much. Because of the risk that it might grow back, healthcare providers don’t recommend surgery for a pterygium that’s small and doesn’t cause symptoms.
However, a pterygium that keeps spreading across your eye can cause problems. It may irritate your eye or obscure your vision. If it reaches your cornea, it can pull at it and change the shape, causing
astigmatism
. It can also scar your cornea, which can affect your vision even after it’s removed.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does a pterygium last?
A pterygium won’t go away unless a surgeon removes it. It’s likely to grow slowly throughout your life. Most people won’t need treatment for a pterygium. If it irritates your eye, you can usually manage these symptoms with over-the-counter medications. If it’s more than a minor nuisance, you can remove it.
What can I expect if I have a pterygium removed?
There’s a small chance your pterygium will come back after surgery. If it does, it usually starts to appear within four months, and no later than 12 months after surgery. If you need to have another surgery, your surgeon will take extra measures to make sure the pterygium doesn’t come back again.
Prevention
What can I do to lower my risk of pterygium?
You can lower your risk of developing a pterygium — and slow its growth if you have one — by protecting your eyes from the elements, especially sunlight. Wear UV protection sunglasses when you’re in the sun. Protect your eyes from dry, windy, dusty climates by lubricating them with
artificial tears
.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider about my pterygium?
Your provider will want to see you regularly to check on your pterygium and measure its growth — usually about once a year, unless it grows faster or slower than normal. Make sure to see them sooner if you start to develop new symptoms, or if your current medications aren’t working for you anymore.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A pterygium can look alarming when it first appears, but it’s not especially serious. You may never need treatment for it. If it does cause symptoms, you can often treat them with over-the-counter medications or eye drops. Your provider will keep an eye on it and let you know if they recommend removing it.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/28/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment