Acoustic Neuroma (Vestibular Schwannoma): Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Acoustic Neuroma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Acoustic Neuroma
Acoustic neuromas (vestibular schwannomas) are benign (noncancerous) tumors that can affect the nerves that help you hear and maintain your balance. Depending on their size and symptoms, your provider may suggest monitoring or surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schwannoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is an Acoustic Neuroma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is an Acoustic Neuroma?
Acoustic neuromas (vestibular schwannomas) are noncancerous ear tumors on your vestibular nerve that affect your hearing and sense of balance.
An acoustic neuroma, also called a vestibular schwannoma, is a noncancerous (benign)
ear tumor
that affects your
hearing
and sense of balance. It grows on the
nerve
that sends signals from your inner ear to your
brain
. It’s called your 8th cranial nerve (vestibulocochlear nerve).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
As acoustic neuromas grow, they can affect hearing, cause ringing in your ear (tinnitus), affect balance, and cause facial weakness or facial numbness. Treatment may include surgery, radiation therapy and, in rare cases, chemotherapy to treat the tumor.
These tumors aren’t common. Each year,
about
1 in 100,000 people develop an acoustic neuroma.
Symptoms and Causes
Acoustic neuroma symptoms
Symptoms depend on the tumor’s size and location. Early signs often include
hearing loss in one ear
and:
Ringing in your ears
Balance issues
Feeling like you’re spinning when you’re not
Vestibular schwannomas grow very slowly. As they grow, they may cause the following symptoms:
Facial paralysis
or
numbness
Headaches
Nausea
and
vomiting
Changes in your sense of taste
Difficulty swallowing
Blurred vision
or
double vision
Acoustic neuroma causes
These tumors form when Schwann cells multiply. Schwann cells support and protect the balance and hearing nerves in your
peripheral nervous system
. Researchers aren’t sure why they multiply.
Risk factors of an acoustic neuroma
If you have
neurofibromatosis type 2
, you may be at an increased risk for a type of vestibular schwannoma called bilateral acoustic neuroma. This tumor affects the hearing (auditory) nerves on both sides of your brain.
Vestibular schwannoma complications
While rare, a tumor may grow large enough to be life-threatening. This happens when it presses on the part of your brain that manages the flow of spinal fluid.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose an acoustic neuroma
To diagnose a vestibular schwannoma, a healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and do a
physical exam
. From there, they may recommend several tests, including:
Imaging tests, like
MRI
and
CT
scans
Hearing tests
, including auditory brainstem response
Balance tests
Electronystagmography
Management and Treatment
How is an acoustic neuroma treated?
Vestibular schwannoma treatment options include:
Observation
: If the tumor isn’t growing and you have no symptoms, your provider may recommend regular MRIs to look for changes.
Stereotactic radiosurgery
: This uses focused beams of radiation to treat the tumor and protect healthy tissue nearby.
Surgery
: A surgeon uses small tools to remove the tumor (
microsurgery
). This is the only treatment that can fully get rid of an acoustic neuroma.
Chemotherapy
: In rare cases, providers may use a drug called
bevacizumab
(Alymsys®, Avastin®, MVASI®, Zirabev®). It may shrink tumors. For children, it may help them keep their hearing longer. It also treats radiation side effects (
necrosis
).
Vestibular rehabilitation therapy
: This therapy helps improve balance if surgery affects the nerves that control it.
Treatments vary depending on factors like:
The tumor size and location
How the tumor affects your hearing and balance
Your age and overall health
Acoustic neuroma surgery
There are a few different ways surgeons can remove an acoustic neuroma. This depends on the tumor’s size and location. Each approach involves carefully reaching the tumor through your skull and separating it from nearby nerves. Your surgeon will choose the method that’s safest and most effective for your specific case.
Your
care team
will talk with you about possible complications after surgery, like hearing loss, balance problems, facial weakness or
infection
. They’ll also explain how to treat or manage these issues, if needed.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have an acoustic neuroma, your provider may decide to watch it closely instead of treating it right away. It’s normal to feel nervous or worry that any changes in your hearing or balance mean the tumor is growing. Ask your provider which changes might be a red flag. If you notice these concerning symptoms, let your provider know. They may suggest a different treatment.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may consider asking your healthcare provider:
Do I need treatment or will you simply monitor the tumor?
What’s the chance I’ll have useful hearing in my ear?
How likely is it that the acoustic neuroma will come back after surgery or radiation therapy?
Am I at higher risk for other types of tumors?
What are the risks and benefits of acoustic neuroma surgery?
Will I need rehabilitation after surgery?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schwannoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a vestibular schwannoma?
That depends on your condition, the type of surgery you have and any possible complications. Your provider will explain your treatment plan and what to expect, including:
Treatment options if the tumor comes back
Hearing devices that may help after surgery, like
bone conduction implants
or CROS (contralateral routing of signals)
hearing aids
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Feeling off balance, physically and emotionally, can be hard. Especially when you’re worried about losing your hearing. Acoustic neuromas grow slowly, but reach out to a provider if you notice symptoms. They may recommend watching and waiting instead of starting treatment right away. That’s because treatments like surgery or radiation, while effective, can be tough on your body.
It’s normal to feel anxious. Don’t hesitate to ask questions. No concern is too small. Your care team can help you understand what symptoms to look out for, when treatment might be needed and how to take care of yourself. And if you need emotional support, consider joining a support group or talking with a mental health professional.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A brain or nerve tumor doesn’t always mean you have cancer. Benign growths like schwannomas can be removed with minimally invasive surgery at Cleveland Clinic.
Schwannoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment