Syncope (Fainting): Types, Symptoms & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Syncope (Fainting)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Syncope (Fainting)
Syncope is the broad medical term for fainting, which has many causes. This temporary loss of consciousness follows a drop in blood flow to your brain. Usually, syncope isn’t a cause for concern. Most people don’t need follow-up treatment. But you need treatment for certain causes, like heart issues.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Fainting in Children Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Syncope?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Syncope?
Syncope (“SIN-ko-pea”) is the broad medical term for fainting or passing out. This happens when you have a sudden, temporary drop in the amount of
blood
that flows to your brain.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are lots of reasons why you may faint. Most of the time, a harmless, short-term cause makes you unresponsive. But in short, syncope can happen if you have:
A sudden drop in
blood pressure
A drop in your
heart rate
Changes in the amount of blood reaching certain areas of your body
If you faint, you’ll likely become conscious and alert after a few seconds or minutes. But you may feel confused or tired for a bit. You can recover fully in minutes or hours.
What happens in your body during syncope is typically less serious than other types of loss of consciousness. It doesn’t include things that happen during a
seizure
, for example.
Syncope is a common condition, especially in people over age 70. But syncopal episodes can happen at any age, whether you have a medical issue or not.
Because fainting spells can be a sign of a more serious condition, it’s important to get treatment right away. Most people can prevent problems with syncope once they get an accurate diagnosis and proper treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
Common symptoms of syncope (fainting) range from feeling dizzy to seeing spots or having headaches.
Signs and symptoms of fainting
The most common syncope symptoms include:
Blacking out
Falling for no reason
Feeling lightheaded or
dizzy
Feeling drowsy or groggy
Feeling unsteady or weak when standing
Seeing spots or having
tunnel vision
Having
headaches
Feeling sweaty or
nauseous
Advertisement
Causes of fainting
Syncope, or passing out, happens when you don’t have enough blood flowing to your brain. There are many causes for this, depending on the type of syncope. You may have a medical condition that affects your
nervous system
or
heart
. Or you may have a condition that affects blood flow through your body and makes your blood pressure drop when you stand up after lying down.
Types of syncope (fainting)
There are many different types of syncope:
Reflex syncope
(which includes
vasovagal
and situational syncope) is your body’s reaction to certain things happening to you or around you, like standing for a while or feeling stressed.
Postural or orthostatic syncope
(also called postural hypotension) is a sudden drop in blood pressure from a change in position. It may happen when you stand up.
Cardiac syncope
is a lack of blood flow to your brain because of an issue with your heart or blood vessels. These conditions can include: abnormal heart rhythm (
arrhythmia
),
blood clot
,
heart valve disease
or
heart failure
.
Neurologic syncope
comes from an issue in your brain that limits blood flow there. It can happen when you have a neurological condition like a seizure,
stroke
or
transient ischemic attack
(TIA).
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome
(POTS)
is an issue with maintaining blood pressure when you stand. But it also involves a fast heart rate (
tachycardia
) that happens when you stand.
Syncope with an unknown cause
. An increased risk of a syncopal episode is a side effect of some medications. Be sure to follow up with a provider if you don’t know what made you faint.
What are the triggers of syncope?
Triggers of fainting may include:
Standing for a long time
Taking
decongestants
or certain
blood pressure medicines
Being in a hot environment
Consuming too much food or caffeine, or too many beverages that contain alcohol
Having too little salt and fluids in your body
Changing position, especially standing up quickly
Having a heart-related issue that affects blood flow
Having an issue with your brain, nerves or
spinal cord
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose syncope
A healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
and a careful review of your medical history. They’ll ask you detailed questions about your symptoms and syncopal episodes. They’ll ask you if you have any symptoms before you faint, and when and where you faint.
They may measure and record your heart rate and blood pressure while you’re in different positions, including lying down, sitting and standing.
You may then have one or more tests to help find the cause of fainting. These tests check things like:
The condition of your heart
How fast your heart beats (heart rate)
The amount of blood in your body (blood volume)
Blood flow when your body is in different positions
Tests that are used
Tests to determine causes of syncope include:
Blood tests
to check for anemia or metabolic changes
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
to record your heart’s electrical activity
Exercise stress test
to see how well your heart works under stress
Ambulatory monitor
to record information about your heart’s rate and rhythm for days or weeks
Echocardiogram
to create an image of your heart’s structures
Tilt table test
to record your blood pressure and heart rate while a provider tilts the table you’re on (head-up) to different levels
Autonomic reflex testing
to monitor your blood pressure, blood flow, heart rate, skin temperature and sweating in response to certain stimuli
Electrophysiology study
to get a detailed review of your heart’s electrical activity
Computed tomography (CT) scan
to get images of your heart or brain
Neurological evaluation
to check for issues with your nervous system
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What to do if someone faints
If someone faints, follow these steps:
Check to make sure they’re breathing.
Make sure they lie down or sit with their head between their knees for at least 10 to 15 minutes.
Offer the person cold water to drink once they’re conscious.
How do you treat syncope?
Syncope treatments will depend on what makes you faint and the results of your evaluation and testing. The goal of treatment is to keep you from having another syncopal episode.
Treatment options for syncope include:
Taking medications
like
beta-blockers
or
midodrine
, or making changes to medications you already take
Wearing support garments
or
compression stockings
to improve blood circulation
Making changes
like eating small, frequent meals, eating more salt (sodium) or potassium, drinking more fluids and avoiding drinks with caffeine and alcohol
Elevating the head of your bed
(you can use extra pillows or place risers under the legs of the head of the bed)
Avoiding or changing the “triggers”
that cause a syncopal episode, which may include avoiding standing for long periods of time, heat or emotional stressors
Having
biofeedback
training
to control a fast heartbeat
Getting a device
like a
pacemaker
or an
implantable cardioverter defibrillator
for heart problems
Getting treatment
for brain issues,
like medicine or surgery
Standing up slowly
Advertisement
Your healthcare team will develop a treatment plan that’s right for you and talk to you about your treatment options.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you faint once and are in good health otherwise, you probably don’t need to talk to a healthcare provider. But fainting may be serious if you felt
chest pain
, confusion or shortness of breath (
dyspnea
) when you fainted. This is a case where you should see a provider.
Depending on the cause of fainting, you should have a follow-up appointment with a provider two to four weeks after you get treatment. If a provider finds an issue with your heart’s structure or rhythm, you’ll need more follow-up appointments for that.
Questions to ask your provider include:
Do you know what caused me to faint?
How can I prevent the type of syncope I had?
Do I need additional tests or follow-up appointments?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Fainting in Children Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
With the proper diagnosis and treatment, you can manage fainting. If you’ve had a syncopal episode, you could have another one. Your chances of another fainting spell and how the condition affects you depend on several factors, including:
The cause
Your age
Your
sex
Other medical issues you have
If you have a syncope diagnosis, check your local laws. Some areas require drivers with syncope to contact the license bureau. A provider may recommend you find out the cause and get treatment before driving.
Advertisement
Fainting typically isn’t fatal. Most episodes of syncope aren’t dangerous unless you get hurt when you fall. But syncope episodes can be life-threatening if you have abnormal heart rhythms or a neurologic cause. People with a heart or neurologic issue need to follow up with a provider who can help.
Can fainting be prevented?
Many times, people feel a syncopal episode coming on. They feel lightheaded, nauseous and have
heart palpitations
(irregular heartbeats that feel like “fluttering” in the chest). You may be able to keep from fainting if you:
Sit or lie down and put your legs up
Make a fist with your hands
Make your arms tense or tight
Cross your legs or squeeze your thighs against each other
To reduce your risk of fainting, you need to know the cause. Reducing your risk may be as easy as staying hydrated, if that was the issue. If you have a heart condition that caused it, you may need medicine or a device to treat an abnormal heart rhythm.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The unexpected and attention-getting nature of syncope can make it seem more dangerous than it is. In most cases, it’s a temporary condition that doesn’t point to any serious health issues. Seeing a provider after you faint can give you peace of mind, knowing that you don’t have a serious condition. Be sure to get treatment for your heart condition if it made you faint.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Fainting in children is common, but it can be unnerving when it happens to your child. Cleveland Clinic Children’s experts can help uncover why it’s happening.
Fainting in Children Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment