Sialadenitis (Salivary Gland Infection): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Sialadenitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sialadenitis
Sialadenitis refers to a swollen salivary gland. It’s caused by infections, autoimmune diseases and salivary gland stones. When a salivary gland becomes inflamed, it can stop functioning. Sialadenitis usually goes away in about a week. But if you develop severe symptoms, such as difficulty breathing or swallowing, call 911.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Sialadenitis can affect any salivary gland. But it most often affects your parotid or submandibular salivary glands.
What is sialadenitis?
“Sialadenitis” is the medical term for inflammation of one or more of your salivary glands.
Salivary glands
are the glands that make your saliva (spit). Saliva helps you swallow, digest food and protects your teeth from harmful bacteria. There are three major salivary glands:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Parotid glands
, located in front of each ear.
Submandibular
glands
, located in the very back of your
mouth
, below your jaw.
Sublingual glands
, located under your
tongue
on the floor of your mouth.
In addition to your major salivary glands, you have hundreds of minor salivary glands. These smaller glands are in your lips, inner cheeks and all throughout the linings of your mouth and throat.
Sialadenitis mostly affects your parotid and submandibular glands.
It can be an acute (sudden), chronic (long-term), or recurrent (returning) condition. Sialadenitis is rare.
Who gets sialadenitis?
Anyone can get sialadenitis. But it’s most common among adults older than 50, especially those who have
salivary gland stones
.
Sialadenitis can also occur in other age groups, including:
Infants during the first few weeks of their life.
People who are sick or recovering from surgery.
People with
dehydration
,
malnutrition
or immunosuppression (when your body can’t fight disease).
Is sialadenitis serious?
Without proper treatment, sialadenitis can spread into the deep tissues of your head and neck, causing a severe infection. It’s important to see a healthcare provider right away if you have any sialadenitis symptoms, such as pain, swelling and fever.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of sialadenitis?
Symptoms of sialadenitis include:
Enlargement, tenderness and discoloration of one or more salivary glands.
Fever
(when the inflammation leads to an infection).
Decreased saliva (a symptom of both acute and chronic sialadenitis).
Pain while eating.
Dry mouth (xerostomia)
.
Swelling in your cheek and neck region.
If you notice any of these symptoms, see a healthcare provider right away.
What causes sialadenitis?
Sialadenitis causes include:
Bacterial or viral infection.
Dehydration.
Recent illness.
Certain medications, such as
diuretics
,
antihistamines
and
beta-blockers
.
Sjögren’s syndrome
, an autoimmune disease.
Poor
oral hygiene
.
Is sialadenitis contagious?
It depends on the cause. If sialadenitis is the result of an infection, then you can spread the infection to others through sneezing, coughing or coming into contact with infected saliva.
If a salivary gland stone caused sialadenitis, then there’s no risk of passing the condition on to someone else.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is sialadenitis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose sialadenitis through a physical examination and a history of your symptoms. They may also examine your salivary glands with an endoscope (a tiny camera with a light attached).
Your healthcare provider might use a
salivary gland scan
to find blockages. They’ll use
ultrasound
or
computed tomography (CT) scans
for this test.
In some cases, your provider might refer you to an otolaryngologist (ENT) for further evaluation. An ENT is a provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating ear, nose and throat conditions.
Management and Treatment
How do you get rid of swollen salivary glands?
There are several ways to manage sialadenitis, including:
Antibiotics.
Home remedies.
Nonsurgical treatments.
Surgery.
Treatment depends on the severity of your condition.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics
are usually the first line of sialadenitis treatment. The most common antibiotics for sialadenitis include
dicloxacillin
, cephalosporin or
clindamycin
.
Home remedies
Your healthcare provide may also recommend home remedies to help decrease pain and increase saliva flow, including:
Staying hydrated.
Drinking lemon juice or sucking on sour candy.
Using warm compresses.
Massaging your salivary glands.
Improving your oral hygiene.
Nonsurgical treatments
In some cases, your healthcare provider may deliver intravenous (IV) medications through a vein in your arm. They’ll give you saline or dextrose solutions to keep you hydrated and antibiotics to fight infection.
Surgical treatments
If sialadenitis doesn’t respond to other treatments, your healthcare provider may recommend surgery. If you’ve developed an abscess (a pocket of pus), they’ll drain the infection and remove any stones or other blockages. They may also use an endoscope to examine your salivary gland. Healthcare providers call this procedure a sialendoscopy.
Advertisement
How long does it take to recover from sialadenitis?
In most cases, salivary gland infections resolve after one week with conservative treatment.
If you had surgery, it could take about two weeks to fully recover.
Can sialadenitis go away on its own?
Infected or swollen salivary glands often go away on their own or with conservative treatment. But if you have lingering symptoms, such as swelling, pain, fever or difficulty swallowing, call your healthcare provider right away. You may need emergency treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have sialadenitis?
Generally, people with sialadenitis feel better in about one week with conservative treatment. If you need surgery, it could take two weeks for swelling and bruising to subside.
Sialadenitis can recur (return) in some people. While you can’t always prevent recurrence, you can reduce your risk by practicing good oral hygiene, staying hydrated and avoiding smoking.
Is sialadenitis fatal?
Left untreated, a salivary gland infection can spread to the tissues of your head and neck.
This is a life-threatening event. If you have difficulty breathing or swallowing, call 911 (or your local emergency number) or go to the emergency room immediately.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk for sialadenitis?
You may not be able to prevent sialadenitis completely. But there are a few things you can do to reduce your risk:
Drink plenty of water.
Practice good oral hygiene.
Eat a diet that’s healthy for you.
Avoid
smoking
and using other tobacco products.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have lingering sialadenitis symptoms, such as facial swelling and fever that lasts for more than three days, schedule an appointment with your healthcare provider. They can find out what caused your swollen salivary gland and recommend appropriate treatment.
When should I go to the ER?
If you develop severe sialadenitis symptoms — such as difficulty breathing or swallowing — call 911 (or your local emergency number) or go to the nearest emergency room. You may need emergency treatment to avoid life-threatening complications.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Sialadenitis refers to inflammation of one or more of your salivary glands. It usually gets better in about a week with conservative treatments. But if your symptoms linger, or if you have trouble breathing or swallowing, you should seek emergency medical care right away.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/29/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment