Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity (LAST)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity (LAST)
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) is a rare complication that can develop within minutes of receiving local anesthetics. It’s a medical emergency that causes nervous system and heart issues. LAST is treatable, and healthcare providers act quickly to diagnose and treat it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What is local anesthetic systemic toxicity?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What is local anesthetic systemic toxicity?
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) is a rare, life-threatening complication of receiving local anesthetic medications. LAST typically causes issues with your
central nervous system
and/or
cardiovascular system
, like
seizures
and
arrhythmias
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Local anesthetics work by temporarily blocking your
peripheral nerves
from sending pain and sensory signals to your
brain
. Healthcare providers use these medications to numb specific areas of your body for various procedures. Local anesthetics come in many forms, like injections, gels and sprays. In rare cases, local anesthetics can cause toxicity within minutes of receiving them.
LAST is treatable. Your provider will act quickly if symptoms develop.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of local anesthetic systemic toxicity
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity most commonly causes central nervous system (your brain and
spinal cord
) issues. Initial signs and symptoms include:
Seizures (the most common sign)
Agitation
or
confusion
Auditory changes, like
tinnitus
Numbness
around your mouth
Metallic taste in your mouth
Slurred speech (
dysarthria
)
Hallucinations
Eye movement abnormalities
LAST can also affect your cardiovascular system, causing cardiac toxicity. Signs and symptoms may include:
Low blood pressure
Bradycardia
(slow heart rate),
tachycardia
(fast heart rate) or other
arrhythmias
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
)
Cardiac arrest
, including failure of your heart’s electrical system (
asystole
) or
ventricular fibrillation
Without quick treatment, LAST can progress to cause respiratory arrest and/or
coma
.
Advertisement
LAST symptoms typically develop within five minutes of receiving a local anesthetic. The symptoms can range from mild to severe. But it’s impossible to predict how LAST will progress. Your healthcare provider will observe you closely after you receive a local anesthetic to look for signs of LAST, especially if you have risk factors for it.
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity causes
The most common cause of LAST is accidental injection of the local anesthetic medication into a
blood vessel
.
Nerve blocks that numb an extremity (like an arm or leg) account for about 20% of LAST cases. But there are reports of LAST developing from:
Topical application of a local anesthetic in gel form
Application of local anesthetic to the
mucosa
in the mouth,
esophagus
and
trachea
Based on this evidence, LAST can develop with any use or form of a local anesthetic. But several factors increase the likelihood of it happening.
Risk factors
Factors related to your health that may increase your risk of experiencing local anesthetic systemic toxicity include:
A buildup of acids in your body (
metabolic acidosis
)
Low levels of oxygen in your body (
hypoxia
)
Preexisting
heart disease
, especially
ischemia
, arrhythmias, conduction abnormalities and low ejection fraction
Being over 65 (infants under 4 months are also at increased risk of LAST)
Liver
or
kidney disease
(these may increase your risk of delayed LAST)
Pregnancy
Mitochondrial diseases
Certain local anesthetic medications are more likely to lead to LAST than others, like
bupivacaine
, for example. Higher doses of anesthetics also increase your risk of LAST.
Certain techniques for giving local anesthetic may also increase your risk of LAST. According to a study of 125 cases of LAST:
Infiltration techniques (injecting the anesthetic
subcutaneously
) accounted for 20% of cases
Central neuraxial blocks (
epidural
and
caudal
blocks) accounted for 15% of cases
Continuous infusion of a local anesthetic accounted for 13% of cases
Lastly, local anesthetic injections in areas that have a lot of blood vessels (high vascularity) are more likely to lead to LAST. There’s an increased number of LAST cases for penile nerve blocks, for example.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose local anesthetic systemic toxicity
Healthcare providers typically diagnose local anesthetic systemic toxicity based on your symptoms. This is because providers must act quickly to treat LAST, so they can’t delay the diagnosis. In rare cases, your provider might do an
EKG
(electrocardiogram) to help diagnose it.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for LAST?
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity is a medical emergency, so healthcare providers act quickly to treat it. In general, treatment involves:
Airway management
. Your provider will provide immediate ventilation and
oxygen therapy
to manage your breathing.
Seizure prevention or treatment
. Your provider will give you medication (like
benzodiazepines
) for this.
IV infusion of
lipid emulsion
. Your provider will inject this medication into a vein. It helps reverse LAST by absorbing local anesthetic from blood and tissues. This decreases the concentration of anesthetic in your brain and heart.
CPR
. If LAST affects the functioning of your heart, your provider will do CPR and use other methods to stabilize it.
Advertisement
After treatment, a provider will monitor you for at least six hours to make sure the treatment is effective and you don’t have any other complications.
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with LAST?
People with LAST who receive quick diagnoses and treatment typically have a good prognosis (outlook). The treatments often effectively reverse LAST.
Delayed treatment of severe LAST can result in coma and/or death. This is rare. For example, data from the poison control centers in the U.S. reveals that there were only four deaths from local anesthetics in 2016.
Prevention
Is local anesthetic systemic toxicity preventable?
LAST isn’t always preventable. But healthcare providers use certain guidelines and methods to help decrease the risk of it.
For example, your provider will use the lowest effective dose of local anesthetic. They may also use
ultrasound
imaging to guide a local anesthetic injection to help avoid accidental injection into a blood vessel.
If you have risk factors for LAST, your provider will carefully consider the safest anesthetic medication, dose and application for you.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity is probably something you don’t think about when you’re going to get a local anesthetic. You may be more concerned about whether the injection will hurt or if you’ll have excessive numbness. And that’s perfectly reasonable — LAST is rare. Know that your healthcare provider will carefully monitor you after you receive a local anesthetic. And they’ll act quickly if signs of LAST develop.
Advertisement
If you have any concerns related to local anesthetics, don’t hesitate to ask your provider. They’re available to help.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7246
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment