Pulmonary Embolism: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pulmonary Embolism
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pulmonary Embolism
A pulmonary embolism (PE) is a blood clot in your lung that creates a blockage. This causes issues with blood flow and oxygen levels in your lungs. A PE is a medical emergency. You need a prompt diagnosis and treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Pulmonary Embolism Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
A pulmonary embolism starts as a blood clot in your leg and moves to your lung.
What is a pulmonary embolism?
A pulmonary embolism (PE) is a
blood clot
in one of the
blood vessels
in your lung. This happens when a clot in another part of your body (often your leg or arm) moves through your
veins
to your lung. A PE restricts blood flow to your
lungs
, lowers oxygen levels in your lungs and increases
blood pressure
in your
pulmonary arteries
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This condition is a medical emergency.
Without quick treatment, a pulmonary embolism can cause
heart
or lung damage and even death. About 33% of people with a pulmonary embolism die before they get a diagnosis and treatment.
A pulmonary embolism can:
Damage your lungs.
Put strain on your heart, causing
heart failure
.
Be life-threatening, depending on the size of the clot.
With timely diagnosis and treatment, a PE is seldom fatal.
How common is a pulmonary embolism?
Pulmonary embolism is one of the most common
heart and blood vessel diseases
in the world. It ranks third behind
heart attack
and
stroke
. In the United States, about 900,000 people a year get a PE.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a pulmonary embolism?
The first signs of pulmonary embolism are usually
shortness of breath
and
chest pains
that get worse if you exert yourself or take a deep breath.
If you have these symptoms, get medical attention right away. Pulmonary embolism is serious but very treatable. Quick treatment greatly reduces the chance of death.
Pulmonary embolism symptoms can vary, depending on the severity of the clot. Although most people with a pulmonary embolism experience symptoms, some don’t.
Pulmonary embolism symptoms may include:
Sudden shortness of breath — whether you’ve been active or at rest.
Fast breathing.
Wheezing
.
Unexplained sharp pain in your chest, arm, back, shoulder, neck or jaw. The pain may be similar to symptoms of a heart attack and can get worse when you take a breath.
Cough with or without bloody mucus.
Pale, clammy or bluish skin.
Rapid heartbeat (
pulse
).
Excessive sweating.
In some cases, feeling anxious, lightheaded, faint or
passing out
.
Advertisement
If you have any symptoms of a pulmonary embolism, get medical attention immediately.
How long can you have a pulmonary embolism without knowing?
Some people have mild symptoms that appear over a number of days or even weeks. Over time, the symptoms get worse and get your attention. But some people get symptoms just minutes (or even seconds) after a pulmonary embolism happens.
What causes a pulmonary embolism?
Pulmonary embolism causes include:
Blood
collecting or “pooling” in a certain part of your body (usually an arm or leg). Blood usually pools after long periods of inactivity, like after surgery, bed rest or a long flight or plane ride.
Injury to a vein, like from a fracture or surgery (especially in your pelvis, hip, knee or leg).
Another medical condition, like cardiovascular disease (including congestive heart failure,
atrial fibrillation
, heart attack or stroke).
An increase or decrease in your blood’s clotting factors. Elevated clotting factors can occur with some types of cancer or in some people taking hormone replacement therapy or birth control pills. Abnormal or low clotting factors may also happen as a result of
blood clotting disorders
.
What are the risk factors for a pulmonary embolism?
People at risk of developing a PE include those who:
Have a blood clot in their leg, or
deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
.
Are inactive for long periods of time while traveling via motor vehicle, train or plane (such as a long, cross-country car ride).
Have recently had trauma or injury to a vein, possibly from surgery, a fracture or
varicose veins
.
Are using hormonal-based contraception (like
birth control pills
, patches or rings) or hormone replacement therapy.
Have a blood clotting disorder.
Have a family history of blood clots.
Currently smoke.
Have
diabetes
.
Have
cancer
.
Are older than 60.
Have a history of heart failure, heart attack or stroke.
Have overweight (a
body mass index or BMI
greater than 25) or obesity (a BMI greater than 30).
Are pregnant or have given birth in the previous six weeks.
Received a
central venous catheter
through their arm or leg.
If you have any of these risk factors and you’ve had a blood clot, talk with your healthcare provider so they can take steps to reduce your risk of PE.
What are the complications of a pulmonary embolism?
A pulmonary embolism can lead to:
Cyanosis
.
Heart attack.
Stroke.
Pulmonary hypertension
.
Shock
.
Pulmonary infarction (lung tissue death).
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a pulmonary embolism diagnosed?
After looking at your symptoms and risk factors, a provider will use the following tests to make a PE diagnosis:
Blood tests
(including the
D-dimer test
).
Computed tomography (CT) angiogram
.
Ultrasound
of your leg. (This helps identify blood clots in people’s legs, or deep vein thrombosis, which can move to the lungs, become a PE and cause more damage.)
A
VQ scan
, if you’re unable to get contrast for a CT scan. (This is a nuclear scan that can detect clots in your lung.)
A pulse oximeter (pulse ox) that attaches to your fingertip to check your
oxygen level
.
Echocardiogram
.
Other tests your provider may order include:
Pulmonary angiogram.
Chest X-ray
.
Management and Treatment
How is a pulmonary embolism treated?
Healthcare providers usually treat a PE in a hospital, where they can monitor your condition closely.
The length of your pulmonary embolism treatment and hospital stay will vary, depending on the severity of the clot. Some people may not need to stay overnight.
Advertisement
The main treatment for a pulmonary embolism is an anticoagulant (blood thinner).
Depending on the severity of your clot and its effect on your other organs such as your heart, you may also undergo
thrombolytic therapy
, surgery or interventional procedures to improve blood flow in your pulmonary arteries.
Anticoagulant medications
In most cases, treatment consists of
anticoagulant medications
(blood thinners). Anticoagulants decrease your blood’s ability to clot. This prevents future blood clots.
As with any medicine, it’s important to understand how and when to take your anticoagulant and follow your provider’s guidelines.
Your diagnosis will determine the type of medication you’ll take, how long you need to take it, and the type of follow-up monitoring you’ll need. Be sure to keep all scheduled follow-up appointments with your provider and the laboratory so they can monitor your response to the medication.
While taking anticoagulants, your follow-up may include frequent blood tests (
prothrombin time test
) to see how fast your blood clots. This helps your provider know if you’re taking the right dose.
Compression stockings
Compression stockings
(support hose) improve blood flow in your legs. People with deep vein thrombosis often use them. You should use them as your provider prescribes. The stockings are usually knee-high length and compress your legs to prevent your blood from pooling.
Advertisement
Talk with your provider about how to use your compression stockings, for how long and how to care for them. It’s important to wash compression stockings according to directions to prevent damaging them.
Procedures
If a PE is life-threatening, or if other treatments aren’t working, your provider may recommend using surgery or a catheter to
remove the blood clot
from your pulmonary artery. Thrombolytic therapy is another option. Your healthcare provider may also recommend an interventional procedure in which a provider places a filter inside your body’s largest vein. A
vena cava filter
traps clots before they enter your lungs.
Thrombolytic therapy
Thrombolytic medications
(“clot busters”), including tissue plasminogen activator (TPA), dissolve the clot. You’ll always receive thrombolytics in the emergency department or intensive care unit (ICU) of a hospital where a provider can monitor you. You may receive this type of medication if you have a special situation, like
low blood pressure
or an unstable condition because of the pulmonary embolism.
Complications/side effects of the treatment
Bleeding is a possible side effect of medications for pulmonary embolism treatment. A provider will give you the dose of anticoagulants or thrombolytics that fits your situation. Keeping you in the hospital allows them to monitor your condition.
Advertisement
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
You should feel better within a week of treatment. But a pulmonary embolism can take months or years to go away completely.
Your heart has to work harder to push against restricted blood flow and higher blood pressure from a PE. Because of this, some people also have issues with getting one of their
heart chambers
back to normal months later. This makes them less able to handle as much physical activity as they did before they had a pulmonary embolism.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Pulmonary Embolism Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a pulmonary embolism?
Without treatment, a pulmonary embolism is a very serious condition that can lead to permanent illness or death. Some people die suddenly or a few hours after a pulmonary embolism happens. This can happen before a provider makes a diagnosis.
Your risk of dying from a PE is higher if you have a heart or lung condition. Still, with better imaging methods than providers had in the past, a pulmonary embolism is fatal for only about 1% to 3% of people who have one.
With treatment, your prognosis (outlook) depends on the size of the blood clot and blockages, as well as your overall health and how well your heart can pump blood.
Will a pulmonary embolism go away?
It can take months or years for a pulmonary embolism to go away completely. Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
(CTEPH)
is a chronic manifestation of PEs that keep coming back.
Prevention
Can a pulmonary embolism be prevented?
Yes, you may be able to prevent it. Ways to prevent a pulmonary embolism include:
Getting regular physical activity. If you can’t walk around, move your arms, legs and feet for a few minutes every hour. If you know you’ll need to sit or stand for long periods, wear compression stockings to encourage blood flow.
Drinking plenty of fluids, but limiting alcohol and caffeine.
Not using tobacco products.
Avoiding crossing your legs.
Not wearing tight-fitting clothing.
Getting to a weight that’s healthy for you.
Elevating your feet for 30 minutes twice a day.
Talking to your provider about reducing your risk factors, especially if you or any of your family members have had a blood clot.
Talking to your provider about a vena cava filter.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
You’ll need to take a blood thinner for three to six months or longer. Don’t stop taking it unless your provider instructs you to. If you’re taking a blood thinner, don’t do things that put you at risk of an injury that could make you bleed.
Be sure you discuss and understand your follow-up care with your healthcare provider. Follow their recommendations to reduce the risk of another PE. They may suggest you stop using tobacco products, get more physical activity and consider changing your eating habits.
Keep all appointments with your provider and the laboratory so they can monitor your response to prescribed treatments.
If you’re feeling anxious or fearful after your PE, ask your provider about talking to a counselor who can help.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your healthcare provider for follow-up appointments. While taking a blood thinner, contact your provider if you have
black poop
, a bad headache or a bruise that’s getting bigger. These signs could mean that you’re bleeding internally.
When should I go to the ER?
Get immediate treatment if you have pulmonary embolism symptoms. (See symptoms section above.)
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Questions you may want to ask your provider include:
What’s the best treatment for me?
How long do I need to take the medicine you prescribed?
When is my next follow-up appointment?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
After you survive a pulmonary embolism, you may be surprised to find that your life may not just go back to the way it was before. It’s OK to admit that you’ve been through something difficult. People might not understand why you’re afraid it’ll happen again. It can help to talk through your fears with a support group or a counselor. To fight your fears, keep following your provider’s recommendations. That includes taking medicines they prescribe for you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A blood clot in your lungs is serious. But Cleveland Clinic has the expert pulmonary embolism treatment you need.
Pulmonary Embolism Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/20/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment