Unstable Angina: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Unstable Angina
Advertisement
Advertisement
Unstable Angina
Unstable angina is a type of chest pain that happens when your heart muscle isn’t receiving enough oxygen. A blockage in your coronary artery causes this. Get help as soon as possible for unstable angina, which can lead to a heart attack. In addition to medicines, you may need to have a medical procedure at a hospital.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Coronary Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is unstable angina?
Unstable angina is a type of
angina
(chest pain) that happens when your heart muscle doesn’t get as much oxygen-rich blood as it should. This happens because of plaque blockages and, usually, a
blood clot
in one or more of the arteries that feed your heart (
coronary arteries
). Your heart muscle can’t get enough blood while a blood clot is blocking your coronary artery. This can lead to permanent heart muscle damage — a heart attack.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Maybe you’ve had chest pain before, but now it’s unpredictable and keeps getting worse. It used to happen only when you worked in the yard, but now mild physical activity brings it on. It even shows up without warning when you’re at rest, relaxing or even asleep. Your
heart
needs your attention now.
Without quick treatment, unstable angina puts you at a high risk of having a
heart attack
. Many people who have heart attacks get unstable angina, exhaustion or
shortness of breath
days or weeks before their heart attack happens.
Unstable angina is an emergency.
You should get medical help immediately.
In rare situations, your heart can stop beating, which is fatal.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of unstable angina?
Unstable angina symptoms include:
Tight or sharp
chest pain
that happens without warning.
Pain in your chest that may spread to your arm, jaw or back.
Chest pain that happens even when you’re not exerting yourself.
Chest pain that doesn’t stop after you rest or take medicine.
Shortness of breath.
Sweating.
Anxiety.
Dizziness
.
Nausea
and
vomiting
.
Episodes of unstable angina can last for 15 minutes or more. Without treatment, you can have many episodes of unstable angina.
What causes unstable angina?
Coronary artery disease
is the top cause of unstable angina.
Atherosclerosis
(cholesterol and fat collecting inside your arteries) can lead to this disease that affects the arteries that bring blood to your heart muscle. A blood clot can form in your narrowed coronary arteries, which allows even less blood to get through. This brings on the unstable angina.
Advertisement
Coronary artery spasms
cause a rare type of unstable angina called variant or
Prinzmetal angina
.
What are the risk factors for unstable angina?
Stable
and unstable angina are both more common in older adults, in people who have a biological family member with coronary artery disease and in people who smoke, have
diabetes
or have
high blood pressure
. But people without any of these risks can also have unstable angina and should pay attention and act if they’re having symptoms.
What are the complications of unstable angina?
Possible complications of unstable angina include:
Heart attack.
Heart failure
.
Stroke
.
Abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmia
).
Cardiac arrest
(rare).
Diagnosis and Tests
How is unstable angina diagnosed?
To make an unstable angina diagnosis, your provider will take your blood pressure and give you a
physical exam
. They’ll also order tests.
Tests to diagnose unstable angina can include:
Electrocardiogram
(EKG).
Stress test
.
Cardiac blood tests
.
Echocardiogram
.
Coronary angiogram
.
What are the three criteria for unstable angina?
A provider making a diagnosis of unstable angina is checking for one of three criteria. These include chest pain that:
Started within the past two months.
Has been getting worse.
Happens when you’re not exerting yourself.
Management and Treatment
How is unstable angina treated?
Treatment for unstable angina should happen in a hospital where you can get immediate care to prevent a heart attack.
For unstable angina treatment, a provider may give you several medicines, like:
Nitroglycerin
to help with chest pain and improve blood flow.
Blood thinners like aspirin or
clopidogrel
to protect against blood clots.
Beta-blockers
to lessen your heart’s workload.
Cholesterol-lowering medicine
.
High blood pressure medicine
.
Medicine to help regulate your heart rhythm
.
What treatments are used for unstable angina?
Unstable angina treatments may include procedures that widen your coronary arteries or reroute your blood around a blockage there. These procedures are:
Angioplasty
with
stent
implantation.
Heart bypass surgery
.
Complications or side effects of the treatment
Although medications sometimes have side effects, your provider prescribes medicine for you because its benefits are greater than its risks. Always talk to your provider first if you have concerns about continuing a medication. Stopping your medications without asking your provider may cause a heart attack.
Complications from procedures (some of which are rare) may include:
Bleeding.
Infection.
Abnormal heart rhythm.
Heart attack.
Stroke.
The need for another procedure.
How long does it take to recover from this treatment?
You can usually get back to your normal activities about a week after angioplasty. But you’ll need several weeks to recover from coronary artery bypass surgery.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Coronary Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have unstable angina?
In treating unstable angina, a provider’s first priority is to make sure your heart can get the blood and oxygen it needs. Medicines and procedures can improve blood flow to your heart. But you’ll likely need to take medicines long-term because of your risk for a heart attack, heart failure or heart rhythm issues.
Your outlook depends on how well your heart is working, how bad your artery blockages are and whether you’ve had a heart attack.
Prevention
How can I lower my risk of unstable angina?
You have the power to change some of the things that cause heart disease and unstable angina, like:
Managing high blood pressure, cholesterol and sugar levels.
Not using tobacco products or recreational drugs.
Getting frequent
physical activity
.
Eating
healthy foods
, like mainly fruits and vegetables.
Staying at a weight that’s healthy for you.
Limiting how many beverages containing
alcohol
you drink.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
You can take care of yourself by:
Taking any medicines your provider ordered for you.
Eating nutritious foods.
Getting regular physical activity.
Avoiding tobacco products.
Managing conditions like diabetes, high blood pressure and high cholesterol.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see your provider when:
Your
heartbeat
isn’t normal.
Your symptoms are happening more often.
You feel lightheaded.
You feel pain even when you’re not moving.
Advertisement
When should I go to the emergency room?
Go to the ER or call your local emergency services number (911 in the U.S.) when:
Your chest pain lasts a long time (more than 15 minutes) or you think you’re having a heart attack.
Nitroglycerin isn’t working in five minutes (or after three doses).
Your pain comes back or gets worse.
What questions should I ask my provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
What lifestyle changes should I make?
What medicines do I need to take and for how long?
What are my odds of having a heart attack?`
Additional Common Questions
Is unstable angina a heart attack?
No, but it’s a strong warning sign that you may have a heart attack soon.
Can unstable angina lead to a heart attack?
Yes, it can. If your provider doesn’t clear the blood clot and plaque in your coronary artery, you could have a heart attack.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The chest pain is back and you’re not sure what to do. Skip the guesswork and get medical help right away. Unstable angina is a warning that you could be having a heart attack before long. Follow your provider’s orders for making changes in your lifestyle and keep taking your medicines. Teaching your family what to watch for and when to call 911 can give you some peace of mind.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you need treatment for coronary artery disease, you want expert care. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create a treatment plan that’s personalized to you.
Get Coronary Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/24/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment