Inhalants: What They Are, Side Effects & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Inhalants
Advertisement
Advertisement
Inhalants
Inhalants are products that produce chemical vapors that you can inhale to induce mind-altering effects. The four categories of inhalants include volatile solvents, aerosols, gases and nitrites. Most of them affect your central nervous system. They have many short- and long-term effects and can be very dangerous.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What are inhalants?
Inhalants are chemicals that people inhale (breathe in) to cause a pleasurable feeling or effect (“high”). The chemicals are found in common household and workplace products that produce fumes (vapors). When you inhale these fumes, your
brain
absorbs them quickly, producing a quick “high.” Chronic use of inhalants can result in irreversible side effects, including brain damage,
coma
and even
death
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Although you can inhale other substances, the term “inhalants” refers to substances that can only be inhaled. Slang terms for inhaling include huffing, bagging and dusting.
How do people use inhalants?
When people use inhalants, they breathe them in through their
nose
or
mouth
in a variety of ways. They may:
Sniff or snort fumes from a container or dispenser
Spray aerosols directly into their nose or mouth
Place a chemical-soaked rag over their mouth or nose
People may also inhale substances from a balloon or a plastic or paper bag. This is called “bagging.” Some use inhalants by pouring them onto a shirt collar or their sleeves and sniffing them periodically. The “high “from inhalants only lasts a couple of minutes, so users prolong it by repeating sniffing over several hours.
Who uses inhalants?
Young children and teenagers use inhalants most often. They often try inhalants before moving on to other substances because inhalants are easier to get. The peak age of inhalant use is 14 to 15. But children as young as 5 to 6 years of age also use the drugs.
In many cases, inhalant use declines by 17 to 19 years of age. But drug use can continue into adulthood. Inhalant use is more common in
males
.
Higher rates of inhalant use have been reported in people with a history of:
Advertisement
Physical or sexual abuse
Criminal behavior
Depression
Suicidal thoughts
Family conflict
Violence
Substance use disorders
Rates are also higher in people of lower income, those with
mental health conditions
, and people living in rural communities and in communities with high unemployment rates.
Types of inhalants
There are more than 1,000 common household and workplace products that people use as inhalants. People who use inhalants find that they’re convenient, inexpensive, easy to hide and legal. There are four general categories of inhalants:
Volatile solvents
Aerosols
Gases
Nitrites
Volatile solvents
Volatile solvents are liquids that become gas easily at room temperature. People use them for household and industrial purposes. Examples of volatile solvents include:
Paint thinners
Paint removers
Degreasers
Gasoline
Rubber cement
Lighter fluid
Glues
Nail polish removers
Dry cleaning fluids
Correction fluids
Felt tip markers
Aerosols
Aerosols suspend both solids and liquids in a pressurized container. You can release them in a spray, like:
Spray paints
Spray deodorant
Hair spray
Vegetable oil spray
Fabric protector spray
Gases
Gases include medical
anesthetics
, as well as gases used in household or commercial products. Medical anesthetics include:
Chloroform
Halothane
Nitrous oxide (laughing gas)
Nitrous oxide is the most misused of these gases and can be found in whipped cream dispensers and propellant canisters (often referred to as “whippets”). Nitrous oxide is also found in products that boost octane levels in racing cars. Other household products containing gas are butane lighters, propane tanks and refrigerants.
Nitrites
Nitrites are chemical compounds found in leather cleaners, liquid aromas and room deodorizers. They’re commonly known as “poppers” or “snappers.” Nitrites act directly on your
central nervous system
. They dilate your blood vessels and relax smooth muscles. The ability of nitrites to relax smooth muscle has made their use popular for sexual enhancement. Nitrites include:
Cyclohexyl nitrite
Isoamyl (amyl) nitrite
Isobutyl (butyl) nitrite
What are some street names for inhalants?
Some common street names for inhalants include:
Chroming
Gas/gasoline
Glue/gluey
Huff
Laughing gas
Poppers
Rush
Snappers
Sniff
Whippets
What are the short-term effects of inhalants?
Inhalants affect everyone differently. The effects of inhalants on your body can depend on various factors, including:
Your overall health, body size and weight
If you’ve used the drug before (tolerance)
If you’re using other drugs at the same time
How much of the drug you’re using
Type of inhalant
Amount of fresh air you breathe in while inhaling
Amount of physical activity you get before and after inhaling
Advertisement
Most inhalants affect your central
nervous system
. They can slow down your brain activity. Short-term effects of inhalants may include:
Feeling less inhibition/increased risk-taking
Lack of body control
Slurred or distorted speech
Loss of coordination
Euphoria (feeling “high”)
Dizziness
/lightheadedness
Nausea
Headaches
Red or
runny nose
, eyes and throat
Confusion
Hallucinations
What are the overdose effects of inhalants?
Intoxication on inhalants only lasts for a few minutes, so people who use these drugs often try to prolong their “high” by repeatedly inhaling over the course of several hours. This kind of inhalant use is very dangerous. It can lead to loss of consciousness and even death.
A condition called “sudden sniffing death” can happen after a single time using an inhalant by an otherwise healthy person. This type of overdose death is especially associated with the use of propane, butane and chemicals in aerosols.
Inhalant use can also lead to death by
asphyxiation
from:
Repeated inhalations
.
This can cause high concentrations of inhaled fumes to displace the available oxygen in your lungs.
Suffocation
. When inhaling fumes from a plastic bag placed over your head, you block air from entering your lungs.
Choking
. You can swallow and choke on your own vomit after inhaling substances.
Advertisement
What are the long-term effects of inhalants?
If you regularly use inhalants, it can lead to long-term effects, including:
Irritability and depression
Memory loss
Reduced attention span
Acne
around your mouth and lips
Pallor
(pale appearance)
Weight loss
Fatigue
Excessive thirst (
polydipsia
)
Loss of sense of smell (
anosmia
) and
hearing
Irregular heartbeat
Stomach ulcers
Severe effects can include:
Tremors
Heart muscle damage
Liver and kidney damage
Delayed behavioral development in children and young adults
Brain damage
Coma
Death
Additional Common Questions
Do inhalants cause hypoxia?
Yes. By displacing air in your lungs, inhalants deprive your body of oxygen. This condition is called
hypoxia
. Hypoxia is when the tissues of your body don’t get enough oxygen. Your cells need oxygen to produce energy and help your tissues and organs to function properly. While some of your tissues can get used to temporary dips in oxygen levels, long-term hypoxia can lead to organ damage.
Are inhalants addictive?
Yes. If you regularly use inhalants, you can become dependent on the drug quickly. If you’re dependent on a drug, you may find that using it is more important than anything else in your life — including school, work and your social life. Over time, you may develop a tolerance to the drug, which means you’ll need to take more of it to get the same effect. Some people develop a condition called
inhalant use disorder
.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Inhalants are a type of substance that many people use to get a quick “high.” The problem is the “high” doesn’t last long, leading people to continue inhaling over the course of several hours. In addition, you can become tolerant to inhalants, meaning you need to inhale more to get the same effect. Inhalant use can lead to addiction and dangerous health effects, including loss of consciousness, coma and even death. Talk to a healthcare provider if you or a loved one need help managing a problem with inhalants.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/28/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment