Naturopathy (Naturopathic Medicine): Benefits & Risks
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Naturopathy/Naturopathic Medicine
Advertisement
Advertisement
Naturopathy/Naturopathic Medicine
Naturopathy (naturopathic medicine) is a type of healthcare that focuses on changes to your daily habits and noninvasive treatments. With the belief that your body can heal itself, naturopathy attempts to improve your overall health. Treatment includes natural therapies, like water, talk and physical therapy, among other complementary methods.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Holistic Medicine Care
Make an Appointment
Naturopathy, or naturopathic medicine, is a type of
integrative medicine
. It uses evidence-based approaches to prevent and treat the root causes of disease. Naturopathic medicine takes a “whole health, whole person” approach to treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Naturopathy focuses on your body’s natural ability to self-heal. It strives to use the least invasive methods necessary to treat your disease and symptoms. Treatment often involves lifestyle and behavioral changes, like:
Getting physically active
Focusing on healthy eating habits
Drinking enough water
Exposing yourself to sunlight
Getting proper sleep
Managing stress
What is a doctor of naturopathic medicine?
A doctor of naturopathic medicine (ND) is a type of
integrative medicine doctor
. NDs diagnose, treat and prevent health conditions by using a whole-person approach. That means they consider your body and mind to be two connected parts that need to be treated together. NDs believe healthy lifestyle habits can help your body naturally restore itself.
Doctors of naturopathic medicine care for people of all ages. They’re
primary care providers
and specialists who practice in clinics, medical centers and hospitals.
NDs are currently licensed or regulated in 23 U.S. states, as well as the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. In these states, they must complete a four-year, graduate-level program at an accredited naturopathic medical school. Some schools award a naturopathic medical doctorate (NMD) degree instead of a doctorate of naturopathic medicine (ND). Both have the same medical education.
Advertisement
If you’re in a state where regulations don’t exist, it’s a good idea to read up on your ND’s background and training before you work with them. You’ll want to make sure they come from an accredited school, have passed board examinations and have an active license to practice medicine.
What are the six principles of naturopathic medicine?
Doctors of naturopathic medicine use the principles of naturopathic medicine to guide the care they provide. The six principles of naturopathic medicine are:
The Healing Power of Nature:
NDs use natural approaches to support health, like
herbal supplements
and food as medicine.
Identify and Treat the Causes:
NDs find and remove the root issue that’s causing your symptoms.
First Do No Harm:
NDs use
evidence-based methods
with as few side effects and risks as possible.
Doctor as Teacher:
NDs get to know you as a person. They teach you and encourage you to take charge of your health.
Treat the Whole Person:
NDs support your mind and body. They believe genetics, lifestyle habits, the environment and relationships with others affect your health. They consider all these factors when providing treatment.
Prevention:
NDs prevent disease by teaching healthy lifestyle habits. They want to empower you to take good care of yourself.
What do naturopaths treat?
Doctors of naturopathic medicine treat many of the same health conditions that doctors of
conventional medicine
do. Some of the most common diseases and conditions they treat include:
Fatigue
Allergies
Chronic pain
Gastrointestinal diseases
Heart disease
Hormonal imbalances
Obesity
What exactly does a naturopath do?
Naturopathic doctors take care of your overall health and well-being. They prevent, diagnose and treat illnesses, diseases and other health conditions. They may order blood tests or imaging tests to help diagnose your condition.
Doctors of naturopathy work with you to find the most effective treatment that causes the least amount of harm. They’ll work with your other doctors to develop a well-rounded health plan. Treatment methods may include:
Changes to your daily routine
Nutritional therapy
Water therapy
Acupuncture
Talk therapy
Physical therapy and exercise
Herbs and dietary supplements
Prescription medication
Minor surgery
When possible, they try to limit the amount of drugs they prescribe. But they do treat with medication when necessary.
What are the benefits of naturopathy?
Naturopathy treatment methods support your body’s natural ability to heal. You may also feel empowered to make changes to your daily habits. Adding naturopathic medicine to your healthcare routine can give you a sense of control over your well-being.
Advertisement
What are the risks of naturopathic medicine?
Doctors of naturopathic medicine use evidence-based treatment methods with low risk. But you should use them together with treatments from your other healthcare providers.
Some health conditions require conventional treatment methods. For instance, you may need an antibiotic to treat a bacterial infection. Or you may need chemotherapy for cancer. Your healthcare providers will let you know the best treatment options for you.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’re looking for a healthcare provider who’ll treat the whole you, you have many different options. Integrative medicine doctors, chiropractors, acupuncturists and other specialists all deliver personalized care. They provide treatment but also encourage you to manage your own health. By taking part in your healthcare, you’ll have a say in what kind of treatment you receive. That can empower you and lead you on the road to self-healing.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you want to balance your body, mind and spirit, Cleveland Clinic holistic medicine providers can help you get in sync.
Holistic Medicine Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.448.4325
Appointments & Locations
Sign Up for News & Info