Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT): What It Is
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT)
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) can help improve the symptoms of low testosterone due to male hypogonadism. TRT has certain risks and benefits, so your healthcare provider will carefully evaluate if it’s safe and right for you.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Testosterone replacement therapy can improve many of the symptoms of low testosterone, but it also comes with side effects and certain risks.
What is testosterone replacement therapy (TRT)?
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) is an option for
men
who have
low testosterone levels
due to male hypogonadism. TRT involves taking manufactured forms of
testosterone
to regulate your levels of this
hormone
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
TRT comes with certain risks and benefits. Together, you and your healthcare provider will decide if TRT is right for you.
Who is TRT for?
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves testosterone replacement therapy for males who have low testosterone levels due to a known medical condition (hypogonadism).
Hypogonadism can develop from damage to or malfunction of one of the following organs that are part of testosterone production:
Testicles
Pituitary gland
Hypothalamus
For example,
chemotherapy
or
radiation therapy
can damage one of these organs. Or you may have a
genetic condition
that causes issues.
The FDA doesn’t approve the use of TRT for males with low testosterone without an associated medical condition. As of 2025, it’s not yet approved for males who naturally experience a decline in testosterone as they age.
TRT isn’t for everyone. Certain existing health conditions make it unsafe, like prostate cancer and heart failure.
Treatment Details
What happens before starting TRT?
Before starting TRT, your healthcare provider will make sure low testosterone is an accurate diagnosis. They’ll also make sure TRT is safe for you. They’ll ask about your medical history and do a
physical exam
. They may order the following
blood tests
:
Two morning
testosterone tests
(for diagnosis)
Hemoglobin
Hematocrit
Liver function tests
Luteinizing hormone
blood test
PSA (prostate-specific antigen) test
Prolactin
blood test
Advertisement
How does TRT work?
With TRT, you take a manufactured form of testosterone to regulate your levels. This can help improve the symptoms of low testosterone, like low libido and lack of energy.
TRT doesn’t fix or cure the underlying cause of low testosterone. In fact, it will cause your testicles to stop working. This means that you’ll need the medication to continue having a normal level of testosterone in your body. If you stop taking testosterone, your body will have to recover its ability to make testosterone again.
Testosterone replacement therapy has several different forms, including:
Testosterone skin gels
. You apply the gel every day to clean, dry skin as directed. It’s important that you don’t transfer the gel to another person through skin-to-skin contact while the gel is wet. Testosterone skin gels are one of the most common forms of TRT in the U.S.
Intramuscular testosterone injections
. You give the injections into a muscle every one to two weeks. Some formulations of long-acting testosterone can be given by injection every 10 weeks. But you have to get them in a medical office.
Subcutaneous testosterone injections
. You give the injections under your skin every week.
Testosterone patches
. You apply these patches every day to your skin as directed. You usually have to switch up their location to avoid skin reactions.
Testosterone pellets
. A provider implants these pellets under your skin every three to six months. The pellets provide consistent and long-term testosterone dosages.
Buccal testosterone tablets
. These are sticky pills that you apply to your gums twice a day. The testosterone absorbs quickly into your bloodstream through your gums.
Testosterone nasal gel
. You apply a testosterone gel into each nostril three times a day.
Oral testosterone
. This is a pill you take twice a day.
Your healthcare provider will work with you to figure out which option is best for you. After you start TRT, you’ll need follow-up testing. This includes monitoring your testosterone level and getting other blood tests to make sure TRT isn’t harming your health.
What are the benefits of TRT?
Testosterone replacement therapy can improve many of the symptoms of low testosterone (male hypogonadism). TRT may improve your:
Sexual function
Lean body mass
Bone mineral density
Mood
Energy levels
Sense of well-being
But it’s important to remember that TRT comes with potential risks and side effects.
What are the side effects of TRT?
The side effects of testosterone replacement therapy include:
Acne
or oily skin
Swelling in your ankles caused by mild
fluid retention
Stimulation of your prostate, which can cause urinary symptoms
Breast enlargement (
gynecomastia
) or tenderness
Worsening of sleep apnea
Smaller testicles
Skin irritation (if you use topical testosterone replacement)
Decrease in sperm count, leading to infertility
Laboratory abnormalities that can happen while on TRT include:
Increase in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level
Increase in red blood cell count, which thickens your blood
Risks / Benefits
How long does it take to see results from TRT?
It may take a few weeks before you start noticing differences in your body and mood once starting TRT. How long it takes varies from person to person. To allow the therapy to take full effect, healthcare providers typically wait 30 days after you start TRT to check your testosterone levels.
Advertisement
If you don’t notice an improvement in your symptoms after taking TRT for three to six months, your provider may recommend stopping the therapy. This is because if your symptoms don’t improve, your testosterone level may not be the cause of your symptom.
How long can you stay on testosterone replacement therapy?
You can stay on testosterone replacement therapy for as long as it’s benefiting your symptoms and not causing health issues. TRT is meant to be a long-term therapy. If you stop taking testosterone, your levels will return to baseline.
Your healthcare provider will recommend regular testing to make sure TRT isn’t hurting your health.
Once you start TRT, can you stop?
Yes, you can stop TRT once you’ve started. You may do this for several reasons, like if:
You have bothersome side effects
The therapy isn’t improving your symptoms
You develop a health condition that makes TRT unsafe
If you stop TRT, you’ll return to your normal level of testosterone. Your body will take some time to restart production of testosterone naturally.
When should I see my healthcare provider about TRT?
Once you start TRT, you’ll have regular appointments with your healthcare provider and routine blood tests. Your provider will let you know how often you need to do this.
Otherwise, see your healthcare provider if:
You don’t notice an improvement in your symptoms
The side effects of TRT are causing you distress
You want to try a different form of testosterone
You’re thinking of stopping TRT
You develop a health condition that could make TRT unsafe
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Who shouldn’t use TRT?
TRT can be dangerous for some people because it can make certain health conditions worse. You shouldn’t use TRT if you have:
Untreated
heart failure
Untreated
obstructive sleep apnea
Had a
heart attack
or
stroke
within the past six months
A history of
elevated red blood cell counts
Untreated
prostate cancer
An unevaluated lump on your
prostate
Male breast cancer
You should also avoid TRT if you’re planning to have biological children. TRT can
decrease sperm count
and cause
fertility issues
. Trying to repair your fertility after TRT can be very expensive and take a long time.
TRT is meant for medical purposes. It’s not worth the potential health risks to use testosterone for nonmedical reasons, like bodybuilding or attempting to prevent aging changes.
Is TRT safe?
Certain existing health conditions make TRT unsafe, like prostate cancer, breast cancer and heart failure. This is why healthcare providers do extensive evaluations and tests before approving the use of TRT. If you don’t have these health concerns, TRT is generally safe.
But there aren’t many studies on the long-term effects of TRT (for example, over decades). And some of the studies have mixed results.
For example, some studies suggest that TRT decreases your risk of heart attack over time, while others say it increases your risk. In 2015, the FDA warned that testosterone use is possibly associated with increased cardiovascular risk based on the results of two studies. However, in 2024 the results of a large, randomized trial found that testosterone gel wasn’t associated with increased heart risks over a medium-length period of time. Research has also studied the increased risk of
venous thromboembolism
, and the results are mixed.
Advertisement
For all these reasons, your healthcare provider will carefully consider if TRT is safe for you based on your unique characteristics.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If symptoms of low testosterone are interfering with your quality of life, know that you don’t have to just grin and bear it. Testosterone replacement therapy may be an option for you. Together, you and your healthcare provider will weigh the risks and benefits of TRT to see if it could help. Don’t hesitate to ask questions or voice your concerns. Your provider is there to support you in all aspects of your health.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment