Endocarditis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Endocarditis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Endocarditis
Endocarditis, most often caused by a bacterial infection, inflames the lining of your heart valves and chambers. Symptoms can include chest pain, heart murmur and fast heart rate. Treatment includes several weeks of antibiotics and sometimes surgery. With quick, aggressive treatment, many people survive. Without treatment, endocarditis can be fatal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Heart Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Endocarditis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Endocarditis?
Endocarditis involves growths in your heart’s lining called vegetations, which can greatly damage your heart tissue.
Endocarditis is inflammation of the inner lining of your
heart valves
and
chambers
(endocardium). Without treatment, endocarditis can be fatal. An infection — often bacterial — is the most common cause of endocarditis.
Germs
enter your
bloodstream
and attach to damaged areas in your heart.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Endocarditis involves growths in your heart’s lining called vegetations. As
inflammation
continues, the vegetations break down the surrounding heart tissue. This can greatly damage your heart valves.
Types
There are two main types of endocarditis: Infective and non-infective.
Infective endocarditis
happens when germs (usually
bacteria
) attach to damaged heart tissue. This is the most common type of endocarditis. Healthcare providers may also call it bacterial endocarditis (BE).
Vegetations in infective endocarditis are made of:
Infecting organisms (like bacteria or
fungi
)
Fibrin (a protein that plays a role in blood clotting)
Platelets
(tiny cell fragments in your
blood
)
Non-infective endocarditis
is much rarer. It involves vegetations in your heart’s lining that aren’t due to an infection. They’re called sterile vegetations.
Non-infective endocarditis is linked with conditions that make your blood clot too easily (
hypercoagulable state
). Examples of these conditions include
antiphospholipid syndrome
and
lupus
(systemic lupus erythematosus).
Healthcare providers may use several other names to describe non-infective endocarditis, including:
Libman-Sacks endocarditis
Non-bacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE)
Marantic endocarditis
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of endocarditis
Symptoms of infective endocarditis can include:
Chest pain
Heart murmur
Fast heart rate (
tachycardia
)
Fatigue
Fever
above 100°F (38.4°C)
Chills
and
night sweats
Loss of appetite
and
weight loss
Muscle
and
joint aches
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
)
Skin rash
Swelling in your abdomen or legs
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
)
Go to the emergency room if you have these symptoms. Infective endocarditis is life-threatening.
Infective endocarditis can be:
Acute
. It begins suddenly with a high fever and fast heart rate. It can become life-threatening within days.
Subacute
. It develops gradually over weeks or several months.
Non-infective endocarditis typically doesn’t have symptoms. But you’ll likely have symptoms of the underlying condition causing it (like lupus). Most people with non-infective endocarditis don’t know they have it until they get heart imaging tests for other reasons. It may also be a finding in an
autopsy
.
Endocarditis causes
Most of the time, a
bacterial infection
causes endocarditis. The bacteria come from elsewhere in your body — like your
mouth
,
skin
or
respiratory system
— and travel through your blood to your heart.
Healthy heart tissue is normally very resistant to infection. But underlying damage can make it more likely for endocarditis to develop. The bacteria attach to and grow on damaged tissue. They grow vegetation and produce enzymes. This destroys surrounding heart tissue.
Risk factors
In general, endocarditis isn’t very common. But certain factors increase your risk for it, like:
Artificial heart valve
,
pacemaker
or
defibrillator
Diabetes
Heart conditions, especially
heart valve disease
and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
IV
substance use
Poor
dental health
and
gum disease
Previous bacterial endocarditis
Previous
heart valve surgery
Weakened immune system
Complications of this condition
Without early diagnosis and treatment, endocarditis can lead to complications like:
Abnormal heart rhythm
(arrhythmia)
Abscesses
around heart valves
Heart block
Heart failure
Leaky heart valve
Sepsis
Stroke
Death
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
If you have symptoms and risk factors for endocarditis, your healthcare provider will want to make a diagnosis as soon as possible.
Diagnostic tests for endocarditis include
blood tests
, like:
Bacterial culture tests
Complete blood count
C-reactive protein test
Imaging tests can show vegetations and heart damage. Your provider may recommend one or more of these tests:
Echocardiogram
Transesophageal echocardiogram
Heart MRI
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for endocarditis?
Endocarditis can be life-limiting. You’ll need quick treatment to prevent damage to your heart valves and more serious complications.
You’ll likely need IV
antibiotics
for several weeks — usually up to six — to fully treat the infection. Your provider may adjust the antibiotics once they know which bacteria are at play.
Advertisement
Your provider will check your symptoms throughout your therapy to see if it’s effective. They’ll also repeat your blood cultures.
If endocarditis damages your heart valve and any other part of your heart, you may need
surgery
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Heart Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have endocarditis?
You can expect to take antibiotics for two to eight weeks to get rid of the infection. Most people survive endocarditis when they get aggressive treatment. But the risk of serious complications or death depends on:
Your age
Whether you have an artificial valve
How long you’ve had the infection
What type of organism (bacteria) made you sick
How badly your heart valve is damaged
Your healthcare provider can give you a better idea of what to expect based on your situation.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
Endocarditis isn’t always preventable. But if you’re at high risk for it or have had it before, your healthcare provider will likely recommend taking
prophylactic (preventive)
antibiotics before certain dental procedures. These include procedures that involve:
Your
gums
The periapical (root) area of your
teeth
Your oral
mucosa
(tissue that lines the inside of your mouth)
Tell your medical and dental providers you have heart disease that places you at a greater risk for endocarditis. Carry a wallet identification card with you that has specific antibiotic guidelines. The
American Heart Association
offers these.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
With aggressive treatment, most people recover from endocarditis. Know the symptoms of endocarditis and go to the ER right away if you think you have it. Taking good care of your teeth and mouth can lower your risk of endocarditis. That includes daily care, as well as visiting your dental provider regularly.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
It can be scary and overwhelming when something is happening with your heart valves. Cleveland Clinic heart specialists are ready to get you the help you need.
Heart Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment