Dysarthria (Slurred Speech): Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Dysarthria
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dysarthria
Dysarthria is a motor speech disorder where damage to your nervous system causes the muscles that produce speech to become paralyzed or weakened. The damage may make it difficult to control your tongue or voice box, causing you to slur words. Speech therapy can help you communicate more effectively.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Speech Therapy for Adults
Find a Speech Therapist
Schedule Speech Therapy for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Dysarthria?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Additional Common Questions
What Is Dysarthria?
Dysarthria (pronounced “dis-AR-three-uh”) is a motor speech disorder that makes it difficult to form and pronounce words. Motor speech disorders occur when damage to your
nervous system
prevents you from fully controlling parts of your body that control speech, like your tongue, voice box (larynx) and jaw. Dysarthria makes it challenging to speak so that others can understand you.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Dysarthria can be developmental or acquired:
Developmental
dysarthria happens due to brain damage during fetal development or at birth. For example, cerebral palsy can cause dysarthria. Children tend to have developmental dysarthria.
Acquired
dysarthria happens as a result of brain damage later in life. For example, a stroke, a brain tumor or Parkinson’s disease can lead to dysarthria. Adults tend to have acquired dysarthria.
People with dysarthria understand language. They know what they want to say and how to say it. It’s just that muscle weakness makes speaking difficult.
What are the six types of dysarthria?
There are six categories of dysarthria. They’re grouped based on the specific part of your nervous system affected. Dysarthria may result from damage to various parts of your nervous system, including your brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) and the network of
nerves
that carry signals throughout your body (
peripheral nervous system
).
Flaccid dysarthria
results from damage to the lower motor neurons. The lower motor neurons are part of your peripheral nervous system. With flaccid dysarthria, your speech may sound breathy and nasal.
Spastic dysarthria
results from damage to the upper neurons on one or both sides of your brain. The upper neurons are part of your central nervous system. Your speech may sound strained or harsh.
Ataxic dysarthria
results from damage to the part of your brain called the
cerebellum
. Your cerebellum helps coordinate muscle movement. You may have trouble pronouncing vowels and consonants, and you may have difficulty placing emphasis on the right parts of a word when you’re speaking.
Hypokinetic dysarthria
results from damage to the parts of your brain called the
basal ganglia
. A basal ganglion (singular) is a structure inside your brain that helps your muscles move. Hypokinetic dysarthria is associated with slow (“hypo-”), monotone, rigid-sounding speech.
Hyperkinetic dysarthria
also results from damage to your basal ganglia. It’s associated with fast (“hyper-”) sounding and often unpredictable speech.
Mixed dysarthria
includes a mix of two or more of the other five types. It’s the most common type of dysarthria.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of dysarthria?
The main sign of dysarthria is that you have trouble speaking so that others understand you. You may have difficulty moving your lips, tongue or jaw in ways that produce clear speech.
Dysarthria symptoms include:
Slurred speech or mumbling when you talk
Speaking too quickly or more slowly than intended
Speaking quieter or louder than intended
Sounding hoarse, harsh, strained, breathy, nasal, robotic or monotone
Speaking in short, choppy bursts with several pauses, instead of in complete sentences
The lack of muscle control may also make swallowing difficult (
dysphagia
).
What causes dysarthria?
Dysarthria occurs when there’s damage to the parts of your nervous system that control the muscles that help you speak. This includes muscles in your face and throat, and those that help you breathe. Injuries, illnesses and neuromuscular conditions (diseases that affect the nerves controlling your muscles) can all cause dysarthria.
Common causes include:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS or Lou Gehrig’s disease)
Brain tumors
Cerebral palsy
Dementia
Huntington’s disease
Lyme disease
Multiple sclerosis
(MS)
Muscular dystrophy
Myasthenia gravis
Parkinson’s disease
Stroke
Traumatic brain injury
Trauma to your face or mouth
Trauma to your head, neck, tongue or voice box
Dysarthria-like symptoms are sometimes a side effect of certain medications, such as sedatives and anti-seizure drugs.
Risk factors
Dysarthria is more common in people with certain neurological conditions, such as:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS):
Up to 30% of people with ALS (Lou Gehrig’s disease) have dysarthria.
Multiple sclerosis (MS):
Around 25% to 50% of people with MS get dysarthria at some point.
Parkinson’s disease:
Dysarthria affects 70% to 100% of people with Parkinson’s disease.
Stroke:
About 8% to 60% of people with stroke have dysarthria.
Traumatic brain injury:
Some 10% to 65% of people with traumatic brain injury have dysarthria.
What are the complications of dysarthria?
Speech problems can cause difficulties in social situations. In general, struggling to communicate and be understood can cause strain at work, school and in your relationships. The stress can lead to mental health issues, like depression.
Getting treatments that can help you communicate and maintain meaningful connections with others is important.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is dysarthria diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will ask about your medical history and do a
physical exam
. A
speech-language pathologist
(SLP) may evaluate you to determine how severe your dysarthria is. They’ll check your ability to coordinate your breathing and voice as well as move your lips, tongue and face. They’ll also inspect the quality of your voice.
Advertisement
They may ask you to:
Smile
Stick out your tongue
Count or say the alphabet out loud
Read a paragraph
Repeat sounds, words and sentences and talk in conversation
What tests might I need to diagnose dysarthria?
Other tests may include:
MRI
or
CT scans
of your brain, head and neck to check for abnormalities that may affect your speech
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
to check for abnormalities in your brain activity related to dysarthria
Electromyography
to test the electrical function of your muscles and nerves
Blood or urine tests
to see if an infection or inflammation is causing speech issues
Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
to see if an infection or tumor is causing dysarthria
Your healthcare provider may perform a
modified barium swallow study
to test for swallowing problems, which sometimes occur with dysarthria.
Management and Treatment
How is dysarthria treated?
People with dysarthria often benefit from
speech therapy
to improve communication. A speech-language pathologist can also work with your family and loved ones to teach them how to communicate with you better.
During speech therapy sessions, you may learn:
Exercises to strengthen your tongue, lips and jaw muscles
Strategies for speaking louder, such as taking fuller breaths before you speak
Strategies for speaking more clearly, like slowing speech and intentionally using specific muscles to form sounds and words
Nonverbal communication techniques, such as gestures or writing
Advertisement
If your dysarthria is severe, you may need a device to communicate with people. These devices include a letter or picture board, or a special computer with a keyboard and message display.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Speech Therapy for Adults
Find a Speech Therapist
Schedule Speech Therapy for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can you recover from dysarthria?
It depends on what’s causing your dysarthria. If it results from a medication side effect, stopping the medicine usually reverses dysarthria. Dysarthria related to a chronic (long-term) neuromuscular condition, stroke or trauma may not be reversible. Still, you can improve your communication through speech therapy.
Speech therapy can help you use your speaking muscles more effectively, and it can give you tools to communicate nonverbally, as well.
Living With
What are some tips for speaking with dysarthria?
If you have dysarthria:
Start with a topic word
. Begin conversations with a word that lets listeners know what you’re talking about. For example, begin speaking about what movie you want to watch by saying “movie” first.
Speak slowly and at an appropriate loudness
. It can help to enunciate your words slowly, so that listeners understand. Using pauses and shorter sentences can allow listeners time to process the meaning of your words.
Avoid talking when you feel tired
. Many people with dysarthria find it harder to speak when tired. Others may feel just fine.
Check to make sure your listeners understand
. It’s a good idea to check in with listeners occasionally to ensure they follow what you’re saying. This can prevent you from having to repeat things you’ve already said.
Use nonverbal communication if needed
. If speaking is too exhausting, let your communication partner know and either write, draw or postpone the conversation instead.
Advertisement
What tips can others use to talk to me?
A speech-language pathologist can recommend tips to help others communicate with you. For instance, loved ones can:
Reduce distractions/noise, like turning off the radio or TV
Pay close attention when you’re talking
Talk to you in a quiet area with good lighting
Ask yes-or-no questions to help you communicate
Tell you if they don’t understand what you’re saying
Encourage you to write or point if you’re having trouble
Repeat what they did understand, so you don’t have to start from the beginning
When should I see my healthcare provider about dysarthria?
If speaking becomes difficult, contact your healthcare provider. Seek immediate medical attention if you experience choking, repeated coughing or
pneumonia
.
When should I go to the ER?
Some causes of dysarthria, like stroke, require emergency medical care. If a person shows signs of a stroke, take them to the ER immediately.
Symptoms include:
Weakness or drooping on one side of their face
Inability to keep both arms lifted
Confusion and agitation
Loss of coordination
Slurred speech
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider if I have dysarthria?
Questions to ask include:
How can I improve my ability to speak?
What results can I expect from speech therapy?
Should I use a communication device?
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between dysarthria and aphasia (dysphasia)?
Aphasia
involves difficulty understanding others or explaining your thoughts. It’s not a problem with how your speaking muscles function, as with dysarthria.
What is the difference between dysarthria and apraxia?
Apraxia
is a different motor speech condition. In apraxia, people have normal muscle function but difficulty making voluntary movements, like speaking. There’s a problem getting the message from your brain to your muscles that tells the muscles to move.
What is the difference between dysarthria and dysphagia?
Like dysarthria, dysphagia involves problems with muscle control. But while dysarthria involves trouble speaking, dysphagia involves trouble swallowing. Dysphagia is sometimes a symptom of dysarthria.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Share your concerns with your healthcare provider if you’re struggling to be understood because of dysarthria. If you have dysarthria related to a neuromuscular condition, treating the underlying condition can help. Your healthcare provider may recommend speech therapy to help you communicate better. SLPs can also instruct friends and family members on how to communicate more effectively with you. Treatments can help you maintain important connections, even if muscle weakness makes speaking difficult.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Speech, language, comprehension and swallowing issues can make daily life harder. Cleveland Clinic speech therapists can help you overcome these problems.
Schedule Speech Therapy for Adults
Find a Speech Therapist
Schedule Speech Therapy for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment