Cerebellar Stroke: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cerebellar Stroke
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cerebellar Stroke
Cerebellar strokes happen when something interrupts blood flow to the cerebellum at the back of your brain. Cerebellar strokes can cause symptoms that might be easier to ignore than other strokes. Don’t dismiss sudden new headaches, balance loss or vision changes, or any other new symptoms that make you feel worried or uneasy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a cerebellar stroke?
A cerebellar stroke is a
stroke
that affects the cerebellum in your
brain
. They’re also known as cerebellum strokes or cerebellar stroke syndrome.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The
cerebellum
is a part of your brain at the back of your head, near where your
spinal cord
connects to your brain. It helps you move your body, maintain balance, learn new movements and process some types of thinking. Strokes that damage your cerebellum can permanently affect your ability to move and use these functions.
A cerebellar stroke happens when a
blood vessel
in your cerebellum is blocked by a blood clot or breaks (ruptures) and bleeds.
Symptoms and Causes
What are cerebellar stroke symptoms?
A cerebellar stroke can cause different symptoms depending on what causes it. Some of the most common symptoms include:
Loss of coordination or clumsiness (ataxia)
Uncontrollable shaking (tremors)
Trouble walking
Dizziness
or
vertigo
Headaches
Blurry vision
Quick, uncontrollable eye movements (nystagmus)
Confusion
or agitation
Weakness (
hemiparesis
) or
paralysis
on one side of your face and body (
hemiplegia
)
Loss of muscle control on one side of your face
Sudden worsening or loss of your senses (including your
vision
,
hearing
,
smell
,
taste
and touch)
Slurred or garbled speaking (dysarthria)
Cerebellar strokes can cause symptoms that might feel easy to ignore. Don’t dismiss things like dizziness, headaches or losing your balance, especially if they happen suddenly.
Advertisement
Each half of your cerebellum controls the opposite side of your body. So, if the stroke affects the left side of your cerebellum, you’ll experience symptoms on your right side. And if the stroke damages tissues in the right side, you’ll have symptoms on your left.
What are the warning signs of a cerebellum stroke?
Cerebellum strokes can cause lots of different symptoms. To recognize the warning signs of a stroke in yourself or a loved one, remember the acronym
BE
FAST
:
Balance
. Watch for a sudden loss of balance.
Eyes
. Look out for
sudden vision loss
or changes in one or both
eyes
.
Face
. Smile. Look for a droop on one or both sides of your face.
Arms
. Raise both arms. If you’re having a stroke, one arm may not move or will be very weak and sag.
Speech
. You might slur your speech or have trouble choosing the right words.
Time
. Time is critical — call for help immediately. If possible, look at your watch, phone or a clock to track when symptoms start. Telling a healthcare provider when symptoms began can help them know which treatment options are best for you.
Transient ischemic attack
A
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
— sometimes called a “mini-stroke” — is like a stroke, but the effects are temporary. Symptoms usually last a few hours. These are often warning signs that a person has a very high risk of having a true stroke soon. A person who has a TIA needs emergency medical care as soon as possible. Call 911 or your local emergency services number right away.
What causes a cerebellar stroke?
There are two types of cerebellar strokes that have different causes.
Ischemic strokes
happen when a
blood clot
blocks a blood vessel in your cerebellum. Health conditions that increase your risk of blood clots can include:
High blood pressure (hypertension)
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
Atherosclerosis
(hardened arteries)
Clotting disorders
Atrial fibrillation
(especially when
sleep apnea
causes it)
Damaged blood vessels from a
head injury
or a trauma like a car accident
Heart defects (including
atrial septal defect
and
ventricular septal defect
)
Hemorrhagic strokes
happen when a vessel in your cerebellum breaks or tears. Causes can include:
High blood pressure (especially if it’s very high or you have it for a long time).
Brain tumors
Brain aneurysms
Moyamoya disease
(and any other condition that weakens blood vessels in your brain)
Risk factors
Anybody can have a stroke, but you may have a higher risk if you:
Smoke
or use other forms of tobacco or nicotine (like
vaping
)
Are older than 65
Are Black
Use recreational or nonprescription drugs
Having certain health conditions can increase your stroke risk, including:
High blood pressure (hypertension)
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
Diabetes
Sleep apnea
COVID-19
and some other infections
Alcohol use disorder
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a cerebellar stroke diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose a cerebellar stroke with a
physical exam
, a
neurological exam
and some tests. Providers in the emergency room may diagnose a stroke if emergency services transport you to the ER.
Your provider will use some of the following tests to confirm that you’ve had a stroke:
CT scan
MRI
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Blood tests
Management and Treatment
What are cerebellar stroke treatments?
Which treatments you’ll need will depend on which type of cerebellar stroke you had. Your healthcare providers will try to restore normal blood flow to your brain as fast as possible to reduce your risk of permanent brain damage and death.
If the stroke is ischemic, your providers will break up or remove the blood clot. You’ll need
thrombolytic medications
(clot-busting medications). Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) or
tenecteplase (TNK-tPA)
are common clot busters. You may need surgery (a
mechanical thrombectomy
) to break up and remove the clot. Your providers may also give you medications to manage your blood pressure.
If you had a hemorrhagic stroke, your providers will work to stop the bleeding in your brain. You may need medications to control the bleeding and manage your blood pressure. You might need surgery to reduce the pressure inside your brain.
Advertisement
Your providers will tell you exactly which treatments are best for you and what to expect.
Cerebellar stroke rehabilitation
Stroke rehab is an important part of stroke treatment. You’ll need rehab to help you adjust to changes in your brain and body after a stroke. You might need a combination of:
Physical therapy
to strengthen your muscles, improve your balance and regain the use of your arms and legs
Speech therapy
to regain or improve your language and speaking abilities and control the muscles that help you talk, breathe, eat and swallow
Cognitive rehab
to help improve your memory, concentration and other mental abilities
Occupational therapy
to help you safely complete your daily tasks, especially chores or activities that need precise body movements
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the survival rate for a cerebellar stroke?
It’s hard for experts to estimate an accurate cerebellar stroke survival rate. Any stroke can be fatal, cause permanent disabilities and affect how long you live (your life expectancy). There’s no one standard recovery timeline or outlook that’s accurate for everyone.
Ischemic strokes usually have better outcomes than hemorrhagic strokes, but that doesn’t mean your recovery will be easier, faster or better if you have one type or the other. Everyone’s bodies respond differently to a stroke.
Advertisement
Can you fully recover from a cerebellar stroke?
What you can expect (the prognosis) after a cerebellar stroke depends on a few factors, including:
How quickly it was treated
Which type of stroke you had
Your overall health
Your age
A full recovery looks different for each person. You might regain all your original brain functions and abilities to move. This usually takes at least a few months. But you might have long-term effects like new or different disabilities.
Your provider will tell you what to expect. They’ll help you set recovery goals and expectations that fit your unique health and situation.
Prevention
Can you prevent a cerebellum stroke?
Maintaining your overall health is the best way to reduce your risk of a cerebellum stroke. In general, try to:
Manage your blood pressure, cholesterol and any health conditions you have
Quit smoking
Eat plenty of healthy foods and maintain a weight that’s healthy for you
Get regular physical activity
Get a healthy amount of
sleep
Visit a healthcare provider every year (or as often as they suggest). Many of the conditions that can cause cerebellum strokes develop or build up over time. Some don’t cause symptoms you can feel or notice. For example, lots of people with high blood pressure or high cholesterol never sense anything wrong before they’re diagnosed. Your provider will help you catch and manage any warning signs before they increase your stroke risk.
Living With
How do I take care of myself after a cerebral stroke?
Recovering and rehabbing after a stroke is hard work. Once you and your provider finalize your treatment plan, follow it as closely as possible. In general, you should:
Take your medications
. Taking your medicine as often as your provider suggests will help your body heal.
Go to your rehab and other therapy appointments
. Tell your therapists if anything makes you feel unsafe or uncomfortable. Rehab can be tough, but you shouldn’t be in constant pain or discomfort.
Remember your mental health
.
Depression
and
anxiety
are extremely common after a stroke. You’re not weak or a quitter for feeling sad or upset. Your emotional health can be just as important as how your physical body is doing. Talk to your provider or a mental health professional if you feel like you need help processing anything during your recovery.
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) if you think you’re experiencing stroke symptoms again. Another stroke has an even higher risk of being fatal or causing severe complications. Don’t wait to call for help.
People who’ve had a stroke have an increased risk of other potentially serious complications, including:
Heart attack
Seizures
Pneumonia
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Pulmonary embolism
Call emergency services or go to the ER if you think you’re experiencing any symptoms of these complications.
Which questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your provider include:
Which type of stroke did I have?
Which medications will I need and how do I take them?
Which kinds of rehab will I need?
What’s my risk of another stroke in the future?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Cerebellar strokes can cause symptoms that might be easy to dismiss. But you know your body better than anyone. If you feel off, different or even think you might be having a stroke, get emergency help. The faster your providers diagnose and treat a cerebellar stroke, the better.
It might seem like a cliché, but give yourself credit for all your progress during rehab. Recovery comes in lots of shapes and forms, and you deserve to celebrate them all. Your providers and therapists will help you set and reach your recovery goals.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
After a stroke, it’s essential to get treated right away. Cleveland Clinic’s stroke care specialists can help you manage recovery and improve your quality of life.
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/04/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment