Glucagonoma: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Glucagonoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Glucagonoma
Glucagonoma is a rare tumor that can release excess of a hormone called glucagon. When this happens, you develop several symptoms like a painful skin rash and weight loss, as well as symptoms of diabetes. Treatment includes medications to manage the symptoms of excess glucagon, surgery and certain cancer therapies.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is glucagonoma?
A glucagonoma is a rare
pancreatic tumor
that releases
glucagon
, a hormone. It’s a type of
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor
(islet cell tumor).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Glucagon is a natural
hormone
your body makes that helps manage
blood glucose (sugar) levels
. Specific cells in your
pancreas
called alpha cells make glucagon. Glucagon triggers your liver to release stored glucose (
glycogen
) to raise your blood sugar. Your body normally releases glucagon in response to a drop in blood sugar, prolonged fasting, exercise and protein-rich meals.
A glucagonoma can release excess glucagon. This leads to glucagonoma syndrome, which involves several symptoms and complications, like a painful
skin rash
and
diabetes
.
Most glucagonomas begin in the tail or body of your pancreas.
Is glucagonoma a cancer?
A glucagonoma is usually cancerous. About 50% of people have
metastasis
(the cancer has spread) when they receive a diagnosis. It most commonly spreads to your
liver
.
How common is glucagonoma?
Glucagonoma is very rare. There’s less than 1 new case per 1 million people a year. It mostly affects people who are 50 to 70 years old.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of glucagonoma?
Glucagonomas tend to grow slowly. If you have one that isn’t releasing enough excess glucagon to cause issues for your body, you likely won’t have any symptoms.
If a glucagonoma releases excess glucagon that your body can’t keep up with, it triggers glucagonoma syndrome. This condition has noticeable symptoms. If you develop these symptoms, it’s important to see a healthcare provider as soon as possible.
Advertisement
Glucagonoma skin rash
The most common symptom of glucagonoma syndrome is a widespread skin rash called necrolytic migratory erythema (NME). It affects about 90% of people with the syndrome.
The rash can be on any part of your body, but it most often starts in your genital and anal regions, buttocks and lower legs. Other features of NME include:
It may come and go and move around your body.
It’s often itchy and painful in the beginning.
It starts as a ring-shaped reddish area that blisters and crusts over. As the area heals, it may leave behind a brownish mark.
It can cause a sore smooth tongue (
glossitis
), a sore mouth, cracked dry lips and
angular cheilitis
.
It can cause inflamed eyelids (
blepharitis
),
hair loss
and issues with your nails.
Diabetes symptoms
The syndrome can lead to
high blood sugar (hyperglycemia)
, which causes diabetes. Symptoms of diabetes include:
Unexplained weight loss
.
Excessive thirst (
polydipsia
).
Frequent urination
(polyuria), especially overnight.
Increased appetite or intense hunger (
polyphagia
).
Other symptoms of glucagonoma syndrome
Other symptoms of glucagonoma syndrome include:
Chronic diarrhea
.
Anemia
, which can cause
fatigue
,
dizziness
and other symptoms.
Blood clots
, especially
deep vein thrombosis
.
It can cause neurological and psychiatric symptoms, including:
Depression
.
Dementia
.
Agitation.
Hyperreflexia
.
Ataxia
.
Psychosis
.
Paranoid
delusions
.
What causes glucagonoma?
In most cases, healthcare providers don’t know the cause of glucagonoma. In about 10% of cases, the tumor is linked to an inherited condition called
multiple endocrine neoplasia type (MEN)
type 1.
However, even among people with MEN type 1, only a very small percentage will develop a glucagonoma.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is glucagonoma diagnosed?
If you have necrolytic migratory erythema (NME), a healthcare provider will likely suspect glucagonoma and order tests. These tests may include:
Fasting blood sugar test
: An elevated level helps point to glucagonoma and can help confirm diabetes related to glucagonoma.
Fasting glucagon blood test
: With glucagonoma, glucagon levels are abnormally elevated — usually greater than 500 picograms per milliliter (pg/mL). Normal fasting blood glucagon levels are less than 150 pg/mL.
Amino acid
blood test
: Glucagonoma usually causes hypoaminoacidemia (low levels of amino acids).
Complete blood count
: This test checks for anemia, which can happen with glucagonoma.
Imaging tests can confirm the presence of a tumor. They may include:
CT scan
.
MRI scan
.
Endoscopic ultrasound
.
Management and Treatment
How is glucagonoma treated?
The treatment for glucagonoma largely depends on whether the tumor is localized (just in your pancreas) or has metastasized (spread to other parts of your body).
Advertisement
Initial treatment for glucagonoma involves managing the symptoms and complications related to excess glucagon. Treatments include:
Medications to manage glucagon excess
:
Octreotide
and
lanreotide
injections can help reverse the effects of glucagon excess, as well as prevent the release of glucagon. These medications may also slow down the tumor’s growth. They can also help treat NME, diabetes, diarrhea and neurological symptoms.
Management of diabetes
: You may need
oral diabetes medications
or insulin injections to keep your blood sugar levels in a healthy range.
Nutritional support
: This may include total
parenteral nutrition
(TPN) and supplementation of amino acids and zinc to reverse the effects of
malnutrition
.
Management of NME
:
Antibiotics
and
corticosteroids
may help improve NME.
Anticoagulant
therapy
: Blood-thinning medication (like
heparin
) can help prevent deep vein thrombosis.
Treatment for localized glucagonoma
If the tumor is only in your pancreas, surgery is the main treatment. If your surgeon can completely remove the tumor, then it’s usually
cured
. Once the glucagonoma is gone, your glucagon levels should return to normal. Your symptoms should also go away.
Treatment for metastasized glucagonoma
When possible, your healthcare provider will recommend surgery to remove tumors. This may include tumors in your pancreas, nearby
lymph nodes
and liver.
Advertisement
If your surgeon can’t remove any or all of the tumor(s), your healthcare team will likely recommend one or more of the following:
Chemotherapy
: This treatment aims to destroy cancer cells and prevent them from multiplying.
Radiofrequency ablation
: This treatment uses heat from radio waves to kill tumor cells.
Cryosurgical ablation
: This treatment uses extremely cold chemicals, like liquid nitrogen, to destroy cancerous cells.
Chemoembolization
: This treatment blocks a tumor’s blood supply.
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis for people with glucagonoma?
The prognosis (outlook) for people with glucagonoma depends on several factors, including:
Your age and overall health.
The tumor size.
If the tumor has spread or not.
The outlook is usually good if the tumor is contained within your pancreas. Surgery to remove the tumor typically cures these cases. But this represents only about 20% of glucagonoma cases.
Glucagonomas are very rare, so there’s not much data that can predict survival rates and outcomes for metastasis. Your healthcare team will be able to provide more information based on your unique situation.
Prevention
Can I prevent glucagonoma?
As scientists don’t know the cause of most cases of glucagonoma, there’s nothing you can do to prevent it.
If one of your first-degree relatives (biological parents and siblings) has a multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) diagnosis, talk to your healthcare provider about genetic testing that can screen for the condition. If you do have MEN, genetic testing could help detect tumors in their early phases.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Receiving a tumor diagnosis is an upsetting experience. And there are special challenges when you’re diagnosed with a rare one like glucagonoma. Know that your healthcare team will be beside you to answer your questions and support you. If you’re feeling like you’re mentally and emotionally on your own with glucagonoma, ask your provider about programs and services that might help you.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/13/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes