Chordoma: What It Is, Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Chordoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chordoma
Chordoma is a rare bone tumor that forms in your spine or skull base. All subtypes of chordoma are considered cancerous (malignant). Surgical removal of the tumor is the first-line treatment, but it can be difficult to completely remove chordomas due to their location near your spinal cord or brainstem.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Skull Base Tumors Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Chordoma is a rare malignant (cancerous) bone tumor that forms in your spine or the base of your skull.
What is chordoma?
Chordoma is a rare malignant (
cancerous
) bone tumor that forms in your
spine
or the base of your skull. It’s a type of
sarcoma
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Chordomas can occur at any point along your spine:
About 35% develop in the base of your spine (sacrum).
About 35% develop where your spine meets your skull (skull base). These are called clival chordomas because the bone in the skull base that’s most often involved is the clivus.
About 30% develop in the vertebrae of your mobile spine — most commonly the second
cervical
vertebrae (in your neck) followed by your
lumbar spine
and then
thoracic spine
.
Chordomas typically grow slowly, but they can be difficult to treat due to how they invade nearby
nervous system
tissue.
They also tend to recur (come back) after treatment — usually in the same place. Chordomas spread to other parts of your body (
metastasize
) in 30% to 40% of cases.
If an advanced chordoma does metastasize, it most commonly spreads to your:
Lungs.
Nearby lymph nodes.
Other bones.
Liver.
Skin.
What are the types of chordomas?
The World Health Organization (WHO) recognizes three distinct types of chordoma based on what the cells look like under a microscope (their histology):
Classic/conventional chordoma
: This is the most common type (80% to 90% of all cases). It’s made up of a unique type of cell that looks “bubbly.” Chondroid chordoma is a variant of this type. It makes up 5% to 15% of all chordoma cases. Chondroid chordoma often forms in the base of your skull.
Dedifferentiated chordoma
: This is a rare type of chordoma (less than 5% of cases) that appears as a mix of abnormal cells. It’s more aggressive, faster growing and more likely to metastasize than conventional chordoma.
Poorly differentiated chordoma
: This type is very rare. There have been fewer than 60 cases recorded in medical literature. Poorly differentiated chordoma is characterized by the deletion of a gene called
SMARCB1
, or
INI1
. These chordomas most commonly affect children and young adults.
Advertisement
Who do chordomas affect?
Chordomas can develop in anyone at any age, but they’re most likely to occur in adults aged 50 to 80. About 5% of cases affect children.
Men
are approximately 1.5 times as likely to have a chordoma as women.
How common are chordomas?
Chordomas are rare. They affect about 1 person for every 1 million people per year. That means that about 300 people receive a chordoma diagnosis each year in the United States.
About 1% to 4% of all primary bone tumors are chordomas.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of chordoma?
As a chordoma grows, it puts pressure on nearby areas of your
spinal cord
or
brain
. This pressure causes the symptoms of chordoma. Symptoms can also vary based on where the tumor is along your spine.
General chordoma symptoms include pain, weakness and/or
numbness
in your back, arms or legs.
Symptoms of a chordoma at the base of your skull may include:
Double vision (diplopia)
.
Blurry vision.
Headaches
.
Facial numbness/pain.
Symptoms of a chordoma in your tailbone may include:
A lump that you can feel through your skin.
Issues with bladder or bowel function.
Low back or
tailbone pain
.
What is the cause of chordoma?
Researchers don’t know exactly why chordomas form. But they think changes (
mutations
) in the
TBXT
gene are likely involved.
A few families have had multiple members who’ve developed a chordoma. Studies revealed that these people inherited a duplication of the
TBXT
gene. Researchers have also identified changes in the
TBXT
gene in people with chordoma who have no family history of the condition.
A chordoma develops from cells of the notochord. This is a structure that’s present in a developing embryo and is important for the future development of its spine. The notochord usually disappears by the time the fetus is eight weeks old. But in a small percentage of people, a few notochord cells can remain embedded in the bones of the spine or the base of the skull.
A change in the
TBXT
gene may trigger the growth of these cells, leading to a chordoma.
People with a genetic condition called
tuberous sclerosis
are at higher risk of developing chordoma. This condition causes a variety of medical issues, including
epilepsy
, developmental delay and tumors throughout your body. Tuberous sclerosis is caused by mutations in two genes:
TSC1
and
TSC2
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are chordomas diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll likely perform a physical exam and a
neurological exam
.
If they suspect a tumor, they’ll order an imaging test, such as an
X-ray
,
computed tomography (CT) scan
or
MRI scan
.
Your provider will likely refer you to a bone cancer specialist for a second opinion and confirmation of the diagnosis. You may need additional imaging tests to better determine the location of the chordoma and see if it’s spread to other areas of your body.
Advertisement
The only way healthcare providers can definitively diagnose chordoma is with a
biopsy
— usually a
needle biopsy
. This involves taking a small sample of the tumor so a specialist can examine it under a microscope.
Management and Treatment
How is chordoma treated?
The go-to treatment option for chordoma is surgery. Total surgical removal of the tumor (en bloc resection) has the best chance of prolonging survival. However, this is often difficult due to the location of the tumors. Specifically, this isn’t possible for chordomas in the base of your skull.
A chordoma in your spine can invade your spinal cord and nearby important nerves and arteries, which could cause lasting issues or death if they’re damaged during surgery. A chordoma at the base of your skull is often difficult to completely remove because it’s close to essential structures such as your
brainstem
, cranial nerves and spinal cord.
Neurosurgeons
aim to remove as much of the chordoma as they safely can.
Chordomas are generally resistant to
radiation therapy
and
chemotherapy
as primary treatments. But your healthcare team might recommend radiation therapy after surgery to lower the chance that the tumor will grow back.
Researchers are currently studying experimental therapies for chordomas, such as
targeted therapy
and
immunotherapy
. There may be clinical trials available that you can participate in.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Skull Base Tumors Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis of chordoma?
The prognosis (outlook) of chordoma varies depending on a few factors:
The tumor’s location and how much of it can be surgically removed
: Total removal of the tumor is associated with a better prognosis. Nonsurgical treatment only is associated with a worse prognosis.
If it has spread (metastasized)
: Distant metastasis is associated with a decrease in survival rate.
Your age at diagnosis
: People over 60 years old generally have a decreased survival rate.
If the tumor has dedifferentiation or not
: Poorly differentiated chordoma has a worse prognosis than conventional chordoma.
Your healthcare team will be able to give you more accurate information about what you can expect. Don’t be afraid to ask them questions.
Can chordoma be fatal?
Yes, chordoma can cause death — typically due to tissue destruction in your spinal cord, brain or brainstem after it has recurred (come back).
A study of 357 people with chordoma revealed that the survival rates were:
After three years: 80.5%.
After five years: 68.4%.
After 10 years: 39.2%.
It’s important to remember that these are just averages. Your healthcare team can provide more detailed information about survival rates based on your unique situation.
Prevention
How can I prevent developing chordoma?
There’s nothing you can do to prevent developing chordoma. Most cases happen randomly.
Advertisement
If you have a family history of chordoma or tuberous sclerosis, be sure to see your healthcare team regularly so they can monitor you for signs of chordoma. The earlier they can catch it, the better.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider about chordoma?
Chordomas often come back (recur), even many years after treatment. Because of this, long-term follow-up with your healthcare team is important.
If you have any new or worsening symptoms, talk to your healthcare provider.
Additional Common Questions
What kind of cancer is chordoma?
Chordoma is a type of bone cancer. More specifically, it’s a type of sarcoma, which is a broad group of cancers that begin in your bones and your soft (connective) tissues.
Can chordoma be noncancerous?
No. All subtypes of chordoma are considered malignant (cancerous).
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning you have a rare type of bone cancer can be scary and stressful. Chordomas can be difficult to treat because of their location. But know that your healthcare team will develop an individualized and thorough treatment plan to help treat the chordoma and improve your quality of life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you learn you have a skull base tumor, you’ll want the best care from the best providers. Cleveland Clinic is here to help.
Skull Base Tumors Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/02/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials