Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Mild Cognitive Impairment
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mild Cognitive Impairment
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a slight decline in thinking and memory. It’s a stage that happens between typical thinking and dementia. Some cases lead to dementia, but not all do. It doesn’t affect your independence or daily living. A healthcare provider can help you manage any underlying causes or symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cognitive Decline Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)?
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a noticeable decline in memory and thinking. It may affect your judgment, like spotting a scam phone call. Or it could affect your ability to plan, like remembering appointments.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You or a loved one might notice these changes. But you can still manage your daily routine without needing help.
MCI isn’t always permanent. In some cases, symptoms may improve. MCI also raises the risk of developing
dementia
caused by Alzheimer’s disease or other conditions that gradually affect brain function.
Types of mild cognitive impairment
There are two types of MCI:
Amnestic MCI (aMCI):
This type mostly affects memory. You might forget important information that you used to be able to remember.
Non-amnestic MCI (naMCI):
This type mostly affects thinking. You may have trouble with judgment, making decisions or completing complex tasks.
Symptoms and Causes
Learn some common symptoms of mild cognitive impairment.
Symptoms of mild cognitive impairment
The main symptom of mild cognitive impairment is a decline in the following skills:
Attention
Judgment
Language
Memory
Planning
Reasoning
You may notice the following:
Becoming easily distracted or losing focus
Difficulty finding the right words to say
Misplacing items more often than usual
Falling behind on a bill payment
Missing important events or dates
In some cases, you may have trouble with movement and/or your sense of smell with MCI.
Mild cognitive impairment causes
Parts of your
brain
that help with memory and thinking may have damage or structural changes. These include your
hippocampus
,
temporal lobes
, parietal lobe and other connected regions. These brain changes may make it harder to remember things, think clearly or focus as well as before.
Advertisement
MCI may be an early stage of certain
neurodegenerative conditions
, like:
Alzheimer’s disease
Frontotemporal dementia
Lewy body dementia
Parkinson’s disease
Vascular dementia
These conditions get worse over time and affect how your brain works.
Risk factors for mild cognitive impairment
Anyone can develop mild cognitive impairment. But you may be more at risk if you:
Are above age 65
Have a biological family history of dementia
Have the
APOE-ε4
(APOE4)
gene variant (a gene that increases your risk of Alzheimer’s disease)
The following conditions may increase your risk:
Brain injuries or disorders, like
traumatic brain injury
and
normal pressure hydrocephalus
Chronic conditions, like
diabetes
,
COPD
and
osteoarthritis
Heart and blood vessel issues, like
high blood pressure
,
high cholesterol
and
stroke
Infections, like
urinary tract infections
(UTIs) and
HIV
Mental health conditions, like
anxiety
and
depression
Metabolic and nutritional issues, like
hypothyroidism
,
vitamin B12 deficiency
and
dehydration
Sleep
conditions, like
obstructive sleep apnea
MCI may be a side effect of taking one of the following medications:
Antihistamines
Antidepressants
Blood pressure medications
Antiseizure medications
Benzodiazepines
Muscle relaxants
Opiates
Complications of MCI
MCI may progress into dementia. Dementia is a more severe decline in mental functioning that affects your daily life. You may need assistance or supportive care if you develop Alzheimer’s disease, the most common form of dementia.
Coming to terms with changes to your cognitive abilities can be tough. It’s normal to feel a range of emotions with this diagnosis. Some people develop depression or anxiety as a result. You may react negatively to assistance from others. That’s why your healthcare provider may recommend talking with a mental health professional. They can help you feel more at ease and supported.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose mild cognitive impairment
To diagnose MCI, a provider will perform a
physical
and
neurological
exam. During the exams, they’ll learn more about your symptoms. They’ll also take a detailed medical history and review your current medications. Let your provider know if you have any knowledge of biological family members diagnosed with memory conditions or dementia.
If a loved one notices changes in your mental functioning and is with you during the exam, your provider may ask them about what they’ve observed.
Mild cognitive impairment test
There isn’t a single test to diagnose MCI. Your provider may offer a variety of tests to rule out conditions with similar symptoms and measure your cognitive and memory skills. These could include:
Advertisement
Blood
and
urine
tests
Lumbar puncture
Imaging tests (
CT scan
or
MRI
)
Neuropsychological testing (like
cognitive tests
)
Management and Treatment
Mild cognitive impairment treatment
Treatment for MCI depends on the cause. Your provider may recommend:
Making adjustments to the medications you take
Participating in brain-stimulating activities, like puzzles and socializing
Prioritizing your safety (like securing rugs in your living space to avoid tripping or asking someone to drive you to the store)
Reducing your risk factors, like not smoking or drinking alcohol, or changing your eating habits and activity routines
Treating or managing conditions, like depression, sleep apnea or vitamin deficiency, among others
Joining a
clinical trial
(if available)
If you have MCI, you may want to think about your future. Planning ahead can give you peace of mind and make things easier for your loved ones later. An
advance directive
tells your loved ones and doctors what kind of care you want if you can’t speak for yourself. If you’re at risk of dementia, having these documents in place ensures your preferences are clear and respected.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have MCI, your provider will want to schedule follow-up visits every six to 12 months. This may vary based on your treatment plan. These visits help your provider check your overall health. They also track changes in your thinking and memory.
Advertisement
Call your provider if you notice any new symptoms or if things get worse.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cognitive Decline Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have mild cognitive impairment?
MCI looks different for each person. For example, your thinking and memory may stay the same or even return to normal for your age after treatment.
In some cases, it’s an early sign of a brain disease that gets worse over time, like Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s. But MCI doesn’t always lead to these conditions.
Research
shows that about 2 in 10 people over age 65 with this condition will develop dementia within a year.
Many people with MCI continue to live independently. Staying in regular contact with loved ones is important. It keeps you socially connected, which supports brain health, and gives you extra help keeping track of daily tasks that might sometimes slip your mind.
A healthcare provider can help you understand your outlook and what to expect.
How fast does mild cognitive impairment progress
The progression from MCI to dementia varies from person to person. For some, it may happen within a year. For others, it can take several years.
What is the life expectancy of someone with mild cognitive impairment?
Studies
show that people with MCI may not live as long as those without it. Averages show that you may lose five years off your
lifespan
. This is just an estimate. Your healthcare provider will have the best information based on your situation.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can mild cognitive impairment be prevented?
Not all cases of MCI are preventable, but these healthy habits may help protect your brain:
Challenge your brain with puzzles, reading or learning new skills.
Don’t smoke or drink too much alcohol.
Eat balanced meals and stay physically active.
Keep blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar in check.
Manage stress and get quality sleep.
See your provider regularly to manage chronic conditions.
Stay socially connected.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) can feel almost normal until the little things start adding up. Maybe you forgot the sugar while baking or misplaced your keys again. It may feel frustrating. When these slip-ups become more frequent, it’s time to talk to a healthcare provider.
They can help you understand what’s causing the changes. Depending on your situation, treatment may improve your symptoms, or your provider can offer strategies to help you manage them and stay safe. No matter what you're experiencing, your care team can offer support.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
It can be unsettling when your brain stops working like it used to. Cleveland Clinic’s cognitive decline experts help you manage the symptoms and provide support.
Cognitive Decline Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment