Thrombotic Stroke: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Thrombotic Stroke
Advertisement
Advertisement
Thrombotic Stroke
Thrombotic stroke happens when a clot forms in a blood vessel in your brain and blocks it. Call 911 or your local emergency services number immediately if you think you’re having symptoms. Emergency treatment is the only way to prevent permanent brain damage and death.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Thrombotic strokes happen when a blood clot forms in a blood vessel connected to your brain.
What is a thrombotic stroke?
A thrombotic stroke is a
stroke
that happens when a blood clot forms in a
blood vessel
in your
brain
and blocks it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Any stroke caused by a blockage like a clot is an
ischemic stroke
. A thrombotic stroke is a specific subtype.
Like all strokes, thrombotic strokes are life-threatening medical emergencies and can be fatal. If you think you or someone you’re with is having a stroke, immediately call 911 or your local emergency services number. The sooner someone is diagnosed and treated, the more likely it is they’ll survive. Every second counts.
Symptoms and Causes
What are thrombotic stroke symptoms?
Thrombotic strokes share symptoms with other types of ischemic strokes, including:
Double vision (diplopia)
or
blurry vision
Headaches
(usually sudden and severe)
Loss of muscle control on one side of your face
New
nausea
and
vomiting
Passing out or fainting
Slurred or garbled speaking (dysarthria)
Sudden loss of any of your senses (including
vision
,
hearing
,
smell
,
taste
and touch)
Trouble speaking or a complete loss of speech (
aphasia
)
Trouble walking or balance issues (an
unsteady gait
)
Unresponsiveness
Weakness or
paralysis
on one side of your face and body
What are the warning signs of a thrombotic stroke?
Thrombotic strokes can cause lots of different symptoms. To recognize the warning signs of a stroke in yourself or a loved one, remember the acronym
BE
FAST
:
Balance.
Watch for a sudden loss of balance.
Eyes.
Look out for
sudden vision loss
or changes in one or both
eyes
.
Face.
Smile. Look for a droop on one or both sides of your or someone else’s face.
Arms.
Raise both arms. If you or someone is having a stroke, one arm will sag or drop in a way that it usually doesn’t.
Speech.
You might slur your speech or have trouble choosing the right words.
Time.
Time is critical — call for help immediately. If possible, look at your watch, phone or a clock to track when symptoms start. Telling a healthcare provider when symptoms began can help them know which treatment options are best for you.
Advertisement
What causes thrombotic strokes?
Thrombotic strokes happen when something blocks a blood vessel in or near your brain.
“Thrombus” is the medical name for a clot, and
thrombosis
is the process that forms them. So, a thrombotic stroke is a stroke caused by a thrombus.
Many health conditions can lead to thrombosis, including:
Atherosclerosis (hardened arteries)
Atrial fibrillation
Clotting disorders
COVID-19
High blood pressure (hypertension)
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
Infections (including
bacterial
or
fungal
infections, bloodstream infections,
sepsis
and h
eart valve
infections)
Transient ischemic attacks
A
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
— sometimes called a “mini-stroke” — is like a stroke, but the symptoms are temporary and usually last less than 24 hours. TIA symptoms are the same as stroke symptoms. A TIA is a warning sign that a person has a very high risk of having a true stroke soon. A person who has a TIA needs emergency medical care as soon as possible.
Thrombotic stroke risk factors
Anyone can have a thrombotic stroke, but some groups have a higher risk, including people who:
Are Black
Are older than 65
Smoke
or use other forms of tobacco or nicotine (like
vaping
)
Use recreational or nonprescription drugs
Having certain health conditions can increase your risk, including:
Alcohol use disorder
High blood pressure (hypertension)
Diabetes
Diagnosis and Tests
How are thrombotic strokes diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose a thrombotic stroke with a
neurological exam
, a
physical exam
and other tests. Providers in the emergency room may diagnose it if emergency services transport you to the ER.
Your provider will use some of the following tests to confirm that you’ve had a stroke:
Blood tests
Carotid ultrasound
CT scan
and/or
CT angiogram
Echocardiogram
MRI
and/or MRI
angiogram
Management and Treatment
What are thrombotic stroke treatments?
The most important part of treating a thrombotic stroke is restoring blood flow to your brain. Healthcare providers will try to do this as fast as possible to reduce your risk of permanent brain damage, new disabilities and death.
The two most common treatments include:
Mechanical thrombectomy
.
This is a procedure to remove a blood clot with a small, thin tube (a catheter). A healthcare provider will insert a catheter into a blood vessel in your wrist or groin. Then, they’ll thread the catheter up to the clot in your brain. They’ll either vacuum the clot up in one piece or break it apart and suck up the pieces. Thrombectomy can be performed within 24 hours of when you start having symptoms.
Thrombolytic therapy
.
These are medications that dissolve clots. Providers will only use them if it’s been less than four and a half hours since you started having stroke symptoms.
Advertisement
You may need other treatments, including:
Blood sugar management.
Your providers will monitor your blood glucose (blood sugar) levels to help your brain recover.
Blood thinners.
It’s common to need
aspirin
or other
antiplatelet medications
.
Anticoagulant medications
are stronger medications that can lower your stroke risk if you have atrial fibrillation or a clotting disorder.
Endarterectomy
.
This is surgery to remove plaque from narrowed or blocked arteries. This can reduce the risk you having another blood clot.
Mild intentional
hypothermia
.
Your providers might safely lower your body temperature. This can slow down brain damage during and after a stroke.
Oxygen therapy
.
Your brain doesn’t get enough oxygen during a stroke. Your providers may have you wear a nosepiece that gives you extra oxygen. This will make it easier to breathe and help your body restore oxygen to your brain.
Stenting
.
A stent is a tiny tube that helps keep a blood vessel open and increase blood flow.
Thrombotic stroke rehabilitation
Stroke rehab is an important part of treating a thrombotic stroke. You’ll need stroke rehab to help you adjust to changes in your brain and body after a stroke. You may need to regain abilities you had before or adjust to new or different disabilities. You might need a combination of:
Advertisement
Cognitive rehab
to help improve your memory, concentration and other mental abilities.
Occupational therapy
to help you safely complete your daily tasks, especially chores or activities that need precise body movements.
Physical therapy
to strengthen your muscles, improve your balance and regain use of your arms and legs.
Speech therapy
to regain or improve your language and speaking abilities and control the muscles that help you talk, breathe, eat and swallow.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the survival rate for thrombotic strokes?
Stroke survival rates continue to increase as we develop better, faster ways to treat them. But there’s no one set recovery timeline or outlook that’s accurate for everyone.
Thrombotic strokes (and other types of ischemic strokes) tend to have better survival rates than
hemorrhagic strokes
. But that doesn’t mean you’re more or less likely to survive than anyone else. Everyone’s health and body respond differently to a stroke, so it’s hard for experts to estimate accurate guesses that apply to everyone.
Thrombotic stroke prognosis
What you can expect depends on a few factors, including:
How quickly it was treated
Which areas of your brain it affected
Your overall health
Most people take a few months to recover. Your provider will tell you what to expect. They’ll help you set recovery goals and expectations that fit your unique health and situation.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can you prevent a thrombotic stroke?
Maintaining your overall health is the best way to prevent thrombotic strokes and the blood clots that cause them. Try to:
Eat plenty of healthy foods and maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Get regular physical activity.
Manage your cholesterol, blood pressure and any health conditions you have.
Quit smoking
.
Visit a healthcare provider for a check-up every year (or as often as they suggest). Many of the health conditions and issues that can cause thrombotic strokes develop or build up over time. They may not cause symptoms you can feel or notice. Your provider will help you catch and manage any warning signs before they increase your risk of a stroke later on.
Living With
How do I take care of myself after a thrombotic stroke?
Recovering and rehabbing after a stroke is hard work. Once you and your provider finalize your treatment plan, follow it as closely as possible. In general, you should:
Go to your rehab and other therapy appointments.
Tell your therapists if anything makes you feel unsafe or uncomfortable. Rehab is hard work, but you shouldn’t be in constant pain or discomfort.
Remember your mental health.
Depression
and
anxiety
are extremely common after a stroke. Your emotional health can be just as important as how your physical body is doing. You’re not weak or a quitter for feeling sad or upset. Talk to your provider or a mental health professional if you feel like you need help processing anything during your recovery.
Take your medications.
This is especially true while you’re taking blood thinners. Reducing the risk of future blood clots is important, and taking your medicine as often as your provider suggests will help your body heal.
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) if you think you’re experiencing stroke symptoms again. Another stroke has an even higher risk of causing severe complications and being fatal. Don’t wait to call for help or go to the emergency room.
People who’ve had a thrombotic stroke have an increased risk of other potentially serious complications, including:
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Heart attack
Pulmonary embolism
Pneumonia
Seizures
Call emergency services or go to the ER if you think you’re experiencing any symptoms of these complications.
Which questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Which changes to my daily routine will I need to make?
Which condition or issue caused it?
Where in my brain did the blood clot form?
Which medications will I need, and how do I take them?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Thrombotic strokes can be sudden emergencies, but the issues that cause them usually build up over time. That’s why it’s so important to see a healthcare provider at least once a year to catch any warning signs before they build up enough to cause a blood clot and stroke. Talk to your provider about your stroke risk. They’ll help you maintain your overall health and keep an eye on any risk factors you may have.
If you’ve had a stroke, remember to celebrate every success in your recovery journey. That might sound like a cliché (and some days will definitely be harder than others), but give yourself credit. Recovery is hard work, and you deserve to be proud of yourself.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
After a stroke, it’s essential to get treated right away. Cleveland Clinic’s stroke care specialists can help you manage recovery and improve your quality of life.
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment