Bronchoconstriction: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bronchoconstriction
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bronchoconstriction
Bronchoconstriction is when the muscles in your airways tighten, narrowing them and making it hard to breathe. You might feel chest tightness, hear wheezing or start coughing. Allergens, cold air, exercise and other triggers can cause bronchoconstriction. Treating underlying conditions, like asthma and COPD, can help prevent bronchoconstriction.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is bronchoconstriction?
Bronchoconstriction is narrowing of the large
airways
(bronchi) that lead to your
lungs
. It happens when the
muscles
in your airways tighten in response to triggers like allergens, cold air or exercise. Asthma, COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) and other respiratory diseases can make it more likely that you’ll have episodes of airway constriction.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Bronchoconstriction can feel like a chest tightness that makes it hard to catch your breath. You might hear
wheezing
or have an irritated, dry feeling that makes you cough.
Bronchoconstriction can be fatal if it prevents you from breathing. Call 911 or your local emergency service number, or get to the nearest emergency room if you’re having difficulty breathing, severe wheezing or swelling of your face, mouth, tongue or throat.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of bronchoconstriction?
Symptoms of bronchoconstriction include:
Wheezing
Shortness of breath
Coughing
Chest tightness
What causes bronchoconstriction?
Tightening in the smooth (involuntary) muscles of your airways causes bronchoconstriction. This can happen during serious reactions, like
anaphylaxis
, or when the muscles react to certain triggers. Triggers of bronchoconstriction include:
Allergens, like pollen or
pet dander
Exercise or exertion
Chemicals, like pool chlorine
Temperature changes
Cold, dry air
Smoking
and
secondhand smoke
Upper respiratory infections
Beta-blocker medications
Over time,
inflammation
or structural changes (airway remodeling) due to chronic respiratory conditions might also cause airway constriction.
What are the risk factors for bronchoconstriction?
Specific diseases make you more likely to have episodes of bronchoconstriction. These include:
Advertisement
Asthma
COPD
, including
emphysema
Severe
allergies
What are the complications of bronchoconstriction?
Severe bronchoconstriction can keep you from getting enough oxygen and lead to
hypoxia
and
respiratory failure
.
Call 911 or your local emergency service number, or go to the nearest emergency room if you’re having difficulty breathing or having a severe asthma attack.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is bronchoconstriction diagnosed?
In an emergency situation, healthcare providers diagnose bronchoconstriction based on your symptoms. To diagnose the underlying cause, they might recommend:
Pulmonary function tests
Imaging tests, like
chest X-rays
and
CT scans
Management and Treatment
How is bronchoconstriction treated?
Treatment for bronchoconstriction depends on the cause. Your provider might prescribe medications to:
Reduce inflammation and open your airways
. These include
corticosteroids
or
bronchodilators
. You take these daily or as needed with an
inhaler
or
nebulizer
.
Block chemicals in your body that cause inflammation
. These include
antihistamines
and
leukotriene modifiers
.
React to an asthma attack
. You might need to carry a
rescue inhaler
with you for sudden asthma attacks.
Treat an emergency
. If you have allergies that put you at risk for anaphylaxis, you may need to carry an
epinephrine auto-injector
(EpiPen®, Auvi-Q®) with you.
In an emergency where your airways are blocked and you can’t breathe, a provider may need to open your airways with:
Intubation
. Providers usually use
mechanical ventilation
(a ventilator) to breathe for you when you’re intubated.
Tracheostomy
(tracheotomy). This can be temporary or permanent. A tracheostomy creates an opening in your airways so you can breathe.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have bronchoconstriction?
If you have a respiratory condition that can cause bronchoconstriction, you’ll probably need to manage it regularly to avoid flares. Everyone’s experience with chronic respiratory conditions is different — you may have infrequent or easily managed episodes of bronchoconstriction. Or you might have severe flare-ups. Talk to your provider about your specific situation and how to manage it.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your provider if you feel like you’re having a lot of episodes of bronchoconstriction that are hard to manage. They might be able to adjust your treatment plan to avoid flare-ups.
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 or your local emergency service number, or go to the nearest emergency room if you’re experiencing (or you see someone experiencing):
Severe difficulty breathing
An asthma attack that you can’t get under control
Swelling of your throat, face, mouth, lips or tongue
Sudden
drop in blood pressure
Bluish skin, lips or nails (
cyanosis
)
Loss of consciousness
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
It might be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:
Advertisement
What might be triggering bronchoconstriction?
What should I do if I have a flare-up or an asthma attack?
How can I avoid flare-ups or asthma attacks?
Prevention
Can you prevent bronchoconstriction?
You can reduce your risk of bronchoconstriction by treating the cause and avoiding triggers. You may need to track your symptoms to help you figure out what might lead to flare-ups so you can avoid them as best you can.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Chest tightness. Not being able to get a breath. Wheezing. If you have asthma, COPD or another respiratory condition, you know that bronchoconstriction is a scary feeling. But together with your provider, you can come up with a plan so you can be prepared and know what to do during a flare-up. It might also be helpful to let friends, family and others that you’re around a lot know the signs of bronchoconstriction and what to do if you have an attack. They can help get you the care you need in an urgent situation.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breathing issues can affect your life in many ways. Cleveland Clinic’s respiratory therapy program treats your symptoms so you can feel better day to day.
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/09/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment