Swollen Uvula (Uvulitis): Symptoms, Causes, & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Swollen Uvula (Uvulitis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Swollen Uvula (Uvulitis)
Uvulitis is inflammation of your uvula, the fleshy, teardrop-shaped piece of tissue in the back of your throat. Infection, allergies or trauma can cause the condition. Depending on the cause, uvulitis treatments may include antibiotics, antihistamines or, in some cases, surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
You can check for a swollen uvula by opening your mouth wide and looking in a mirror.
What is uvulitis?
Uvulitis is another word for a swollen uvula. Your
uvula
is that little fleshy piece of tissue that hangs from the roof of your
mouth
. It can swell because of things like
infections
, allergies or trauma. You might develop a swollen uvula when you have
inflammation
in nearby areas, like your
throat
or
tonsils
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Uvulitis is common. Treating the cause usually eases your symptoms.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a swollen uvula?
Swollen uvula symptoms might include:
Coughing
, gagging or choking
Difficulty swallowing
Excess saliva production
Feeling like
something’s stuck in your throat
Fever
Sore throat
Snoring
Trouble breathing
White spots on your uvula or throat
What causes a swollen uvula?
Some of the most common swollen uvula causes include:
Allergies
. Pet dander, dust, pollen or certain foods can cause your uvula to swell.
Dehydration
. Not getting enough fluids, like water, can cause a swollen uvula.
Environmental irritants
.
Vaping
,
smoking
or inhaling certain chemical substances can irritate your uvula and lead to inflammation.
Genetics
. Some
genetic conditions
can result in uvulitis, like hereditary
angioedema
.
GERD (chronic acid reflux)
. Severe acid reflux can irritate your throat and uvula.
Infections
. Some people get swollen uvulas as a symptom of viral or bacterial infections like
strep throat
, the
flu
, or the
common cold
.
Medications
. Some drug side effects can cause a swollen uvula.
Snoring
. Many people with
obstructive sleep apnea
will also have swollen or sore uvulas. (Snoring can be a cause or a symptom of uvulitis.)
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
. Some STIs like
gonorrhea
and
syphilis
could cause your uvula to swell. (But uvulitis itself isn’t an STI.)
Trauma
. Surgical procedures, like
tonsillectomy
, can sometimes injure your uvula. Uvulitis could also happen from
intubation
during surgery with general
anesthesia
.
Advertisement
Is a swollen uvula contagious?
Uvulitis itself isn’t contagious. But the viruses and bacteria that cause it can spread from person to person.
If you have a contagious infection, be sure to
wash your hands
frequently and stay home if you have a fever.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is uvulitis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
and ask about your symptoms. They may also request certain tests to see what caused the inflammation. These tests may include:
Allergy tests
. If something in your environment causes a swollen uvula, these tests can determine the culprit.
Throat cultures
. This quick, painless test can tell you what kind of
germs
caused your uvula to swell.
Blood tests
. These tests can detect germs in your blood, like viruses, bacteria and funguses related to uvulitis.
Management and Treatment
How is a swollen uvula treated?
The quickest way to get rid of a swollen uvula is to treat the underlying cause. To do this, your healthcare provider may recommend:
Antihistamines
. Medications like
loratadine
(Claritin
®
) and
diphenhydramine
(Benadryl
®
) may reduce uvular swelling related to allergies.
Corticosteroids
. These drugs can reduce swelling if you have severe inflammation.
Medications to treat infections
. Your healthcare provider might prescribe
antibiotics
,
antifungals
or
antivirals
if you have an infection.
Surgery
. If less invasive treatments don’t work, or if you have chronic uvulitis, you may need surgery to remove part or all of your uvula (uvulectomy).
Swollen uvula home remedies
You may be able to ease mild uvulitis symptoms at home with these remedies:
Drink lots of water.
Eat ice chips.
Gargle with warm saltwater.
Get lots of rest.
Make hot tea sweetened with honey.
Suck on throat lozenges.
Take over-the-counter
pain relievers
.
Use a humidifier.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for uvulitis?
Uvular swelling often goes away in a couple of days. But if you have severe or lingering symptoms, you should schedule an appointment with your healthcare provider.
Prevention
Can uvulitis be prevented?
You can’t always prevent a swollen uvula. But there are things you can do to reduce your risk:
Avoid allergens as much as possible.
Avoid chemical irritants and other environmental triggers.
If you smoke,
consider quitting
.
Practice safe sex
(since uvulitis is linked to some STIs).
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should schedule an appointment with your healthcare provider if you have a swollen uvula that doesn’t improve after five days.
If you’re choking or you feel like you can’t breathe, call 911 or head to your nearest emergency room.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If your uvula is swollen, here are some questions you might want to ask your healthcare provider:
What do you think caused my swollen uvula?
What are your treatment recommendations?
How long do you think my symptoms will last?
Am I contagious?
What should I do if my symptoms don’t improve?
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Like every morning, you get out of bed. But today is different. Your throat feels sore and scratchy. It’s hard to swallow. You stumble to the bathroom mirror. You open your mouth wide, only to see a swollen uvula in the back of your throat. This can be alarming, especially if you’ve never had uvulitis before. But the good news is that inflammation usually goes away in a couple of days. If you have symptoms that linger or come back often, tell your healthcare provider. They can identify the cause and recommend appropriate treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment