Bowenoid Papulosis: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bowenoid Papulosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bowenoid Papulosis
Bowenoid papulosis is a sexually transmitted infection that causes small, discolored bumps on or around your genitals. Most people don’t have any other symptoms. You may not need treatment. But in some cases, you may be at risk of developing cancer. If you’re sexually active, talk to a healthcare provider about how to reduce your risk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sexually Transmitted Infections Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Bowenoid Papulosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Bowenoid Papulosis?
Bowenoid papulosis (pronounced “BOH-uhn-oid” “pap-yeh-LO-sis”) is a skin condition. It causes discolored, flat or raised
bumps
(papules) on your genitals or
anus
. They may go away within a few weeks or last for years. It most commonly spreads through sexual intercourse.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Bowenoid papulosis of the anus affects about
1 to 2 out of every 100,000 people
in the general population. If you have a penis, it affects about 1 to 4 out of every 100,000. It’s slightly more common if you have a
vulva
, affecting about 3 to 5 out of every 100,000.
Other names for Bowenoid papulosis (BP) include:
High-grade
squamous intraepithelial lesion
(HSIL)
Intraepithelial neoplasia
Is it an STD?
Yes, Bowenoid papulosis is a
sexually transmitted infection
(STI). It may pass from person to person through:
Anal sex
Oral sex
Skin-to-skin contact
Vaginal sex
Is it serious?
Bowenoid papulosis is precancerous. That means it isn’t cancer, but it can become
squamous cell carcinoma
later. Squamous cell carcinoma is a type of skin cancer.
If you notice any skin changes on your body, it’s a good idea to schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider. An early BP diagnosis can help prevent it from progressing to cancer.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of Bowenoid papulosis?
The main symptom of Bowenoid papulosis is one or more bumps on your genitals or around your anus. They usually appear on the tip of your penis (glans),
foreskin
or vaginal lips (labia). But they can also appear on your scrotum, groin and butt. They rarely appear in other areas of your body.
They may look:
Advertisement
Flat
Raised
Smooth
Rough
Discolored (pink, red, brown or purple) or the same color as the skin around it
The bumps usually don’t hurt. Most people don’t have any other symptoms. But in rare cases, they may be itchy or sore.
Women
usually have larger BP bumps than men — about 0.75 to 1 inches (2 to 3 centimeters) in diameter. Women usually have more bumps.
What causes Bowenoid papulosis?
Human papillomavirus
(HPV) causes Bowenoid papulosis. There are over 100 different strains of HPV. But HPV 16 and HPV 18 cause most cases.
Is it contagious?
Yes, Bowenoid papulosis is very contagious. It spreads through skin-to-skin contact during sexual intercourse. You get BP when your genitals come into contact with the body parts of a partner who has BP.
It’s rare, but BP can affect other areas of your body. These areas may include your fingers and areas around your mouth. It’s possible to spread it through hand- or mouth-to-genital contact. This includes “manual stimulation” like hand jobs and fingering.
Risk factors
Anyone sexually active can get Bowenoid papulosis. It’s most common in people in their 30s.
Complications
HPV that causes Bowenoid papulosis could potentially develop into cancer. If you have BP, you have an increased risk of developing:
Cervical cancer
Vaginal cancer
Vulval cancer
Penile cancer
Invasive squamous cell carcinoma
It’s important to remember that having BP doesn’t mean you’ll develop cancer. But you may need to schedule regular appointments with a healthcare provider. Regular monitoring can help prevent BP from causing cancer.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Bowenoid papulosis
A provider will first review your health history and ask you about your symptoms. They’ll also look at your affected areas. They may use a magnifying device with a light (dermoscopy) to get a closer look.
If they suspect Bowenoid papulosis, they’ll confirm it with a
skin biopsy
. During a skin biopsy, they’ll remove a small amount of affected tissue and send it to a lab to look for signs of BP.
Management and Treatment
How do you cure Bowenoid papulosis?
Sometimes, Bowenoid papulosis doesn’t need treatment. Healthcare providers may suggest regular appointments to monitor it. Your appointments may include a
Pap smear
. During a Pap smear, your provider uses a
medical device
to widen your vaginal walls. This allows them to take a closer look at your vagina and cervix. They’ll also swab cells from your cervix and send them to a lab to look for signs of BP.
If you need treatment, your provider may recommend:
Medicated creams
: Applying 5-fluorouracil and 5%
imiquimod
creams may treat mild cases.
Ablation therapy
: Your provider uses extreme heat or cold to destroy BP bumps.
Electrosurgery
: Your provider uses electricity to destroy the bumps.
Photodynamic therapy
: Your provider uses light and photosensitizing drugs to destroy the bumps.
Excision
: Your provider uses a sharp medical knife (scalpel) to cut out the bumps.
Advertisement
In some cases, providers may combine treatments.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call your
primary care provider
(PCP) if you notice any changes around your genitals. They can make an official diagnosis or refer you to a
dermatologist
.
During your appointment, you may wish to ask the following questions:
What tests do you suggest to diagnose Bowenoid papulosis?
Are there any signs I should look out for that it’s getting worse?
Do you think I need treatment?
Will it go away on its own?
Should I schedule follow-up appointments for monitoring?
How often should I schedule appointments?
Can I still get an HPV vaccine if I have Bowenoid papulosis?
Is there anything else I can do to protect myself or my partner(s)?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sexually Transmitted Infections Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for Bowenoid papulosis?
The outlook for Bowenoid papulosis is generally good. Symptoms go away completely for most people. You may not even need treatment.
But there is a risk that BP may turn into cancer. It’s important to see a healthcare provider if you have any changes to or around your genitals. Early diagnosis and treatment reduce your risk of cancer.
Prevention
Can it be prevented?
The easiest way to prevent Bowenoid papulosis is to avoid sexual intercourse. But if you’re sexually active, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare provider about the
HPV vaccine
. They can answer any questions about their safety and effectiveness.
Advertisement
You can also help lower your BP risk by:
Getting an
STI test
before having sex with any new partners
Limiting your number of sexual partners
Practicing safe sex by using dental dams and condoms each time you have sex
You should also tell your partner(s) if you have BP. If they have any questions, encourage them to talk to a provider.
Additional Common Questions
What conditions are similar to Bowenoid papulosis?
Conditions that have similar symptoms to Bowenoid papulosis include:
Bowen’s disease
Genital warts
Lichen planus
Lichen sclerosus
Psoriasis
Seborrheic keratosis
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be a shock any time you notice unexpected changes to any part of your body. This is especially true if changes occur around your genitals. Your immediate thoughts may concern your health and the health of your sexual partner(s). What caused this? How did I get it? Could I have spread it to someone else? Will I ever be able to safely have sex again?
Before you get too overwhelmed by your thoughts, talk to a healthcare provider. They can make an official Bowenoid papulosis (BP) diagnosis. They can also explain to you what it means and guide you through your next steps. You may not have any problems or need treatment. But in some cases, your provider may want to schedule regular appointments to make sure it doesn’t get worse. They can also answer any questions you have about prevention and treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Don’t ignore sexually transmitted infections. Cleveland Clinic experts will treat them confidentially and quickly in a judgment-free environment.
Sexually Transmitted Infections Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment