Epidural Abscess: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Epidural Abscess
Advertisement
Advertisement
Epidural Abscess
An epidural abscess is a dangerous infection in the epidural space in your skull or spine. A collection of pus develops between the protective covering of your brain or spinal cord and the bones of your spine and skull. Providers can treat the infection with antibiotics or by draining the abscess. These work best when done early.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurosurgery Care for Adults
Neurosurgery Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is an Epidural Abscess?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is an Epidural Abscess?
An epidural
abscess
is a rare infection where a collection of pus is in your epidural space. This space is between the protective covering of your
brain
and
spinal cord
(
dura mater
), and the bones that make up your skull and
spine
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Since the epidural space contains
blood vessels
and
nerve
endings, an infection can cause severe pain. It also affects how your
nervous system
functions.
An epidural abscess is a medical emergency. It can be fatal if not treated quickly, or it can lead to permanent damage to your body.
Types of epidural abscesses
There are two types of epidural abscesses based on the infection’s location:
Spinal epidural abscess
: The infection happens in your spine.
Intracranial epidural abscess
: The infection happens inside your skull.
Spinal epidural abscesses are more common than intracranial abscesses.
Symptoms and Causes
Spinal epidural abscess symptoms
Symptoms of a spinal epidural abscess may include:
Back pain
(often severe)
Fever
and chills
Lethargy
Nausea
and
vomiting
Swelling and tenderness near the abscess
If you have a spinal epidural abscess, it may press against your spinal cord. This might cause neurological symptoms, including:
Difficulty walking
Leg weakness or
paralysis
Loss of
bowel
or
bladder
control
Loss of feeling in your butt, legs and genital area
The infection can spread to nearby muscles and cause pain with leg movement.
If you notice any of these symptoms, contact a healthcare provider right away. Symptoms may get worse within hours to days after the infection starts.
Advertisement
Intracranial epidural abscess symptoms
Symptoms of an intracranial epidural abscess may include:
Drainage from the nose
Double vision
Drowsiness or lethargy
Facial swelling
Fever
Headaches
Light sensitivity
Nausea and vomiting
Epidural abscess causes
Bacteria
cause epidural abscess infections. Sometimes, fungi and parasites cause it, too. The abscess forms when infected material (pus) collects in a pocket in the epidural space. This causes swelling in your spine or skull.
Causes vary based on the type of epidural abscess you have.
A spinal epidural abscess may happen after:
An infection that started elsewhere in your body spread through your bloodstream (like
endocarditis
)
Boils
Bone infection (
osteomyelitis
)
Spine surgery
An intracranial epidural abscess may happen after:
Brain surgery
Frequent
ear infections
Mastoiditis
Sinusitis
Traumatic brain injury
In some cases, a cause isn’t known. Regardless, providers can still treat the abscess to prevent complications.
Epidural abscess risk factors
You may be more at risk of an epidural abscess if you have one of the following:
A condition or long-term use of a medication that
suppresses your immune system
Alcohol use disorder
Diabetes
Kidney failure
Substance use disorder
(substance injections into your veins)
Epidural abscess complications
Epidural abscess complications can be life-threatening or cause permanent damage. While rare, they include:
Brain damage
Chronic back pain
Nerve damage
Paralysis
Spinal cord compression
Spine fractures
Septic
thrombophlebitis
causing tissue death (
necrosis
)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose an epidural abscess
Your provider will diagnose an epidural abscess after a
physical exam
and testing. They’ll take your temperature to see if you have a fever. While learning more about your medical history, your provider may ask if you had a recent infection, surgery or procedure.
An
MRI
can confirm the diagnosis. During this imaging test, your provider will find the exact location of the abscess in your body. Your provider may also take a
culture
sample of the infected area (if possible) or offer a
blood test
to determine the cause of the infection.
Management and Treatment
How is an epidural abscess treated?
Antibiotics
usually treat an epidural abscess caused by a
bacterial infection
.
Antifungals
and
antiparasitics
treat
fungal
and
parasitic
infections.
Severe cases, where the abscess compresses your brain or spinal cord, may need emergency drainage surgery to prevent complications. Your surgeon will send a sample of the infected fluid to a lab to verify the cause of the infection. Your care team may give you antibiotics before the procedure. When the culture results return, they may change the type of medication they give you to get rid of the infection.
Advertisement
Epidural abscess recovery
You may need to take antibiotics for four to six weeks or more to completely remove the infection from your body. You should continue taking your course of antibiotics, even if you feel better, until you use up all of your medication. This will ensure that your body and the antibiotics have enough time to clear the infection completely.
Eating healthy and treating other health problems can help your body fight the infection and stop it from coming back
If you needed a drainage procedure or surgery, your provider will give you instructions on how to
care
for yourself. You may need to stay in the hospital for a couple days or weeks, depending on how serious your condition is. Your doctor will want to make sure there are no lasting problems.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call your provider if you have symptoms of an epidural abscess. Visit the emergency room if you notice symptoms like unusual leg weakness or a sudden loss of feeling in part of your body.
Contact your provider immediately if you develop new or worsening symptoms after treatment for an abscess. Though uncommon, these infections can come back and require more treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurosurgery Care for Adults
Neurosurgery Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for an epidural abscess?
Many people have a good outlook and survival rate when they receive treatment shortly after symptoms start. Antibiotics and draining the abscess can get you on track to feeling better. The infection may come back if it wasn’t removed entirely. This is why it’s important to follow your provider’s instructions and take your antibiotics as directed.
Advertisement
While complications are rare, they’re possible. It can significantly impact how well your nervous system works or be fatal, in some cases. If you notice symptoms, especially with a fever, contact a healthcare provider as soon as possible.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
An epidural abscess can be a scary diagnosis to deal with. Symptoms may progress quickly, and treatment could begin before you’re sure exactly what caused the infection. It’s important to follow your provider’s treatment plan. This will make sure the infection leaves your body completely. Let your provider know if you have any questions about how long you need to take antibiotics or how to care for yourself after drainage surgery.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
The neurosurgery care team at Cleveland Clinic helps find solutions for your brain, spine and nerves — whether that means surgery or not.
Neurosurgery Care for Adults
Neurosurgery Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment