What Is Homeostasis?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Homeostasis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Homeostasis
Homeostasis is how your  body systems regulate and maintain themselves. When they do, it’s easier for your body to function at its best. Homeostasis also helps your body adjust conditions to keep things balanced, and to try to help you recover from injuries and illnesses.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Homeostasis is how your body maintains internal balance so its internal systems can run as effectively as possible.
What is homeostasis?
Homeostasis is how your body regulates your internal systems so they function correctly. Your body works best when its internal environment — including things like temperature or oxygen levels — is just right.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The term homeostasis comes from two ancient Greek words meaning “equal” and “holding still.” In other words, homeostasis means reaching and maintaining a state of balance. In this context, balance isn’t about keeping you from toppling over. It’s about having the right balance of everything you need.
Balance is key because too much of even the most essential things can be harmful. For example, everyone knows that water and oxygen are good things, and you need them to survive. But drinking too much water too quickly can cause
hyponatremia
. And breathing pure oxygen for too long can cause oxygen toxicity. Both of those conditions can be deadly.
How does homeostasis work?
Homeostatic processes are automatic, and a specific part of your
brain
, the
hypothalamus
, runs them. There are two main ways that homeostasis happens:
Negative feedback
Positive feedback
Negative feedback homeostasis
Negative in this context doesn’t mean bad. It means your body senses a change and tries to counteract or reverse the unwanted change. Most homeostatic processes in your body rely on negative feedback.
Examples of negative feedback homeostasis include:
Blood pressure
. Your blood pressure keeps blood flowing up toward your head against the pull of gravity.
Body temperature
. If you’re too hot, your body makes you sweat to cool you down. If you’re cold, your body makes you shiver to generate heat. These are examples of thermal (temperature) homeostasis.
Fluid balance
. If you drink too much water, you’ll soon feel the urge to pee to get rid of the extra fluid.
Oxygen levels
. Your heart and breathing rates increase and decrease depending on how active you are. That’s an example of respiratory and circulatory homeostasis.
Advertisement
Positive feedback homeostasis
Positive feedback homeostasis means the processes add to themselves and get stronger. That will keep on happening until the initial cause is gone.
Examples of positive feedback homeostasis include:
Labor and delivery
. When labor starts, your
cervix
starts to stretch, which triggers nerve signals that go to your
brain
. Your brain releases the hormone
oxytocin
, which causes
uterus
contractions. The more your cervix stretches, the more oxytocin your brain releases and the stronger the contractions get. That stops once delivery is complete and your cervix returns to its normal size.
Hemostasis (blood clotting)
. When you have a wound that bleeds, clotting factors in your blood activate to seal the wound. They also call for reinforcements, summoning even more clotting factors. They’ll keep on calling for more clotting factors until the bleeding stops.
Immune responses and inflammation
. When you have an infection or injury, your
immune system
causes
inflammation
at that site. Inflammation is your body’s way of shining a spotlight on a specific place so immune cells know exactly where to go. And immune cells at the scene will keep inflammation going as long as they need more help.
Why is homeostasis important?
You can’t survive without homeostasis and the processes that drive it. And every disease or medical condition involves a disruption of homeostasis.
When you get hurt or sick, your body adjusts its homeostatic processes so you can recover. That’s why you get a
fever
with infections or your blood clots when you have a bleeding wound.
Chronic conditions happen when something goes wrong and your homeostatic processes can’t adjust enough to make up for it. For example,
high blood pressure (hypertension)
happens when your body can’t keep the pressure within a healthy range.
Osteoporosis
happens when your
bones
lose calcium faster than your body can replace it.
Some diseases happen because homeostatic processes malfunction and make things worse. Examples include:
Allergic reactions
. Allergies happen when your immune system reacts to something that it thinks is a threat. Mild allergies may just be unpleasant. But if the reaction is too strong, that homeostatic process can be dangerous. For example, a
bee sting
causes brief pain and mild swelling for most people. But a sting can cause deadly
anaphylaxis
for someone with an allergy.
Autoimmune diseases
. These happen when your immune system malfunctions and mistakenly attacks part of your own body. The reaction itself would likely be normal and healthy if the target were an infection or injury instead of your own healthy tissues.
Cytokine release syndrome (CRS)
or
sepsis
. Immune system reactions naturally strengthen with time and will stop once the initial cause is gone. But those processes can rapidly become dangerous if your immune system reacts too strongly early on. That’s why CRS and sepsis can become deadly so quickly.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
How does the nervous system maintain homeostasis?
Your
nervous system
balances its own activity using two subsystems that do opposite jobs. Those subsystems, which are part of your
autonomic nervous system
, are your:
Sympathetic nervous system
. This activates to protect you when you’re in danger. It’s responsible for your “fight-or-flight” response.
Parasympathetic nervous system
. This is what relaxes your body. It takes the lead when you feel safe and comfortable.
How does the skeletal system maintain homeostasis?
Your
skeletal system
constantly goes through a maintenance cycle of breaking down and replacing old bone tissue. You need vitamin D and
calcium
for that to work properly. But that maintenance process
slows down naturally as you age
. And if you lose bone tissue faster than your body can replace it, you can develop conditions like
osteopenia
or osteoporosis.
How does the respiratory system maintain homeostasis?
Your
respiratory system
helps maintain multiple types of homeostasis. Two key examples include:
Oxygen levels throughout your body
. That’s why physical activity makes you breathe faster and harder. Your body needs more oxygen to meet the demand.
Blood pH level
. Your body uses carbon dioxide to manage your blood pH (acid-base balance). Your blood is slightly basic (alkali), the opposite of an acid. When blood pH strays too far from normal,
respiratory acidosis
or
respiratory alkalosis
can happen.
Advertisement
How does the endocrine system maintain homeostasis?
Your
endocrine system
supports homeostasis for multiple systems. That’s partly because your endocrine system creates many key
hormones
, which are like chemical messengers. They can tell your body systems when to start or stop certain processes. Examples include your
digestive system
,
metabolism
, and the
male
and
female
reproductive systems.
How does the muscular system maintain homeostasis?
Your
muscular system
relies on and supports homeostasis in multiple ways. One example is how your
muscles
constantly break down and rebuild themselves. Your muscles are also important for temperature homeostasis, especially when they generate heat to keep you warm.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Just like Goldilocks inside the home of the Three Bears, your body works best when everything is
just right
. Understanding how homeostasis works means you can make it easier for your body to find and hold the right balance for its systems. Maybe that means drinking more water, going for a walk or taking medication to manage a condition. Finding and maintaining balance may take work, but it can also make a big difference in your quality of life.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider