Functional Dyspepsia: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Functional Dyspepsia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Functional Dyspepsia
Functional dyspepsia is a kind of chronic indigestion. It involves frequent stomachaches and a feeling of fullness or bloating after eating. A healthcare provider may diagnose you with functional dyspepsia if they can’t find any direct cause for your symptoms. There are many treatment options, but there’s no one solution that works for everyone.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Chronic Indigestion Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
There's no single cause of functional dyspepsia, but several factors may contribute. Many people who have it have these conditions.
What is functional dyspepsia?
Functional dyspepsia is chronic
indigestion
with no identifiable cause. “Dyspepsia” is another word for indigestion — a pattern of symptoms that occur together after eating and while you’re digesting. “Functional” means that your dyspepsia symptoms can’t be explained by the usual physical causes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Typical symptoms of dyspepsia include burning stomach pain, over-fullness and bloating. These symptoms resemble
peptic ulcer disease
or
GERD
. But after testing, only a fraction of people with dyspepsia are diagnosed with these conditions. The rest are diagnosed with functional dyspepsia.
Types of functional dyspepsia
Dyspepsia is more of a syndrome than a condition — it’s a pattern of symptoms that occur together. But different people can have different combinations of symptoms with it. Healthcare providers have identified two distinct ways that people can experience functional dyspepsia. They classify these as:
Epigastric pain syndrome
. This type is characterized by upper abdominal pain and burning, such as heartburn. It resembles symptoms of GERD and it doesn’t necessarily occur at mealtimes.
Postprandial distress syndrome
. This type is characterized by early satiety and fullness, bloating and stomach pain after eating (“postprandial”). It resembles symptoms of peptic ulcer disease.
Not everyone fits these into profiles. Some people experience both types or a mix.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of functional dyspepsia
Functional dyspepsia symptoms typically include:
Upper abdominal pain
. Pain in your upper abdomen is called epigastric pain. This region (your epigastrium) is home to digestive organs like your
stomach
, pancreas, duodenum and
liver
.
Bloated stomach
. You may feel uncomfortable pressure or fullness in your belly after eating. Bloating is closely connected to
gas and gas pain
and a feeling of stretching or
distension
.
Fullness and loss of appetite
. You may feel full very quickly during or after eating (
early satiety
), even when you haven’t eaten a lot. In some cases, you may lose your appetite before eating.
A burning sensation
.
Heartburn
, a burning pain in your chest, is common with indigestion. It’s usually related to acid reflux in your
esophagus
. You may also feel burning in your stomach.
Advertisement
Additional or related symptoms may include:
Excessive
belching
Nausea
or gagging
IBS symptoms
(urgent or delayed pooping)
Stress
or emotional disturbances
What causes functional dyspepsia?
Healthcare providers diagnose
“functional” gastrointestinal disorders
when they can’t find a direct cause for your symptoms. This might happen because of the close
connection between your gut and brain
. Functional disorders seem to involve your nervous system and how you perceive pain or discomfort.
While there’s no single cause of functional dyspepsia, several factors might be involved. These include:
Visceral hypersensitivity
. If your nervous system is extra sensitive, you might be more likely to have a physical response to stress. You might unconsciously clench your muscles or halt your digestion in order to attend to your stress. You might also be hypersensitive to sensations in your organs. This could make digestion feel uncomfortable even when it’s working normally.
Motility disorders
. Motility disorders affect how your GI tract moves food along through the digestive process. This is another way that communication between your brain and digestive system can go awry. The nerves in your GI tract may fail to activate the muscles in your organs correctly. Your organs may
hold on to food too long
, or may not relax enough to let food in.
Gut dysbiosis
. Dysbiosis in your
gut microbiome
— an imbalance of microbes in your gut — may cause symptoms of functional dyspepsia in various ways. For example, some bacteria, like
H. pylori
, can eat into your stomach lining, causing inflammation and making it more sensitive to acid.
Bacterial overgrowth in your small intestine
can cause gas and difficulties digesting fats.
Eosinophilic duodenitis
. Some people with functional dyspepsia have an excess of white blood cells (called
eosinophils
) in the top of the small intestine (
duodenum
). This can cause chronic inflammation (
duodenitis
). Eosinophils come from your immune system to defend you from infections and allergens. A previous infection or food allergy might have triggered them.
Risk factors
Additional risk factors for functional dyspepsia include:
Psychological factors like
anxiety
and
mood disorders
or a history of
trauma
or
abuse
A family history of nervous disorders or other functional GI disorders, like IBS
Food sensitivities (such as
FODMAP
s) or
intolerances
(such as lactose intolerance)
Having a lot of
allergic
conditions or
atopy
Diagnosis and Tests
How do doctors diagnose functional dyspepsia?
Healthcare providers diagnose functional dyspepsia by confirming your symptoms and ruling out other causes. These include chronic acid reflux (GERD) and peptic ulcer disease. In some cases, you may already have one of these diagnoses. But treating the condition hasn’t relieved your symptoms.
Functional dyspepsia symptoms can be sporadic. Providers only diagnose it if they:
Have been persistent for at least three months
Originally appeared at least six months ago
Aren’t relieved by burping, passing gas or pooping
Don’t meet the criteria for
biliary colic
or
gallbladder pain
Once they’ve confirmed you have dyspepsia, they’ll look to rule out structural causes.
Tests might include:
Blood tests
to check for common infections and diseases that might explain your symptoms
Breath tests
(
urea
and
hydrogen
) to screen for abnormal bacteria in your GI tract
Gastric emptying studies
to see how fast or slow your stomach empties into your intestine
Upper endoscopy
to look inside your digestive organs for structural issues, or to take a biopsy
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What treatment is available for functional dyspepsia?
If tests reveal any underlying factors, like bacterial overgrowth or a motility disorder, your provider will treat those first. But usually, treating these isn’t enough to relieve functional dyspepsia. Your provider will suggest other treatment options to relieve your symptoms. It usually takes a combination of these.
Medications for functional dyspepsia might include:
Antibiotics
to treat a bacterial infection
Prokinetics
to encourage movement in your GI tract
Acid blockers like
proton pump inhibitors
(PPIs) or
H2 blockers
Tricyclic antidepressants
in low doses to calm your nervous system
Complementary medicine
for functional dyspepsia might include:
Plant-based formulas, like peppermint and caraway oil, or a blend called Iberogast®
Mind-body relaxation therapies, like
meditation
and yoga,
biofeedback
or
psychotherapy
Elimination diet
to identify food triggers, followed by a revised regular diet
Acupuncture
, which has shown some benefits in some studies
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Chronic Indigestion Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have functional dyspepsia?
For most people, functional dyspepsia is a chronic condition that comes and goes throughout their lives. It may take some trial and error to figure out which therapies and habits improve your symptoms. While you may find some relief, it may never go away completely. But it doesn’t cause serious harm.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your provider if:
You haven’t been tested for gastrointestinal diseases
Your symptoms change or get noticeably worse
You’re vomiting often
You’re losing weight unintentionally
A note from Cleveland Clinic
With no definitive cause or cure, functional dyspepsia can be a frustrating diagnosis for people looking for answers. Functional GI disorders are complex. They involve your brain and nervous system, diet and lifestyle, and possibly hidden causes in your body. That’s what makes them so tricky to manage.
Medical testing can help by identifying or ruling out certain contributing factors. But in the end, you’re the one in the best position to notice what makes your symptoms better or worse. As you try out different therapies and isolate your triggers, you’ll find your own way to live with functional dyspepsia.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Chronic indigestion can affect your daily routine or make you feel worried and anxious about eating. We can help with treatments to bring relief.
Chronic Indigestion Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us