What Is Nutrition & The Essential Nutrients Your Body Needs
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Nutrition
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nutrition
Nutrition is consuming the right amount and combination of nutrients to keep your body functioning. Nutrients are chemical substances that you find in food. Good nutrition can reduce your risk of disease. It can support healing and your mental health.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is nutrition?
Nutrition is the process of eating and absorbing food that your body needs for nourishment. It involves breaking down food into nutrients. Nutrients are chemical substances your body needs to function. But this essential process does much more than that. For example:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Research
shows proper nutrition can reduce your risk for
diabetes
,
heart disease
and
stroke
It supports the healing process whether you’re recovering from
surgery
,
a cold
or a case of
stomach flu
Experts
are exploring the influence that nutrition may have on mental health
In other words, there’s more to nutrition than may meet the eye. Taking a closer look at nutrition may help you understand how it works. That may make you feel confident that you’re making the most of what you eat.
What are nutrients?
There are six major classes of nutrients. Eating well is a balancing act that combines all six. The nutrients in the food you eat
benefit your body
in different ways.
Macronutrients provide energy and keep your body working. Micronutrients
are vitamins and minerals
. They support your metabolism, among other functions. Water rounds out the list of essential nutrients. It supports nutrition in many ways, like carrying nutrients and oxygen to your cells.
Macronutrients
If your body was a building, macronutrients would be the foundation. Macronutrients are your main source of energy. Macronutrients are:
Carbohydrates
like sugars, starches and fiber, which are the main source of energy powering your body
Lipids
— which are in fats, oils, meat, dairy and other foods — do many things like storing energy and digesting fat
Proteins
, which help to build and repair muscle, as well as regulate hormones
Advertisement
Micronutrients
Micronutrients include essential vitamins and minerals. You need fewer micronutrients than macronutrients, but they’re still very important.
Vitamins are substances that animals and plants make. The food you eat is your main source of most vitamins. Many people take a multivitamin to make sure they’re getting all the vitamins they need. You may recognize some vitamin names, like vitamin A, vitamin C or vitamin D. Others may not be so familiar. But they all contribute to your health. The following are essential vitamins:
Vitamin A
supports your immune system, metabolism and vision.
Vitamins B1 – 12
all help your body turn food into energy. They also support your blood vessels, brain, immune system and nervous system.
Vitamin C
supports your body in many ways. It helps your body grow tissue. It can also heal wounds and strengthen your immune system.
Vitamin D
partners with calcium to build and maintain healthy bones. Vitamin D also supports brain health and your immune system.
Vitamin E
helps to protect your cells. It also helps to maintain the health of your red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. This vitamin also supports your brain, eyes and skin.
Vitamin K
helps your blood to clot and prevents excessive bleeding.
Minerals make their way into food via the animals that eat them and the plants that absorb them. Animals and plants provide minerals. These substances support your health in many ways. The following minerals are micronutrients:
Calcium
builds strong bones. It also supports your heart, muscles and nervous system.
Chromium
helps your body metabolize (process) carbohydrates and fats.
Copper
supports brain development, your immune system and your nervous system.
Fluoride
helps to keep your bones strong and to prevent tooth decay.
Iodine
promotes brain development, thyroid health and more.
Iron
helps your body make
hemoglobin
, a protein in red blood cells.
Magnesium
makes new proteins and helps to convert food into energy.
Manganese
protects your cells from damage and helps your body make energy.
Phosphorus
builds and maintains strong bones and teeth, produces energy and repairs cells.
Potassium
helps to prevent high blood pressure. It also supports muscle health.
Selenium
supports thyroid health and reproductive health.
Sodium
helps cells absorb nutrients. It helps muscle and nerve functions.
Zinc
boosts your immune system and protects your vision.
Food Groups
The long list of macronutrients and micronutrients come together in the
five food groups
that make up the balanced meals you need to have good nutrition:
Advertisement
Dairy
Fruit
Grains
Protein
Vegetables
How nutrition needs change
Getting nutrition right is a balancing act that changes throughout your lifetime. Babies, kids, adults and older adults have very different nutritional needs. For example, breast milk or formula meets most babies’ nutritional needs until they’re six months old. But adults and older adults typically need a different combination of nutrients.
Nutrition for kids of all ages
Breast milk or formula meets most
babies’
nutritional needs for the first six months. At six months, you can start adding solid food to the mix. It can be challenging to figure out which mix of solid food gives your baby the best possible nutritional boost. Ask your baby’s
pediatrician
for suggestions for your baby’s introduction to solid food.
The nutritional balancing act continues as your baby grows. In general, meals that include the
five food groups
give toddlers and children the right combination of macronutrients and micronutrients.
Nutrition for adults
Building meals from the five food groups still works for adults. But
males
and females benefit by having a different mix of
macronutrients and micronutrients.
Here are two examples:
Females typically need more iron than males. That’s because females lose iron through blood loss during
menstruation
. Pregnancy and childbirth can cause
iron-deficiency anemia
.
Males need a bit more vitamin B5 than females. Vitamin B5 supports muscle mass, among other things. Males typically have more muscle mass than females.
Advertisement
The nutrient picture changes as we
age
. Medication or medical conditions may affect your appetite. When you eat less, you miss out on essential nutrients. People age 65 and older may benefit by focusing on foods that boost vitamin D and calcium for strong bones.
Medical conditions that affect nutrition
There are medical conditions that affect nutrition regardless of your age. For example:
Cancer cachexia
happens when cancer speeds up your metabolism, so your body uses more energy than you get from food
Depression
can cause you to lose interest in planning and eating nutritious meals
Dysphagia
(difficulty swallowing)
can make it hard for you to eat certain foods, which increases the chance you’ll miss out on getting certain nutrients
Malabsorption
syndrome refers to conditions that keep your body from absorbing nutrients
Conditions that affect nutrition can lead to macronutrient and micronutrient undernutrition. These are types of
malnutrition
. They can cause serious complications:
Macronutrient undernutrition means you don’t get enough protein, carbohydrates or fats. Your body needs macronutrients for energy. When you don’t get enough macronutrients, your body starts conserving energy. It does that by breaking down tissue or slowing organ function.
Micronutrient undernutrition is when you have a serious vitamin or mineral deficiency. For example, a lack of iron can lead to iron-deficiency anemia.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between calories and nutrients?
They’re both a way to keep track of what you eat. Calories are a unit of energy. They measure how much energy food provides your body. Nutrients are essential chemical substances your body needs to function and can have different calories (for example, lipids have more calories than carbohydrates).
Who can help me with nutrition questions?
A
registered dietitian
(RD) is probably your best source of information about nutrients. They’ll discuss your needs, explain how specific nutrients may be helpful and how to build nutrients into a meal plan.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The saying “You are what you eat” doesn’t capture all the things that make us individual and unique. But it comes close. It’s fair to say that what we eat — the nutrients we consume — supports our physical and mental health in many ways.
Nutrition can be complicated. There are more than a dozen macronutrients and micronutrients. You may wonder if you’ll need to sort them all to build healthy eating habits. Ask a healthcare provider for help. They’ll take time to understand your situation. Then, they’ll make recommendations to help create a nutrition plan for eating that works for you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us