Triglycerides: Levels & Normal Range
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Triglycerides
Advertisement
Advertisement
Triglycerides
Triglycerides are a very common kind of fat in your body. They’re in butter and other fats in food. You also make triglycerides from extra calories to use later. But high triglyceride levels can raise your risk of issues like heart attacks and strokes. Exercise and other healthy habits can bring triglyceride levels back to normal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Triglycerides from fatty foods build up in your blood vessels. For adults, a healthy triglyceride level is below 150 mg/dL.
What are triglycerides?
Triglycerides are fats from the food we eat. Most of the fats we eat (like butter) are in triglyceride form. Extra calories, alcohol and sugar in your body turn into triglycerides. Your body stores them in fat cells throughout your body like stocking shelves in a pantry. You can use triglycerides later when you need them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
High triglycerides (
hypertriglyceridemia
) can put you at a higher risk of heart and vascular (blood vessel) disease. This includes
heart attack
and
stroke
. About 25% of people in the U.S. have high triglycerides.
How are triglycerides different from cholesterol?
Triglycerides and
cholesterol
are both fatty substances called
lipids
. But triglycerides are fats; cholesterol isn’t. Cholesterol is a waxy substance your
liver
makes. Your body uses it to build cell walls and help your
nervous system
. It also plays an important role in digestion and hormone production.
How do triglycerides circulate in the blood?
Pure cholesterol can’t mix with or dissolve in blood. Instead, your liver packages cholesterol with triglycerides and proteins called
lipoproteins
. The lipoproteins move this fatty mixture to areas throughout your body.
Types of these lipoproteins include:
Very low-density lipoproteins (
VLDLs
).
High-density lipoproteins (
HDLs
).
Low-density lipoproteins (
LDLs
).
Normal and high triglyceride levels
For adults, your healthcare provider classifies high triglyceride levels as:
Mild:
150-199 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL).
Moderate:
200-499 mg/dL.
Severe:
Greater than 500 mg/dL.
For adults, a normal triglyceride level is below 150 mg/dL. For young people between ages 10 and 19, a normal number for triglycerides is below 90 mg/dL.
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider figures out your total cholesterol by looking at a combination of triglycerides, HDL and LDL numbers. If your triglycerides and LDL cholesterol are high, but your HDL is low, you have an increased risk of heart attack and stroke.
What are the symptoms of high triglycerides?
Like high cholesterol, high triglycerides rarely cause symptoms. That’s why you need to get routine
lipid blood tests
to check
cholesterol numbers
. For the most accurate reading, you should fast eight to 12 hours before a lipid blood test.
What are the complications of high triglycerides?
High levels of triglycerides increase your risk of
pancreatitis
. This severe and painful inflammation of the pancreas can be life-threatening.
High triglyceride levels also increase your risk of heart and vascular disease, including:
Carotid artery disease
.
Coronary artery disease
(CAD) and heart attack.
Metabolic syndrome
(a combination of
high blood pressure
, diabetes and obesity).
Peripheral artery disease
(PAD).
Strokes.
Learn what triglycerides are and what causes them.
What causes high triglycerides?
Causes of high triglycerides include:
Excessive alcohol use.
Unmanaged
diabetes
.
A diet high in sugar, saturated fat and simple carbohydrates.
Liver disease
.
Kidney disease
.
Medications like
diuretics
, hormones,
corticosteroids
,
beta-blockers
and some HIV medications.
A
body mass index (BMI)
greater than 25.
Inflammatory diseases like
rheumatoid arthritis
.
Smoking
.
Thyroid disease
.
Lack of physical activity.
What are the risk factors for high triglycerides?
Factors that may raise your risk of high triglyceride levels include:
Family history of
high cholesterol
or high triglycerides.
Menopause
.
Pregnancy.
HIV
.
Lipid metabolism disorder that you inherit.
South Asian ancestry.
How often should you get triglyceride tests?
High triglyceride levels become more of a problem with age. As the risk rises, your healthcare provider might recommend tests more often.
Adults in their 20s, 30s and early 40s may need cholesterol tests every four to six years. If you have diabetes, a family history of high cholesterol or other heart disease risk factors, you may need more frequent tests.
Males
over 45 need a test every year. Females over 55 also need annual tests.
If you have cardiovascular disease or you’re taking medications to lower your cholesterol or triglyceride levels, your healthcare provider or
cardiologist
might check your triglyceride levels more frequently.
Do children need triglyceride tests?
Yes, children need cholesterol and triglyceride tests. Providers usually test children between ages 9 and 11 and again during young adulthood (between ages 17 and 21). If a child has a family history of high cholesterol, heart attacks or strokes, their provider may do tests as early as age 2.
How can you prevent or lower high triglycerides?
Changes to your diet and lifestyle can lower triglyceride numbers. To keep triglycerides and total cholesterol within a healthy range:
Advertisement
Be physically active for at least 30 minutes every day.
Eat a
heart-healthy diet
with fewer unhealthy
fats
and simple sugars (
carbohydrates
) and more
fiber
.
Manage high blood pressure and diabetes.
Cut back on alcohol.
Get enough
sleep
.
Lose weight (if needed) and maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Manage
stress
.
Stop using tobacco products.
How are high triglycerides treated?
People at high risk for heart attacks, strokes or other problems may need medications to lower triglycerides. These may include
cholesterol-lowering drugs
such as statins.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
High levels of triglycerides increase your risk of heart disease and pancreatitis. Eating or drinking too many calories can lead to high triglyceride levels. The good news is that you can take steps to lower triglyceride numbers. Your healthcare provider can offer suggestions for heart-healthy lifestyle changes. If needed, medications can also help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/09/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment