Beta Thalassemia: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Beta Thalassemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Beta Thalassemia
Beta thalassemia is an inherited blood disorder that limits your body’s ability to make beta-globin. Beta-globin is an important protein that helps make hemoglobin and red blood cells. Beta thalassemia can cause you to experience anemia symptoms. There are minor, intermediate and major types of beta thalassemia.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Beta Thalassemia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Beta Thalassemia?
Beta thalassemia is an inherited
blood disorder
that affects your body’s ability to make hemoglobin. This iron-rich protein is the main ingredient in
red blood cells
. The protein enables these cells to carry oxygen to tissues throughout your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you have beta thalassemia, you don’t have enough healthy red blood cells. The lack of healthy red blood cells may lead to
anemia
. Severe thalassemia is diagnosed in infancy or early childhood. People with less severe forms aren’t usually diagnosed until they’re adults and have a routine blood test done.
Beta thalassemia is one of two main types of
thalassemia
. The other type is alpha thalassemia.
Types of beta thalassemia
Healthcare providers classify the condition types by their symptoms, which range from mild to severe. The types are:
Beta thalassemia major (Cooley’s anemia):
This type causes the most severe symptoms. Providers may call this transfusion-dependent thalassemia because people with it need blood transfusions for the rest of their lives.
Beta thalassemia intermedia:
This type causes mild to moderate symptoms.
Beta thalassemia minor (beta thalassemia trait):
This type may not cause symptoms or only cause mild symptoms.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of beta thalassemia
This condition may not cause symptoms. When it does, it causes anemia-related symptoms that may be mild to severe, including:
Fatigue
Dizziness
or weakness
Frequent
headaches
Skin paleness
Shortness of breath
Heart palpitations
Yellow skin or eyes (
jaundice
)
Dark or tea-colored pee
Swollen belly
Weak or misshapen
bones
in your arms, legs and face
Advertisement
Babies with beta thalassemia may be especially fussy and get frequent infections. The condition symptoms may start when your baby is 3 to 6 months old or before they turn 2.
Beta thalassemia causes
This condition happens when there’s a change (
genetic variation
or mistake) in the hemoglobin beta (
HBB
) gene. This
gene
tells your body how to make beta-globin chains. This is one of the two types of protein chains that make up hemoglobin. The other is alpha-globin.
In beta thalassemia, you don’t have enough beta-globin chains for your body to make hemoglobin. That means you don’t have enough healthy red blood cells, and you develop anemia.
You’ll have a type of beta thalassemia if you inherit the changed gene from one or both of your biological parents. Healthcare providers call this
autosomal recessive inheritance
.
Inheriting changed genes from both parents increases the chance you’ll have a more serious type of the condition. You may have the less serious type if you inherit a changed gene from one parent and a normal gene from the other parent.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose beta thalassemia
Healthcare providers will do a
physical exam
and
blood tests
. Beta thalassemia major, the most severe type, is diagnosed in early childhood. Children with beta thalassemia major usually receive a diagnosis by the time they’re 2 years old. Tests to diagnose beta thalassemia may include:
Complete blood count (CBC)
Reticulocyte count
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
Genetic tests
(to identify the genetic change in hemoglobin that causes the condition)
Prenatal tests like
amniocentesis
or chorionic villus sampling (
CVS
) may detect the genetic change during pregnancy.
If your provider or your child’s
pediatrician
suspects you or your child has beta thalassemia, they’ll review all the results. They’ll answer questions you may have, like:
What type of thalassemia is it and how does the condition affect one’s health?
If treatment is necessary, what options are available?
As it’s an inherited disorder, should other family members be tested for thalassemia?
Management and Treatment
How is beta thalassemia treated?
Your treatment will depend on the type you have. In general, people with the most severe type need more medical support. Potential treatments are:
Blood transfusions
:
The transfusions give you more red blood cells to carry oxygen through your body. If you have the major type of thalassemia, you may need regular blood transfusions throughout your life.
Iron
chelation
therapy:
This treatment helps prevent
iron overload
from frequent blood transfusions that can damage your liver or heart.
Folic acid supplements
:
The supplement helps your body make red blood cells. Your doctor may recommend them if you have mild anemia.
Luspatercept
( Rebolzy
®
):
This drug helps your body make more red blood cells. It’s a treatment for the severe form of beta thalassemia that doesn’t improve with blood transfusions or medication.
Stem cell transplant
:
This is treatment for the most severe form of beta thalassemia.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my baby has this condition?
Your baby will have regular check-ups and tests so their pediatrician can track any changes in their health. This will include frequent physical exams to check on their growth and development. They may do tests to check iron levels and liver function tests. Beta thalassemia major can affect your child’s bones, heart and liver. That’s why it’s very important that their pediatrician check for any bone, heart or liver issues.
What is the life expectancy for someone with beta thalassemia?
People with the least serious form of this condition typically don’t need treatment and have normal lifespans. Life expectancy for people living with the more severe type is typically shorter than a normal
lifespan
.
A bone marrow or stem cell transplant is the only known cure for the most severe form of beta thalassemia. Researchers are studying different types of gene therapy. This type of treatment holds great promise for treating beta thalassemia major.
When you think about living with beta thalassemia, try to keep in mind that your situation may be very different from others who have the condition. If you have questions about living with this condition, your healthcare provider is your best resource for information.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Beta thalassemia affects people in different ways. You can have the condition without symptoms. But some people have a type of beta thalassemia that causes serious health issues. They’ll need long-term medical care. Regardless of the type of beta thalassemia, it’s important to work with specialists with experience diagnosing and treating this condition. If your baby has beta thalassemia, their care team will be there to help you take care of your child now and as they grow up.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Living with a noncancerous blood disorder can be exhausting. But there’s hope. Cleveland Clinic’s benign hematology experts provide personalized care and support.
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/01/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials