Brachytherapy for Cancer (Internal Radiation Therapy)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Brachytherapy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Brachytherapy
Brachytherapy (internal radiation therapy) treats prostate, breast and other cancers. Healthcare providers place tiny radioactive pellets inside or near a tumor. The pellets release radiation that destroys cancer cells. The treatment spares surrounding healthy tissue. Brachytherapy is an effective treatment for tumors that haven’t spread.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Brachytherapy uses radioactive implants to treat various cancer types.
What is brachytherapy?
Brachytherapy (pronounced “bray-kee-THEH-ruh-pee”) is a form of
radiation therapy
that treats various
cancers
. Treatment involves placing radioactive seeds, or pellets, capsules or other implants inside or near a tumor. The implants give off radiation for a short time.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Brachytherapy can deliver large amounts of radiation that shrink or destroy
tumors
while sparing healthy surrounding tissue. You may only need brachytherapy. Or you may get it alongside other
cancer treatments
, like
external beam radiation therapy (EBRT)
or surgery.
Brachytherapy is also called internal radiation therapy.
What are the types of brachytherapy?
Types of brachytherapy include temporary and permanent implants.
Temporary implants
Low-dose rate (LDR) brachytherapy
LDR implants release low doses of radiation continually for one to seven days. Then, a provider removes them.
High-dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy
HDR implants release high doses of radiation during treatment sessions that last for 10 to 20 minutes. Providers remove them at the end of each session. Sessions vary from twice a day for up to five days to once a week for up to five weeks.
Permanent implants
These implants release low doses of radiation continually over several weeks or months. The level of radioactivity decreases over time until the implant becomes inactive. The implants remain in your body. This treatment is also called “seed implantation.”
What types of cancer are treated with brachytherapy?
Brachytherapy is effective at destroying tumors that haven’t
spread
. Brachytherapy treats:
Prostate cancer
Gynecological cancers (like
uterine
,
cervical
or
vaginal
cancer)
Breast cancer
Eye cancer
Head and neck cancers
Advertisement
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for brachytherapy?
Your healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
and review your medical history. You may also need
blood tests
and imaging procedures to help your provider plan treatment.
Your healthcare provider will explain things you should do leading up to brachytherapy. Depending on your situation, you may need to:
Stop taking medicines that affect blood clotting, like blood thinners (
anticoagulants
) or
NSAIDs
.
Clean out your bowels by using an
enema
before the procedure.
Not drink or eat anything for several hours before going to the hospital.
Quit using tobacco products.
What happens during brachytherapy?
The procedure depends on the cancer and the type of brachytherapy (LDR, HDR or permanent). It also depends on where the
radiation oncologist
places the implant:
Interstitial brachytherapy
. A healthcare provider places the implants directly inside the tumor. This is what happens during
brachytherapy for prostate cancer
, some gynecologic cancers, and sarcomas.
Intracavity brachytherapy
. A provider places the implants near the tumor inside a body cavity. This is often what happens during brachytherapy for gynecological cancers (like uterine, cervical and vaginal cancers).
If appropriate and necessary, you’ll receive medicines, like
anesthesia
, to prevent pain during brachytherapy. Once you’re comfortable, the radiation oncologist will:
Insert a catheter or applicator device
. Your provider will place the device needed to send the radioactive implants to the tumor. They’ll use imaging to ensure correct placement.
Send the implant through the catheter or applicator
. They’ll place the implant inside or near the tumor. The implant will release a prescribed radiation dose that kills cancer cells.
Remove the implant (temporary forms of brachytherapy only)
. With HDR, your provider will remove the implant after each treatment session. With LDR, they may remove the implant after each session and re-insert it during future sessions.
If appropriate, you’ll receive pain medicine to ease any discomfort once it’s time to remove the catheter or applicator device.
How long does it take?
Brachytherapy procedures take anywhere from 30 minutes to a few hours. How long the treatment lasts in total depends on the type of brachytherapy:
HDR brachytherapy
. The implants stay in for several minutes before a provider removes them. You may need several sessions daily spread out over a week or once a week spread out over several weeks.
LDR brachytherapy
. The implants may remain inside your body for a day up to a week. Permanent forms of LDR stay in your body forever. Eventually, the implants stop giving off radiation.
Advertisement
What happens after getting brachytherapy?
After the procedure, healthcare providers will take you to a recovery room. They’ll monitor you and help manage any pain.
You may get to go home on the same day as your procedure. If you do, you’ll need someone to drive you if you received pain medications or anesthesia as part of your procedure. Or, you may need to stay in the hospital overnight to recover from the procedure. Sometimes, you’ll stay in the hospital if you have treatments spread out over several daily sessions.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of brachytherapy?
Brachytherapy is an effective cancer treatment for localized tumors. The implants give off a powerful dose of radiation that blasts tumors without harming healthy tissue away from tumors. Less damage means there’s a reduced risk of
side effects
related to radiation exposure. The recovery time for brachytherapy can be shorter than some other types of cancer treatment.
How successful is it?
Brachytherapy is a successful treatment for tumors that haven’t spread. For example, a recent
study
shows healthcare providers are increasingly using brachytherapy to help people with cervical cancer live longer.
Research
also shows that in some cases, brachytherapy can get rid of prostate cancer and keep it from
coming back
.
Still, no two cancer diagnoses are the same. Ask your healthcare provider about the likely outcomes of brachytherapy treatment based on your unique diagnosis.
Advertisement
What are the risks or complications of brachytherapy?
Potential side effects depend on the cancer type and the type of brachytherapy you receive. Side effects typically improve once the radiation leaves your body. But some are long-term or don’t appear until after treatment ends.
Potential side effects include:
Difficulty peeing (urinating) or stopping pee from leaking (
urinary incontinence
)
Erectile dysfunction
Vaginal scarring
Fatigue
Fecal (bowel) incontinence
,
constipation
or
diarrhea
Nausea
and
vomiting
Usually, side effects occur in the body part where the implant is. For example, with a prostate gland seed implant, you may experience symptoms impacting how you pee or poop, but not nausea and vomiting.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time?
Brachytherapy may involve a shorter recovery time than other
cancer treatments
, like surgery. Depending on the procedure, you may feel better within a few days up to a week.
You may need to limit your activity and get extra rest after treatment. Follow your healthcare provider’s guidance on when it’s safe to return to your usual routine.
Is it safe to be around someone with brachytherapy?
Follow your provider’s instructions on how to interact with others safely after brachytherapy. For example, if you have
permanent brachytherapy
, you may expose other people to radiation for several weeks or months. The exposure risk is small. But you should limit your contact with young children and pregnant
women
as directed by your healthcare provider. With temporary brachytherapy, there isn’t any exposure to other people around you.
Advertisement
Still, it’s important to know that the radiation the implant releases doesn’t usually travel beyond the tumor. This is why it kills tumors without harming nearby tissue.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your healthcare provider if you experience any of the following symptoms during or after treatment:
Trouble breathing or swallowing
Severe stomach upset, vomiting or diarrhea
Urinary incontinence
Fecal incontinence
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Brachytherapy places radiation close to a tumor to destroy it. The good news is that it spares healthy tissue from harmful radiation exposure. It’s also excellent at treating local tumors, like those found in prostate, cervical and uterine cancer.
Follow your healthcare provider’s guidance about caring for yourself and managing any side effects of brachytherapy. Ask about likely outcomes based on your treatment timeline.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/18/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials