Hip Resurfacing: What It Is, Procedure & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Hip Resurfacing Surgery
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hip Resurfacing Surgery
Hip resurfacing surgery is an alternative to a total hip replacement for some people who have severe hip pain and stiffness. Instead of replacing your whole hip joint, your surgeon replaces your hip socket (acetabulum), and then surgically re-shapes the top of your thigh bone (femur) to fit securely into the prosthetic.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Joint Replacement Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Hip resurfacing replaces less of your natural hip joint with a prosthesis than a hip replacement.
What is hip resurfacing?
Hip resurfacing is surgery to repair damage inside your
hip joint
. Healthcare providers sometimes call it a hip resurfacing arthroplasty.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Resurfacing is similar to a
hip replacement (arthroplasty)
, but it involves replacing less of your natural hip joint. Your surgeon will replace only your hip socket (acetabulum) with a prosthetic piece. Then, they’ll trim and reshape (resurface) the head of your
thigh bone (femur)
to fit securely into the prosthetic acetabulum.
What does hip resurfacing treat?
A healthcare provider might recommend hip resurfacing surgery if you have severe symptoms that don’t get better after trying nonsurgical treatments like activity modifications, physical therapy or medications. Symptoms that can cause you to need resurfacing can include:
Hip pain
.
Stiffness or decreased range of motion (how far you can move your hip).
Limited mobility (difficulty walking or moving).
Swelling.
Instability (not feeling steady or balanced on your hip).
Arthritis
is the most common reason people need hip resurfacing. Most people who choose to have resurfacing surgery have
osteoarthritis
, but some people with
rheumatoid arthritis
may need it, too.
Who is a good candidate for hip resurfacing?
Not everyone is a good candidate for hip resurfacing. Because your surgeon won’t replace your entire hip joint, your
bone
health is more of a factor than in hip replacement. Specifically, your femur needs to be strong and healthy enough to be resurfaced.
Advertisement
In general, good candidates for hip resurfacing include people who:
Are younger than 60.
Are physically active.
Have strong, healthy bones.
The size of your hip bones is an important part of whether or not hip resurfacing will be a good option for you.
Men
typically have larger bones than women. This means people men are usually better suited to hip resurfacing than women. But your bone size is more important than your sex.
Talk to your healthcare provider or surgeon. They’ll suggest which type of hip surgery is best for you based on your body, unique needs and situation.
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for hip resurfacing?
Your healthcare provider or surgeon will help you get ready for surgery. You might need:
A
physical exam
to make sure you’re healthy enough for surgery.
Blood tests
.
An
electrocardiogram
to check your heart health.
A dental exam to reduce your risk of developing an infection after surgery.
Imaging tests, including a
hip X-ray
. You might also need an
MRI
or a
CT scan
.
Tell your provider and surgeon about any medications and over-the-counter supplements you take. You may have to stop taking them before your surgery.
Your surgeon will tell you when you should stop eating and drinking the day before your surgery. Most people need to avoid eating and drinking eight hours before their surgery. Your surgeon will also tell you which medications are safe to take with a sip of water the morning of your surgery.
What happens during hip resurfacing?
On the day of your surgery, you’ll receive
anesthesia
to numb your body and make sure you don’t feel any pain. An
anesthesiologist
will give you either general anesthesia to put you to sleep or a regional anesthesia to numb the area around your hip. They may give you other medications to make you sleep if you need regional anesthesia.
During a hip resurfacing, your surgeon will:
Make incisions (cuts) in the skin around your hip.
Remove damaged
cartilage
and
bone
from your hip socket.
Insert the prosthetic acetabulum.
Reshape and trim the top (head) of your femur so it fits into the new prosthetic socket. This is called resurfacing, and it’s where hip resurfacing gets its name.
Put a cap on your femur. The cap is usually metal, but your surgeon might use a ceramic cap instead.
Re-align your hip joint and insert your resurfaced femur into the prosthetic socket.
How long does hip resurfacing surgery take?
Hip resurfacing surgery usually takes two to three hours. It may take more or less time depending on how damaged your natural hip joint is and which kind of prosthetic your surgeon uses.
What happens after hip resurfacing?
After surgery, you’ll be moved to a recovery room. Your surgery team will keep an eye on you for a few hours to make sure you wake up from the anesthesia without complications. They’ll also monitor your vital signs and pain level.
Advertisement
Most hip resurfacing surgeries are outpatient procedures. That means you can go home the same day. Your surgical care team will perform a medical exam and physical therapy assessment before they say it’s safe for you to go home.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Joint Replacement Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of hip resurfacing?
The most obvious benefit of hip resurfacing is how much it can improve your quality of life. People who have a successful hip resurfacing usually experience noticeably reduced pain, improved mobility and increased strength. You should be able to resume all of your favorite physical activities once you recover.
Other benefits of hip resurfacing can include:
Increased mobility compared to hip replacements:
Most people who get hip resurfacing can run, jump and do almost any physical activity after they heal. People who have hip replacements usually need to stick to low-impact activities like walking, swimming and golfing.
Reduced risk of dislocation:
Because hip resurfacing keeps some of your natural hip joint, it’s less likely to lead to
hip dislocations
than a fully prosthetic joint.
Improved biomechanics:
Hip resurfacing will let you move better and safer. This is especially true if you’ve changed how you move, run, jump or use your hip to compensate for pain and other symptoms.
Lifelong symptom relief:
A hip resurfacing usually lasts a long time. Many people who have hip resurfacing live with it for the rest of their lives.
Advertisement
What are the negatives or complications of hip resurfacing?
Hip resurfacing is usually a safe, effective procedure. But some risks are possible, including:
Femoral neck fractures:
Resurfacing the top of your femur can weaken the area below it (the neck). This can increase the risk that your femoral neck fractures (a
broken femur
). If you experience a broken femur, you’ll probably need a total hip replacement.
Metal-on-metal ionization:
If your surgeon uses a metal cap on your femur and a metal prosthetic acetabulum, there’s a small chance you experience metal-on-metal ionization. This happens when the two pieces of metal rub together over time. The extra friction can release negatively charged particles (ions) into your hip joint. The ions can damage the tissue in and around your hip and weaken your bones.
Hip resurfacing shares the same risks as any type of surgery. Rare complications include:
Blood clots
.
Infection inside your hip or at your surgery site.
Nerve
damage.
Blood vessel
damage.
Problems with the prosthetic implant, including the device wearing down too soon.
Scar tissue inside your hip.
Your surgeon will tell you what you can expect after your surgery and how you can reduce your chances of experiencing complications.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time for hip resurfacing?
It usually takes a few months to recover completely after hip resurfacing surgery. Your surgeon will probably ask you to start moving and putting some weight on your hip right away, often as soon as the day after your surgery. You’ll likely need to use
crutches
or a
walker
for a few weeks.
Advertisement
Most people need at least a few weeks of
physical therapy
after hip resurfacing. A
physical therapist
will give you exercises to strengthen your hip muscles and regain your range of motion.
You should be able to resume everyday activities around six weeks after your surgery. Your surgeon will tell you when it’s safe to resume more intense physical activities like running, jumping or playing sports.
Ask your surgeon or physical therapist for tips on moving through your home safely after your surgery. They can show you how to:
Walk and move.
Sit down and stand up.
Go to the bathroom.
Bathe or shower.
Get dressed.
Use stairs.
When can I go back to work or school?
If you can do your job or schoolwork without putting a lot of physical strain on your hip, you might only need a week or two off.
If you have a more physically demanding job, or your studies require you to be on your feet or not sitting at a desk, you might need to take a longer break. Tell your surgeon about your daily routine, including all of your jobs, hobbies and physical activities. They’ll let you know what’s safe to do while you recover.
Pain management after hip resurfacing
After surgery, you’ll feel pain, especially in the first few weeks of your recovery. You’ll feel pain from the surgery itself and pain as your body begins to heal.
Your surgeon will suggest a combination of prescription pain medication, over-the-counter
NSAIDs
(if it’s safe for you to take them) and acetaminophen to relieve your pain. They’ll also tell you how much of each kind of medication you can take each day or in a certain amount of time.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your surgeon or healthcare provider right away if you experience any of the following symptoms:
Chest pain
.
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
.
Fever higher than 101 degrees Fahrenheit (39 degrees Celsius).
Bleeding.
Signs of an infection at your surgery site, including leaking, swelling, discoloration, odor or a feeling of warmth.
New or worsening pain in your leg, calf, ankle or foot.
Severe pain that doesn’t get better after you take pain medication.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Resurfacing may sound like something that needs to be done to your driveway instead of your hip. But it’s a safe, effective way to manage symptoms that keep you from doing the activities you love. Not everyone is a good fit for hip resurfacing, but if your surgeon suggests it, you should have few (if any) limits on what you can do once you recover.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stiff, painful joints don’t have to slow you down for good. Cleveland Clinic’s joint replacement surgery experts can help you get back to doing what you love.
Get Joint Replacement Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/25/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment