Vertebral Osteomyelitis: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vertebral Osteomyelitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vertebral Osteomyelitis
Vertebral osteomyelitis is a rare infection in your spine. It happens when bacteria or fungi infect your vertebrae (spine bones). The infection can start in your spine if the germs get in a wound or surgery site. It can also spread to your spine from somewhere else in your body. You’ll need medication for several weeks to kill the infection.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Back Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is Vertebral Osteomyelitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is Vertebral Osteomyelitis?
Vertebral osteomyelitis can damage your affected vertebra and the tissue around it in your spine.
Vertebral osteomyelitis is a rare spine infection. It happens when there’s a bone infection (
osteomyelitis
) in one of the bones in your spine (vertebrae).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Vertebral osteomyelitis can happen as the result of a spine injury or after surgery. It can also spread to your spine from another place in your body. Other names for this condition include spinal osteomyelitis and spondylodiskitis.
See a healthcare provider right away if you think you might have vertebral osteomyelitis. It can be fatal if it’s not treated.You’ll need medication to treat the infection and other treatments to manage symptoms or complications you experience.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of vertebral osteomyelitis
Symptoms of vertebral osteomyelitis can include:
Back pain
that’s worse when you move and doesn’t get better with at-home treatments
Numbness
and tingling
Unexpected weight loss
Weakness
You might feel back pain in one spot (localized) or it might spread (radiate) to other parts of your body. It’s most common to feel pain in your lower back (
lumbar spine
).
It’s common to have a
fever
when you have an infection. But you probably won’t if you have vertebral osteomyelitis. Experts estimate that only around
1 in 3 people
with vertebral osteomyelitis have a fever they can feel or notice.
Vertebral osteomyelitis causes
Infections that affect your spinal bones cause vertebral osteomyelitis.
Bacterial infections
are the most common cause, especially
staph infections
and
MRSA
. It’s much less common, but some
fungal infections
can also cause it.
Advertisement
You might have an open wound near your spine after an injury, spine injection or spinal surgery that lets germs in. Or an infection somewhere else in your body can spread to your spine through your bloodstream.
Risk factors
Anyone can get vertebral osteomyelitis, but you may be more likely to if you:
Live in a nursing home, shared care facility or another place where many people live close together
Experience a trauma that needs surgery (like repairing a
broken bone
)
Have a spine injection
Have a surgery like a
joint replacement
Have
bedsores
(pressure injuries)
Inject recreational drugs or share needles with other people
You might have a higher risk if you have a condition or need treatments that
weaken your immune system
. Examples include:
Diabetes
Sickle cell anemia
Taking
immunosuppressants
(like
chemotherapy
or oral
corticosteroids
)
Needing
hemodialysis
Complications of vertebral osteomyelitis
Vertebral osteomyelitis complications can include:
Abscesses
.
The infection in your spine can cause pockets of pus.
Necrosis
.
The infection can kill tissue around your spine if it spreads from your bones into your
nerves
,
skin
or
spinal cord
.
Osteonecrosis
.
Severe or untreated infections can cause permanent bone death. This happens if swelling from the infection cuts off blood flow to your vertebrae.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose vertebral osteomyelitis
A healthcare provider will diagnose vertebral myelitis with a
physical exam
and some tests.
Your provider will examine your back and spine. Tell them when you first noticed pain and other symptoms (especially if certain activities or movements make them worse).
There are a few tests your provider can use to diagnose vertebral osteomyelitis and the infection that caused it. You might need:
Blood tests
Biopsy
CT scan
MRI
Spine X-ray
Management and Treatment
How is vertebral osteomyelitis treated?
Your healthcare provider will prescribe medication to kill the infection. You’ll need
antibiotics
if you have a bacterial infection or an
antifungal
if you have a fungal infection.
Make sure to take your medication for as long as your provider says (even if you start feeling better sooner). If you don’t take the full course, it won’t kill all the bacteria or fungi. This can let the infection come back (recur). Infections that recur are often more severe and have a higher risk of complications.
Your provider might suggest other treatments, including:
Over-the-counter pain relievers like
NSAIDs
or acetaminophen to manage pain
Needle aspiration
to drain pus or fluid from your spine
Surgery to clean out abscesses or repair your spine (this is rare)
Wearing a back brace to support your spine while you recover
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Vertebral osteomyelitis symptoms can be hard to notice. That’s because back pain is an extremely common issue.
Visit a healthcare provider if you have pain that lasts for more than a few days — especially if rest or other at-home treatments don’t help you feel better. Talk to your provider right away if you notice any changes in your ability to feel or move any part of your body.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Back Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How serious is vertebral osteomyelitis?
Vertebral osteomyelitis is a serious infection that can be fatal.
With treatment, you may recover from vertebral osteomyelitis in about four to six weeks. However, it might take up to six months to feel fully recovered.
Without treatment, you may develop severe spine damage or blood poisoning (
septicemia
). Experts estimate that around
1 in 10 people
with vertebral osteomyelitis die within a year even though they’ve received a diagnosis and treatment and have gotten better.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Thinking about an infection in your spine, like vertebral osteomyelitis, can be scary. But it’s treatable, so don’t hesitate to see a healthcare provider if you think something is wrong. Trust your intuition. You know when pain, weakness or other symptoms aren’t right. The faster a provider can diagnose vertebral osteomyelitis and prescribe medication to treat it, the better.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Back pain can stop you in your tracks. But you don’t have to live like that. Cleveland Clinic is here to help you get moving again.
Back Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment