Endarterectomy: Procedure, Types & Purpose
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Endarterectomy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Endarterectomy
An endarterectomy is a surgical procedure to remove plaque buildup from narrowed or blocked arteries. It may be a treatment for peripheral artery disease or carotid artery disease. Your provider makes an incision over the blocked artery during the procedure. Then, they use a special tool to remove plaque, improving blood flow.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Peripheral Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is an endarterectomy?
An endarterectomy (en-DAR-tuh-RECK-toh-mee) is a surgery to open narrowed or blocked
arteries
. Your healthcare provider uses the procedure to remove
plaque
, a fatty and calcified substance that can build up in arteries. Removing this buildup improves
blood
flow through your arteries and reduces your risk of blood clots or stroke.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Providers can use an endarterectomy to treat various forms of
atherosclerosis
. This is plaque buildup in an artery that eventually leads to stiff, narrowed arteries. Usually, providers use endarterectomies for moderate to severe cases, especially if you have symptoms.
Conditions an endarterectomy procedure treats include
peripheral artery disease (PAD)
and
carotid artery disease
.
In PAD, plaque builds up in the arteries in your legs or arms. This blocks blood flow and may lead to pain, wounds and eventual death (
gangrene
) of your tissues.
Carotid artery disease is plaque buildup in your
carotid arteries
. These are blood vessels that carry blood to your brain. Narrow carotid arteries can lead to a
stroke
,
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
or
transient blindness
if you don’t get treatment.
Types of endarterectomies
The type of endarterectomy procedure you have depends on where you have a blocked artery:
Aortic and iliac endarterectomy
removes plaque from the main arteries in your abdomen (belly) and pelvis.
Carotid endarterectomy
removes plaque from the arteries running through your neck to your
brain
. These procedures are common.
Coronary endarterectomy
takes plaque out of your
coronary arteries
, which bring blood to your
heart
.
Femoral endarterectomy
removes plaque from
femoral arteries
in your groin going to your legs.
Pulmonary endarterectomy
takes chronic
blood clots
out of your pulmonary arteries. These procedures are rare.
Visceral endarterectomy
removes plaque from the arteries to your intestines and
kidneys
. These procedures are rare.
Advertisement
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for this procedure?
Before an endarterectomy procedure, you’ll likely have tests to evaluate the extent of the artery blockage, including:
Doppler ultrasound
,
using sound waves to evaluate the location of blockages and the amount of blood flow through your blood vessels
CT angiography
,
using advanced X-rays and contrast dye injected through an IV to make a three-dimensional picture of your body and blood vessels
Angiography
,
using
X-rays
and a contrast dye injected directly into your arteries to take pictures of your
blood vessels
Magnetic resonance angiography (
MRA
),
using magnets and radio waves to take pictures of your blood vessels
Your provider will give you instructions to prepare for an endarterectomy. You may need to stop taking certain medications, like blood thinners (
anticoagulants
), temporarily. In other cases, your provider may tell you to start taking
antiplatelets
, like aspirin, before surgery.
You’ll need to fast before an endarterectomy. Your
anesthesia
team will tell you how long to fast before the operation.
You may also have tests to assess your overall heart health, like an
echocardiogram
or
stress test
. Cardiovascular tests help your provider evaluate your
heart attack
risk and determine if you’re a good candidate for surgery.
Who isn’t a candidate for an endarterectomy?
Some people have risk factors that mean endarterectomy isn’t a suitable treatment option. You may not be a candidate for an endarterectomy if you have conditions that would make the surgery more dangerous, like:
Decompensated
congestive heart failure
Recent heart attack
Symptomatic coronary heart disease that’s not repairable
Severe
emphysema
or
COPD
Radiation
damage to the area
Infection in the area
Extensive calcification
But a provider may be able to remove blockages through a minimally invasive option called
atherectomy
. They may be able to treat others with metal scaffolds (
stents
) to open up the blockages.
How is an endarterectomy performed?
You receive anesthesia so you don’t feel any pain during an endarterectomy. Most people will be under general anesthesia and unconscious. But your provider may use regional anesthesia like a spinal block or keep you awake using local anesthesia. The most common procedure providers do with local anesthesia is a carotid endarterectomy to better monitor your brain function.
For a carotid endarterectomy, a provider may place a tube (shunt) to keep blood flowing to your brain during the procedure.
During an endarterectomy, your healthcare provider:
Makes an incision directly over the blocked artery
Removes plaque from the artery
Closes the artery with sutures, sometimes using a patch to widen the area to prevent re-narrowing (the patch can come from a synthetic graft or a piece of a healthy
vein
from another part of your body, if needed)
Closes the incision
Advertisement
How long does this procedure take?
A carotid endarterectomy takes about one or two hours. Times vary for other types of endarterectomies. Factors like the type of anesthesia you get and the medical conditions you have affect how long a procedure takes.
What are the potential benefits and risks of this procedure?
An endarterectomy procedure removes the blockages and restores your artery back to its normal, healthy size. The cleaned-out vessel can help heal leg wounds or resolve
leg pain with walking
or belly pain from
poor circulation
. It can also significantly reduce your risk of stroke.
The results of an endarterectomy usually last for many years.
Endarterectomies are typically safe, but there’s a risk of complications like:
Bleeding
Heart problems, like a heart attack
Infection
Nerve
damage (often temporary)
Re-narrowing in your artery
Stroke
In most people, the risk of serious complications is low. It depends on the location and the reason for the surgery. If your provider recommends an endarterectomy, it means that they believe the benefits outweigh the potential risks.
Some factors can increase your risk of experiencing complications after an endarterectomy, including:
Age, with risk increasing the older you are for most areas (for carotid blockages, some data shows endarterectomy to be safer than stenting the blockage)
Conditions like untreated
coronary artery disease
and chest pain (
angina
), severe lung disease or decompensated congestive heart failure
History of previous surgery or radiation to the area of your body where the operation will take place
Plaque buildup in multiple arteries throughout your body
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Peripheral Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after this procedure?
You may have a drainage tube extending from the incision site immediately after surgery to keep the area from bruising. Your provider will remove this before releasing you to go home. They’ll keep an eye on your
vital signs
as you recover.
You’ll likely be allowed to drink and eat a few hours after your procedure unless you have an incision in your abdomen. You may have some numbness or pain around the area where the provider cut into your skin.
Your provider may prescribe antiplatelets or anticoagulants for you. You may take these for several months after your surgery. If you have a pulmonary endarterectomy, you’ll take these blood thinners for the rest of your life.
How long does it take to recover from it?
The length of your hospital stay will depend on the type of surgery and location. You may need to stay in the hospital for:
One day for a carotid endarterectomy
Two to four days for a femoral endarterectomy
One week for an aortic or visceral endarterectomy
Ten days for a pulmonary endarterectomy
You’ll have a follow-up visit with your healthcare provider about four weeks after the endarterectomy. Your provider will examine the incision and image the repair over time with ultrasonography or CT scans. Most people can return to work after this follow-up visit. You may need at least six weeks to recover after an aortic, visceral or pulmonary endarterectomy.
Advertisement
Physical activity can help recovery, but it’s important to avoid strenuous activity until your provider tells you it’s OK. You may need to wait one or two months to return to work if you have a job that requires manual labor or strenuous physical activity. For aortic or visceral endarterectomy, you won’t be able to lift more than 10 pounds for two months until the abdominal area has healed and strengthened.
If you have stitches, a provider will need to remove them at a follow-up visit. If you had an endarterectomy in your leg, a provider may check your
ankle-brachial index (ABI)
every six months.
What is the life expectancy after endarterectomy?
This will depend on the area of your body that had the endarterectomy. The biggest risk is heart-related issues like heart attack down the road. But risk prediction methods don’t consider every factor. Everyone is different. Your healthcare provider is the best person to talk to you about your life expectancy.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your provider right away if you have any signs of complication after an endarterectomy, including:
Chest pain
Difficulty breathing
Fever
or
chills
Numbness
or weakness
Swelling (
edema
), increased redness or discharge around the incision site
Vision changes, slurring of speech or drooping of your face
Nausea or
vomiting
Additional Common Questions
How is an endarterectomy different from a thrombectomy?
Both are procedures to improve blood flow in blood vessels. Healthcare providers can use an endarterectomy to remove plaque or (in rare cases) blood clots. A
thrombectomy
is only for removing blood clots.
Is endarterectomy the same as angioplasty?
No. In an endarterectomy, a provider surgically pulls plaque out of your artery. With
angioplasty
, a provider pushes plaque against the sides of your artery wall. Sometimes, they may destroy the plaque with a laser. Also, an angioplasty is a
minimally invasive procedure
.
Is an atherectomy the same as an endarterectomy?
No. Although both remove plaque, they do it differently. An
atherectomy
is a minimally invasive procedure. An endarterectomy is a surgical procedure that involves cutting directly into your artery.
In an atherectomy, a provider
guides a catheter
through your artery. When the catheter reaches the narrow or blocked section, a provider uses a tool at the end of the catheter to remove the plaque.
Is endarterectomy major surgery?
An endarterectomy is an open surgery, meaning it’s a major operation. You may stay in the hospital for one or several days, and recovery takes several weeks to months. But complications of a carotid or femoral endarterectomy are uncommon. People usually tolerate aortic and iliac endarterectomy well and have infrequent major complications.
Most people have long-lasting positive results from an endarterectomy.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
For most people, having surgery isn’t an everyday thing. It’s normal to have questions and concerns. But if your provider recommended an endarterectomy, they believe it will benefit you. And because they do these surgeries every day, they can answer the questions you have. Don’t be afraid to ask for more information.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plaque in your blood vessels can cause tingling, pain and numbness. Cleveland Clinic’s experts treat circulatory problems, including peripheral artery disease.
Peripheral Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment