Paget's Disease of the Bone: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Paget's Disease of the Bone (Osteitis Deformans)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Paget's Disease of the Bone (Osteitis Deformans)
Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans) is a chronic bone disorder characterized by excessive breakdown and regrowth in the affected bone(s). Many people have no symptoms. The disease is more common as you age and is uncommon in people under the age of 50. It’s more common in people of Northern European ancestry.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)
Paget’s disease of the bone is a rare chronic bone disorder in which there's excessive and disordered bone turnover with both excessive resorption and formation. This is the process by your body breaks down old bone and creates new bone. A person with Paget’s disease of the bone is more likely to experience
bone fractures
(breaks). When the disease is around a joint, it can cause arthritis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Which bones are affected by Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
Any of your bones can be affected by Paget’s disease. However, your pelvis, skull, spine and leg bones (femur and tibia) are most commonly affected by Paget’s disease. Paget’s disease can affect one bone (monoostotic) or many bones (polyostotic).
Who does Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans) affect?
Anyone can develop Paget’s disease of the bone, but it’s more common in people who are over the age of 50. People who are from northern Europe or people who are from countries settled by European immigrants are more likely to develop Paget’s disease.
How common is Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
The number of cases of Paget’s disease of the bone varies from country to country Paget’s disease of the bone is more common in some European countries. Approximately 1% of the population in the United States has Paget’s disease of the bone.
Is Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans) cancer?
Paget’s disease of the bone isn’t a form of cancer. However, in very rare cases, Paget’s disease of the bone can cause bone cancer (
osteosarcoma
).
Other conditions have the name of Paget’s that aren’t bone diseases, including:
Paget’s disease of the breast (also known as Paget’s disease of the nipple):
This is a rare form of
breast cancer
in which cancer cells form in or around your nipple.
Paget’s disease of the vulva:
This is a rare form of
skin cancer
that forms on the vulva.
Advertisement
These Paget’s diseases are distinct from Paget’s disease of the bone, and they aren’t related.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
Researchers and healthcare providers don’t know the exact cause of Paget’s disease of the bone. They believe it’s caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors.
What are the symptoms and signs of Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
Many people who have Paget’s disease of the bone don’t realize that they have it. They may experience no symptoms, or the symptoms may be mild. When a person has symptoms, they're similar to symptoms of other bone conditions, like
arthritis
.
Symptoms of Paget’s disease of the bone depend on which bones are affected, and Paget’s disease usually gets worse slowly over time if it isn’t treated. Symptoms and signs of Paget’s disease of the bone can include:
Bone or
joint pain
: This could be caused by Paget’s disease or by arthritis, which is a complication of Page’s disease of the bone. When the disease is adjacent (next to) to a joint,
osteoarthritis
can develop.
Larger head size, bowing of the arm or leg or curvature of the spine
: Bone deformations like these can happen in advanced cases of Paget’s disease of the bone.
Bone fractures
: Paget’s disease can weaken your bones, which makes it more likely that you will experience bone fractures (breaks).
Headaches
and
hearing loss
: These symptoms can happen if Paget’s disease is affecting your skull.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans) diagnosed?
Because Paget’s disease of the bone often has no symptoms or very mild symptoms, it’s often diagnosed by chance (incidentally) after healthcare providers perform an X-ray or blood test to for another reason. Providers often use X-rays to make the final diagnosis of Paget’s disease of the bone.
What tests will be done to diagnose Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
The following tests help to diagnose Paget’s disease of the bone:
Alkaline phosphatase blood test
: A high level of alkaline phosphatase in your blood could be a sign that you have Paget’s disease of the bone. Sometimes this blood test is what first alerts healthcare providers that someone could have Paget’s disease.
X-rays
: With X-ray images, healthcare providers can see if you have bones affected by Paget’s disease. The affected bones look different in the images than unaffected bones.
Bone scan
: Providers sometimes use bone scans to see which bone(s) are affected by Paget’s disease and how mild or severe it is. During a bone scan, a safe amount of radioactive liquid is injected into your vein. The liquid then flows through your bloodstream and into your bones and makes areas of the bone affected by Paget’s disease appear “bright” on the images your bones.
Management and Treatment
What treatment is used for Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
Treatments for Paget’s disease of the bone can include:
Advertisement
Medication
: Many medications can treat Paget’s disease of the bone. The most common type is bisphosphonates. The most effective bisphosphonate is zoledronate (Reclast®). Often, one dose of this drug can result in long-lasting remission of the disease but it can’t correct bone deformities.
Surgery
:You might need surgery to fix or improve complications of Paget’s disease of the bone. Some surgeries include
knee
or
hip replacements
, surgery to realign deformed bone and surgery to enable bone fractures to heal in a better position.
Is there a cure for Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
There's currently no cure for Paget’s disease of the bone, but it’s treatable. The sooner Paget’s disease can be diagnosed and treated, the less likely that you’ll experience complications from the disease.
How long will I have Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
Paget’s disease of the bone is a chronic (lifelong) condition but it’s treatable. It often gets worse slowly over time if it isn’t treated.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis (outlook) for Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
The prognosis (outlook) for Paget’s disease of the bone is excellent if it's diagnosed and treated early in the course of the disease before complications such as arthritis, fractures and hearing loss have occurred.
Prevention
What are the risk factors for developing Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans)?
Unfortunately, there’s nothing you can do to prevent Paget’s disease of the bone. There are some things that are considered risk factors for developing Paget’s disease of the bone, including:
Advertisement
Your age
: People over the age of 50 are more likely to develop Paget’s disease of the bone.
Your national origin
: Paget’s disease of the bone is more common in European populations, including those living in England, Italy and Spain. It’s rare among Scandinavians and non-European immigrants living in Europe.
Your
sex
: Males are slightly more at risk.
Your family history
: Paget’s disease of the bone can sometimes run in families. If you have a family member who has the disease, you may be more likely to develop it.
Living With
How do I take care of myself if I have Paget’s disease of the bone?
If you have Paget’s disease of the bone and take medication, it’s important to follow your healthcare provider’s instructions for taking your medicine.
While medication and surgery are the only methods that can treat Paget’s disease of the bone, there are things you can do to help keep your
skeletal system
healthy in general, including:
Maintain a healthy weight:
Having obesity can cause extra pressure on your joints. Try to maintain a healthy weight to keep your joints and bones healthy.
Exercise:
Physical activity can help keep your skeletal system healthy and can help maintain your joint mobility. Be sure to talk with your healthcare provider before you begin an exercise routine. Certain exercises could put too much pressure on your bones that are affected by Paget’s disease.
Get enough calcium and vitamin D
: Calcium and vitamin D help keep bones strong and healthy. Be sure you're consuming enough calcium and vitamin D in your diet and/or through supplements.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have an elevated alkaline phosphatase blood level, you need an evaluation from a specialist to determine if it’s coming from your bones. If you have an X-ray that’s suggestive of Paget’s disease, you should have an evaluation.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Paget’s disease of the bone can be difficult to identify because it often develops without any symptoms. Without signs that something is wrong, your bones can slowly become damaged without you knowing. Because of this, it’s important to know the risk factors for Paget’s disease of the bone, especially if you have had a bone break or are experiencing symptoms of arthritis. Paget’s disease of the bone could be the cause. If you experience any symptoms of Paget’s disease of the bone, reach out to your healthcare provider.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/12/2021.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment