Craniodiaphyseal Dysplasia (CDD): What It Is, Causes & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Craniodiaphyseal Dysplasia (CDD)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Craniodiaphyseal Dysplasia (CDD)
Craniodiaphyseal dysplasia is a rare genetic disorder. It makes skull bones grow much thicker than they should. This raises the pressure inside a child’s skull. That extra pressure causes severe complications, and is usually fatal. Treatments can’t slow or reverse the bone growth, but they can improve a child’s quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Craniodiaphyseal Dysplasia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Craniodiaphyseal Dysplasia?
Craniodiaphyseal dysplasia makes your child’s skull bones grow too thick and large.
What is craniodiaphyseal dysplasia?
Craniodiaphyseal dysplasia (CDD), previously known as lionitis, is a rare condition that makes a child’s skull and facial bones develop incorrectly. CDD is a
congenital condition
. It’s present at birth. It makes your child’s body produce and store too much calcium in their skull.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In healthy amounts, calcium plays an important role in keeping your bones strong. But in children who have CDD, the extra calcium makes their skull bones grow too thick and large. The extra bone misshapes their face and puts extra pressure on the tissue and organs in their head. This can damage your child’s:
Brain
Eyes
Inner ears
Nasal passages
Nerves
CDD can sometimes affect other bones in your child’s body, including their:
Ribs
Spinal bones
The extra bone growth can cause serious complications and damage. There’s no cure for craniodiaphyseal dysplasia. It gets worse over time and reduces a child’s
lifespan
significantly. Most children born with CDD live for around 20 years. Treatments can help your child manage symptoms and feel more comfortable.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of craniodiaphyseal dysplasia
CDD symptoms will be most noticeable in your child’s facial features, including:
A larger, fuller-than-usual lower jaw
A noticeably long head
A wide nose, especially between their eyes
Bulging eyes
Wider-set eyes
The thickened bones and increased
pressure inside their skull
can cause:
Blurry vision
Eye pain
Headaches
Seizures
Sinus pressure or pain
Trouble breathing
Trouble hearing
Craniodiaphyseal dysplasia causes
CDD is a
genetic disorder
. A
genetic change
that affects the
SOST
gene causes it.
Advertisement
CDD is passed in an
autosomal dominant
pattern. If one birth parent has a changed
SOST
gene, their biological children will have a 50% chance of being born with CDD.
What are craniodiaphyseal dysplasia complications?
As your child’s skull bones get thicker and larger, they’ll put more pressure on the tissue under them. This can cause serious complications, including:
Developmental disorders and
learning disabilities
Epilepsy
Hearing loss (including deafness)
Paralysis
Vision loss
The increased pressure can also cause fatal brain damage.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will diagnose CDD with a physical exam and some tests. They’ll examine your child and their facial bones. Tell your provider when you first noticed any symptoms or changes in your child.
Your provider will use X-rays to take pictures of your child’s skull and other bones. They might also use
genetic testing
to confirm your child has a changed
SOST
gene.
Management and Treatment
What are craniodiaphyseal dysplasia treatments?
Your provider will suggest treatments to manage any symptoms your child experiences.
Your child might need a
cranioplasty
. This is surgery to reshape their facial bones. But not every child with CDD can have this kind of surgery. It often has a high risk of complications. And there’s a good chance the bone tissue will regrow afterward.
Your provider may suggest treatments to manage specific symptoms or complications, including:
Glasses or other visual aids to help with
low vision
Hearing aids to manage reduced hearing
Occupational therapy
to help your child complete everyday tasks
Specialized dental treatments to help their mouth and teeth
Is there a cure for this condition?
There’s no cure for CDD. Many of the treatments are
palliative
. This means your provider will focus on making your child comfortable and improving their quality of life. They can’t stop or reverse CDD.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you how often your child will need follow-up visits. They’ll monitor your child’s bones and overall health for any changes. Your child may need regular X-rays to keep track of how their bones are growing.
Visit a healthcare provider if you notice any changes in your child’s facial features. Talk to a provider if they’re experiencing any new pain, or trouble hearing or seeing.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for craniodiaphyseal dysplasia?
CDD is a progressive condition. It gets more severe over time. There’s no way to reverse or stop your child’s bones from growing incorrectly.
What is the life expectancy of someone with craniodiaphyseal dysplasia?
Children born with CDD often die in childhood. How long your child can expect to live depends on how quickly their skull bones grow. Any complications they experience can also affect their lifespan.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Is craniodiaphyseal dysplasia a disability?
Yes, CDD can be considered a disability. In the U.S., the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) guarantees legal and civil rights to people living with a disability. The U.S. Department of Justice Civil Rights Division has
information online
about accommodations.
Your provider can suggest resources or support groups for families managing CDD.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Craniodiaphyseal dysplasia (CDD) will have a huge impact on your child’s life. Even if you’ll face challenges many people don’t, you’re still you. And your child is still your child. Living with CDD doesn’t change that.
Talk to your provider about managing any symptoms and complications your child experiences. Your care team will help you know which treatments are available and how you can help your child stay comfortable. Don’t be afraid to ask your provider lots of questions. There’s no question too big or small when it comes to your child’s health.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider