Macrolide Antibiotic: Examples, Uses & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Macrolides
Advertisement
Advertisement
Macrolides
Macrolides are a class of antibiotics. They treat a wide range of bacterial infections, including walking pneumonia, whooping cough and strep throat. Common — and usually mild — side effects include nausea and diarrhea. You should only take macrolides or any other antibiotics if a healthcare provider prescribes them for you.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What are macrolides?
Macrolides are a group (class) of
antibiotics
that treat
bacterial infections
. Macrolides work by preventing
bacteria
from growing. Like other antibiotics, macrolides won’t treat
viral infections
, such as the
common cold
or
flu
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your healthcare provider may prescribe a macrolide antibiotic if it’s the best medication to treat your specific type of infection. Macrolides are also an alternative if you’re allergic to other types of antibiotics, like
penicillin
.
Macrolide antibiotics list
The macrolides that U.S. healthcare providers most commonly prescribe are:
Azithromycin
Clarithromycin
Erythromycin
Fidaxomicin
Conditions that macrolides treat
Healthcare providers prescribe macrolides to treat a wide range of bacterial infections, including:
Atypical pneumonia
— commonly called “walking pneumonia”
Bacterial
eye infections
C. diff
infection
Campylobacter
infection
Cat scratch fever
Diphtheria
H. pylori
infection
Legionnaires’ disease
Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) infections
Sexually transmitted infections
, like
chlamydia
Strep throat
, typically in people with a penicillin allergy
Traveler’s diarrhea
, when severe
Urethritis
Whooping cough (pertussis)
Healthcare providers sometimes prescribe a macrolide (
erythromycin in gel form
) to treat
acne
. This is because bacteria living on your skin can clog your pores and contribute to acne breakouts. Applying erythromycin gel to your skin can help control surface bacteria.
In some cases, providers prescribe a macrolide along with other medications to treat a condition. For example, they use clarithromycin, another antibiotic and a
proton pump inhibitor
to treat
ulcers
due to
H. Pylori
infection.
Advertisement
Treatment Details
How do I take a macrolide?
Macrolide antibiotics come in different forms, including:
Pills you swallow
Liquids you swallow
Gels or solutions you apply to your skin
Ointments you apply along your inner eyelid
Injections your provider gives you
Follow the directions on the prescription label and ask your provider if you’re unsure how to take or use your medicine. When using a liquid form, always use the measuring device that comes with your medication. Don’t use a household spoon — it’s not an accurate way to measure medications.
How long will I need to take a macrolide antibiotic?
Your provider will tell you how many days you need to take your medication. The total course of your treatment depends on the specific type of infection you’re treating and your overall health. Take your medication for exactly as long as your provider says. If you stop too soon (even if you feel better), the antibiotic may not get rid of all the bacteria. This means the infection can come back stronger.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the potential benefits of macrolides?
Macrolide antibiotics successfully treat many different bacterial infections. They’re safe and effective for most people. Macrolides are also a helpful alternative if you have allergies to other antibiotics (like penicillin) for certain conditions.
What side effects do macrolides have?
Having an upset stomach is a common (and usually mild) side effect of macrolides and other antibiotics. You might experience:
Nausea and vomiting
Abdominal pain or cramping
Diarrhea
Your risk of having an upset stomach varies according to the specific type of macrolide you’re taking. Some are more likely to upset your stomach than others. Your provider will tell you what to expect.
Macrolides may
interact
with other medications you’re taking. This means some of your medications might not work as well as they should. Tell your provider about all the medications and supplements you take. Also, tell them if you drink alcohol and how often you do. You might need to avoid alcohol while taking a macrolide. It can interact with medications and make antibiotics less effective.
Allergic reactions are rare but possible. A rash is the most common symptom.
Serious side effects are rare but can include
Stevens-Johnson syndrome
or its most severe form,
toxic epidermal necrolysis
.
Do macrolides cause arrhythmias?
Although it’s not common, macrolides may lead to abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmias
). This is because macrolides may prolong your heart’s QT interval. The QT interval is the time it takes your heart muscle to contract and then recover. When your QT interval is longer than normal, you’re at risk for a dangerous arrhythmia called
Torsades de Pointes
.
Advertisement
Your provider may recommend another type of antibiotic if you have
long QT syndrome
or other conditions that put you at risk for arrhythmias.
Recovery and Outlook
How long will it take for me to feel better?
It depends on the type of infection you have. Your provider will tell you what you can expect.
You may start feeling better before you’ve finished your antibiotics. But just because you feel better doesn’t mean the infection is fully cleared from your body. That’s why it’s important to take the full course of antibiotics as your provider prescribes. Doing so makes sure you get rid of the infection.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your provider if you:
Have questions about how to take your medication
Have side effects that make it hard for you to take your medication (like nausea or vomiting)
Still have symptoms after finishing your course of macrolides
Develop a rash or other signs of an allergic reaction
Go to the emergency room if you:
Have watery diarrhea multiple times in one day or signs of
dehydration
Have trouble breathing or other signs of
anaphylaxis
— this is a severe allergic reaction that needs immediate medical attention
Additional Common Questions
Is clindamycin a macrolide?
No, clindamycin isn’t a macrolide. Clindamycin belongs to the
lincosamides
class of antibiotics. But clindamycin and macrolides work in similar ways to prevent bacteria growth.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When bacteria invade your body, you want the biggest army possible available to help. Macrolides are one group of “troops” in the big army of antibiotics, and healthcare providers call them to duty when necessary.
Keep in mind that antibiotics won’t help with viral infections, and you should only take macrolides — or any other antibiotic — when your provider prescribes them. Take the full course even if you start to feel better, and call your provider if you have any questions or concerns.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider