Friedreich’s Ataxia: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Friedreich’s Ataxia (FA)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Friedreich’s Ataxia (FA)
Friedreich’s ataxia (FA or FRDA) is a rare genetic disorder that affects how you move and keep your balance. It usually starts in childhood and gets worse over time. Complications may affect your heart. While there’s no cure, new treatments and therapies can help manage symptoms and improve your quality of life for as long as possible.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Friedreich’s Ataxia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Friedreich’s Ataxia?
Friedreich's ataxia (FA or FRDA) is a rare
genetic condition
that causes progressive
nervous system
damage. It may impact your
heart
function over time. It affects your movement, balance and coordination (
ataxia
). Symptoms usually start in childhood and get worse.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
FA affects
approximately
1 in every 50,000 people in the United States. Globally, it affects 1 in every 40,000 people.
If you’re a parent or caregiver, it can be alarming to see your child struggle with movement or coordination. You may worry about how it will affect their life. The best option is to see a specialist who can answer your questions and guide you through what to expect.
Types of Friedreich’s ataxia
Most cases of FA are known as “typical” when they develop before age 25. There are also two, less common, atypical types:
Late-onset Friedreich’s ataxia (LOFA)
: You develop symptoms after 25
Very late-onset Friedreich’s ataxia (VLOFA)
: Signs and symptoms start after 40
LOFA and VLOFA usually progress more slowly than typical FA.
Symptoms and Causes
Friedreich’s ataxia causes progressive nervous system damage and movement issues.
Friedreich’s ataxia symptoms
Symptoms of FA usually begin between the ages of 5 and 15. But some people experience symptoms starting at age 2 or age 50. Symptoms may include:
Muscle weakness,
tightness
or
involuntary jerking
Loss of
balance
and coordination
Loss of touch
or feeling in your legs, arms and/or abdomen
Decreased reflexes
Fatigue
Slow or slurred speech
and
difficulty swallowing
Loss of
the ability to sense your body’s position and movements
Vision
and
hearing loss
Scoliosis
Foot deformities like inward turning and
high arches
Advertisement
The first signs are usually difficulty standing, walking and balance issues (
gait ataxia
). Over time, these get worse and new symptoms may develop.
Friedreich’s ataxia causes
Friedreich’s ataxia is a genetic condition — a
change (variant)
in the
FXN
gene causes the disease. This
gene
carries the code for frataxin.
Frataxin is a protein in the energy-producing parts of cells called
mitochondria
. Although scientists don’t fully understand its role, frataxin helps mitochondria do their job. The gene change that causes FA disrupts the production of frataxin.
Without the expected level of frataxin, certain cells in your body produce less energy. This creates a buildup of toxic byproducts called
oxidative stress
. It damages your cells and causes symptoms.
Friedreich’s ataxia inheritance pattern
Friedreich’s ataxia develops when you inherit two changed copies of the
FXN
gene. You get one from each biological parent. Healthcare providers call this an
autosomal recessive
inheritance pattern.
The biological parents of a person with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the changed gene. But they typically don’t show signs and symptoms of the condition.
As this is a genetic condition, you can’t prevent it.
Complications of Friedreich’s ataxia
Many people with FA develop heart issues. The most common ones include:
Damage to
nerves
that control your heart
Enlarged heart muscle
Irregular heartbeat
Other heart complications may include:
Heart muscle changes (
myocarditis
, myocardial fibrosis)
Heart gets bigger
Difficulty pumping blood to supply the body
Abnormal heartbeat rhythms (
tachycardia
,
atrial fibrillation
,
heart block
)
About
3 out of 10 people with FRDA develop
diabetes
. This is due to damage that affects
insulin
production in your
pancreas
, which leads to
high blood sugar
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Friedreich’s ataxia
A healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll then do a thorough
physical exam
and
neurological exam
.
Your provider will likely recommend a variety of tests.
Genetic testing
is the main test that can confirm FRDA. Your provider may offer more tests to see which parts of your body the condition affects. These include:
MRI
or
CT scans
: These tests provide images of your
brain
and
spinal cord
. They help rule out other
neurological conditions
.
Electromyogram (EMG)
and
nerve conduction studies
: These tests show how well your muscles and nerves work.
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
: This test shows the electrical activity, or beat pattern, of your heart.
Echocardiogram
: This test provides images of your heart’s movement.
Blood tests
: Certain blood tests check for high
blood glucose (sugar) levels
and
vitamin E
levels.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is Friedreich’s ataxia treated?
In 2023, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first medication specifically for Friedreich’s ataxia — omaveloxolone (SKYCLARYS™) — for people aged 16 and older. Studies show this medication can help improve neurological function and ataxia. Research is ongoing to understand the possible long-term effects of this medication. Omaveloxolone isn’t a cure for FA.
The main goal of treatment is to manage symptoms and complications. This helps your body work as well as possible for as long as possible. Treatment may include:
Physical therapy
to help with muscle strength, balance and coordination
Speech therapy
to improve speech and swallowing
Braces
or
surgery
to treat foot problems or scoliosis
Medicine for heart conditions, if needed
Medicine for diabetes, if needed
Therapies to manage
pain
Antibiotics
to treat or prevent infections
Mobility aids like special shoes,
canes
or wheelchairs
Heart transplant
for serious heart complications
FRDA affects everyone differently and at different rates. Your
care team
will develop an individualized therapy plan that will change as you grow.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Friedreich’s ataxia life expectancy
As Friedreich’s ataxia is a degenerative condition and worsens over time, people with this condition tend to have a shorter life expectancy than the average population.
Advertisement
FA affects everyone differently. Many people with FRDA live until at least their 30s, and some live into their 60s or beyond.
What is the cause of death of Friedreich’s ataxia?
The most common cause of death in people with FA is
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
. This causes thickening of your heart muscle. It may make your heart not pump as well as it should (heart failure), beat dangerously fast (
ventricular tachycardia
) or lose function (
sudden cardiac arrest
).
Friedreich’s ataxia prognosis
FA affects each person differently. No one can predict you or your child’s outlook with certainty. The best way you can prepare for the future is to talk to your healthcare providers or other specialists who research and treat this condition.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with Friedreich’s ataxia can be tough, both in daily life and emotionally. It’s natural to wonder what the future holds or how to make the right choices for you or your child’s health.
Your care team can help you understand what’s happening and create a treatment plan that fits your needs. New treatments and therapies continue to bring hope for better day-to-day living.
As you manage your or your child’s health, don’t forget to care for your emotional well-being, too. Support groups and mental health professionals can help if you’re feeling stressed or overwhelmed.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment