Allergic Shiners: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Allergic Shiners
Advertisement
Advertisement
Allergic Shiners
Allergic shiners are dark, painless circles under your eyes due to nasal allergies. If you have allergic shiners, over-the-counter and prescription allergy medications can help them go away in a few weeks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What are allergic shiners?
Allergic shiners are dark, discolored circles under your eyes that may look like black eyes (
bruises
). They appear due to nasal congestion brought on by
hay fever
(allergic rhinitis).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
As your immune system responds to allergies, you may develop swelling in the moist inner lining of your nose (mucosal edema). The swelling slows blood flow in the veins around the air-filled cavities around your nose (paranasal sinuses). These veins are close to the surface of the skin under your eyes. When they swell, the area looks darker and puffy.
Other names for allergic shiners include periorbital hyperpigmentation and allergic facies.
How common are allergic shiners?
Allergic shiners are common. In the United States, approximately 15% to 25% of people have hay fever, though not all people who have hay fever get allergic shiners.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of allergic shiners?
The main symptom of allergic shiners is a dark, discolored (black, brown, dark gray, gray-blue or purple) circular area under your eyes.
You may also have related allergy symptoms, including:
Itchiness around your eyes, nose or throat.
Red or watery eyes.
Runny nose.
Stuffy nose (nasal congestion).
Sneezing.
What causes allergic shiners?
Hay fever causes allergic shiners. The most common hay fever allergens include:
Pollen.
Pet dander.
Dust mites.
Mold.
Seasonal allergies occur when pollen counts are higher, usually in the spring, summer and early fall. However, allergens that are always around — like pet dander and dust mites — can cause allergic shiners year round.
Advertisement
Itchy or watery eyes can also make the appearance of allergic shiners worse. Rubbing your eyes for relief may cause further irritation to your skin.
Are allergic shiners contagious?
No, allergic shiners aren’t contagious. You can’t spread allergic shiners to another person.
Who do allergic shiners affect?
Anyone who has hay fever may develop allergic shiners. However, children who have allergies are more likely to have allergic shiners than adults. Some healthcare providers suspect children may be more likely to have allergic shiners because they don’t properly blow their noses as often as adults — they may only wipe their noses or sniff. There isn’t enough research to be certain that this is why children are more prone to allergic shiners.
What are the complications of allergic shiners?
Allergic shiners don’t hurt and won’t affect your physical health. However, their appearance may make you feel self-conscious. Talk to a healthcare provider if allergic shiners cause you to feel emotional
stress
or
anxiety
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are allergic shiners diagnosed?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have dark circles under your eyes that last longer than a few weeks or generally appear during certain times of the year. They’ll review your medical history, ask about your symptoms and conduct a
physical examination
. If they suspect your dark circles are allergic shiners, they may refer you to an
allergist
. An allergist is a healthcare provider who specializes in allergies. They can conduct tests to help diagnose the allergies that cause your allergic shiners.
What tests will be done to diagnose allergic shiners?
Your healthcare provider may order
allergy tests
to help diagnose allergic shiners. The most common allergy tests are a skin prick (scratch) test and blood tests.
During a skin prick test, a healthcare provider uses a thin needle or plastic pick to scratch small areas of your skin with different common allergens. If you’re allergic to any of these allergens, you may develop a discolored bump and/or discoloration at the site of the application within 15 minutes. The provider will measure the size of the skin reaction and then apply a steroid cream to the site. The steroid cream will soothe the itching and skin reaction. Providers prefer skin prick tests to diagnose allergic shiners because they’re noninvasive and provide quick results during the visit.
During a blood test, a healthcare provider uses a thin needle (about the size of a standard earring post) to draw a small amount of blood from a vein in your arm. They send the sample to a lab, where providers add common allergens to the sample and then measure the amount of allergy antibodies. You may be allergic to a particular allergen if you have higher levels of certain antibodies. Blood tests aren’t as accurate as a skin prick test.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How can I get rid of allergic shiners?
Avoiding allergens is one of the most effective ways to get rid of allergic shiners. However, avoiding allergens isn’t always possible, and avoidance may not completely stop your allergic reactions. Over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription allergy medications can help. These may include:
Antihistamines
Fexofenadine
(Allegra®).
Loratadine
(Claritin®).
Cetirizine
(All Day Allergy-D® or Zyrtec®).
Levocetirizine
(Xyzal®).
Nasal sprays
Steroid nasal sprays, including
fluticasone
(Flonase®),
mometasone
(Nasonex®) and
budesonide
(Rhinocort®).
Antihistamine nasal sprays, including
azelastine
(Dymista®) and
olopatadine
(Patanase®).
Cromolyn nasal spray
(Nasalcrom®).
Eye drops
Antihistamine eye drops, including olapatadine (Pataday®) and
azelastine
(Optivar®).
Ketorolac eye solution
(Acular®).
Naphazoline eye solution
(AK-Con®).
Decongestants
Oxymetazoline nasal spray
Phenylephrine
(Sudafed PE® or Sudogest PE®).
Pseudoephedrine
(Contac® or Sudafed®).
Nasal irrigation
Nasal irrigation
is an over-the-counter treatment that rinses out your nasal passages with a saline (salt) solution. It helps clear out allergens and mucus.
Ice or cold compresses
Apply ice or a cold compress wrapped in a light towel over your eyes for up to 10 minutes several times a day to help reduce puffiness.
Advertisement
Immunotherapy
If over-the-counter and prescription medications don’t get rid of your allergic shiners, your provider may recommend immunotherapy (allergy shots) and sublingual immunotherapy (allergy tablets or drops you apply under your tongue). These treatments expose you to small amounts of allergens. The dosage increases over several months until your body builds up a tolerance to the allergens, and you no longer have allergic shiners or other allergy symptoms.
How long do allergic shiners last?
It depends. With proper treatment to alleviate your allergies, allergic shiners usually go away within a few weeks. As your veins heal, the color of your allergic shiners may change from a darker color to a lighter color, including green, yellow or brown.
Without treatment, allergic shiners may go away a few weeks after your last exposure to allergens.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have allergic shiners?
Allergic shiners may make you feel self-conscious, but they aren’t a serious health problem. They may appear and disappear throughout your life. Many people who have allergic shiners manage them by avoiding known allergens and taking over-the-counter medications.
Prevention
Can allergic shiners be prevented?
The best way to prevent allergic shiners is to avoid known allergens. You can also take over-the-counter or prescription medications daily to help prevent allergic shiners from appearing.
Advertisement
The following tips can also help lower your risk of allergic shiners:
Regularly vacuum your home to help remove allergens.
Keep your windows shut and use an air conditioner during pollen seasons.
Use a high-efficiency particulate (HEPA) air filter to remove airborne allergens from your home.
Use a humidifier to help relieve irritation in the
mucosa
tissues in your nose.
Avoid petting, hugging or kissing animals if you have animal allergies.
Wear sunglasses and a hat while outside to help protect your eyes from pollen.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Allergic shiners don’t cause serious health problems, though accompanying allergy symptoms may be annoying. Talk to a healthcare provider if allergic shiners cause stress or if allergy symptoms affect your day-to-day life. A provider can help determine the exact cause of your allergic shiners and recommend the best treatment.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to an emergency room immediately if you have allergic shiners and develop more serious allergy symptoms, such as
anaphylaxis
.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Questions to ask your provider include:
How can you tell that allergies are causing dark circles under my eyes?
What am I allergic to?
What medications do you recommend?
Should I take medications every day or only when allergic shiners appear?
Do your recommended medications have any side effects?
Can you recommend an allergist?
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between allergic shiners and dark circles?
Allergies cause allergic shiners. Other conditions may cause
dark circles
to form under your eyes. These may include:
Common cold
.
Flu
.
Sinus infection
.
Eczema
.
Bruising.
Prolonged lack of sleep.
Nasal polyps
.
Inflamed
adenoids
.
Dehydration
.
Genetics.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Allergic shiners occur when congestion in your sinus cavities causes swelling in the veins under your eyes, which in turn causes discoloration. Though allergic shiners aren’t painful or harmful to your health, they may make you feel self-conscious or embarrassed. They may also appear alongside annoying allergy symptoms. A healthcare provider can help provide relief. They can identify the allergens responsible for your allergic shiners and recommend over-the-counter or prescription medications or treatments.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergies can wreak havoc on your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our team of experts can help create a treatment plan that’ll help you breathe easier.
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/17/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment