Gangrene: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Gangrene
Advertisement
Advertisement
Gangrene
Gangrene is when lack of blood flow causes tissues in your body to die. It often starts on the edges of limbs, like toes or fingers. But it can form anywhere blood’s not reaching. Gangrene looks like a patch of discolored skin (red, brown, purple, green, black). The area may have blisters that leak blood or pus. Prompt treatment is lifesaving.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Gangrene?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Gangrene?
When blood can’t reach a certain area of your body, those tissues start to die. Gangrene can make your skin look purple, green or black in color.
Gangrene is a medical emergency in which blood stops
flowing
to a specific part of your body, and tissues in that area die. Gangrene can develop anywhere in your body, but it often starts in your foot or hand.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Gangrene always involves tissue death, but it doesn’t always involve an infection. A gangrene infection is when
bacteria
grow in the affected area. Without prompt treatment, gangrene (with or without an infection) can lead to serious complications or
death
.
Types of gangrene
There are several types of gangrene:
Dry gangrene
. This is when
blood
can’t reach a certain area of your body, but there’s no infection. Your skin will feel dry to the touch (no open blisters or pus). Plaque buildup in your arteries (
atherosclerosis
) is commonly responsible for dry gangrene.
Wet gangrene
. This is disrupted blood flow along with a
bacterial infection
. Blisters that release pus (the “wet” factor) form on your skin. Wet gangrene spreads quickly to nearby tissues.
Gas gangrene
. This bacterial infection destroys your soft tissues and blood cells. Bacteria quickly multiply in your
muscle
tissue, forming toxins and releasing gas. The infection spreads fast and can become life-threatening within hours of symptom onset.
Fournier’s gangrene
. This is a rare, severe bacterial infection that affects your genital area. It affects
males
more often than females.
Internal gangrene
. This is blocked blood flow to internal
organs
. Affected organs many include your gallbladder, intestines or appendix. A gangrenous
gallbladder
is a serious complication of chronic
cholecystitis
, where continued swelling leads to tissue death.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of gangrene
Gangrene symptoms vary by type and may include:
Changes in
skin
color (red, purple, green or black)
Changes in how your skin feels (pale, firm, cool and/or tender to the touch)
Crackling sound when you press on your skin (this means there’s a gas buildup underneath)
Fast
breathing
and
heart rate
Feeling very
anxious
Flu-like symptoms
like fever, sweating, chills and vomiting
Severe pain or a
loss of feeling
Sores and
blisters
that release blood or foul-smelling
pus
Swelling of the affected area
What does gangrene look like?
Gangrene causes skin color changes that may occur in stages:
At first, your skin may look paler than usual due to lack of blood flow.
Then, it turns red or reddish in color.
It may then turn brown before changing to purple or greenish-black.
It may be more difficult to see these color changes if you have a darker skin tone.
If there’s an infection, you’ll notice sores or blisters with smelly fluid coming out.
Gangrene causes
Lack of blood flow to a specific part of your body causes gangrene. Blood delivers
oxygen
, nutrients and
antibodies
to your tissues. When your tissues don’t receive blood, they start to die.
Causes of blocked blood flow include:
Medical conditions, like peripheral artery disease, that affect your
circulation
Deep wounds
Surgical complications (rare)
Risk factors
You face an increased risk of gangrene if you have a condition that affects your
blood vessels
. Examples include:
Buerger’s disease
. Inflammation of blood vessels in your limbs leads to
blood clots
that block blood flow.
Diabetes
. This condition damages your
nerves
and blood vessels. It also causes wounds to heal more slowly. Slow-healing wounds face a higher risk of infection.
Peripheral artery disease
. Plaque buildup in your arteries prevents enough blood from reaching your legs, feet, arms or hands. This is the most common cause of dry gangrene.
Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome
. Your calf muscle squeezes your
popliteal artery
. This limits blood flow to your lower leg during exercise.
Raynaud’s syndrome
. Cold temperatures affect the blood vessels in your fingers and toes. Your blood vessels narrow, limiting blood flow.
Vasculitis
. Inflammation of your blood vessels interferes with blood flow.
You also face a higher risk of gangrene if you have:
A traumatic injury
A weakened immune system
Severe tissue damage from
frostbite
or
burns
If you have any risk factors, see your provider for regular checkups and keep all your follow-up appointments. Your provider will tell you what you can do at home to lower your risk of gangrene — like taking good care of your
feet
and tending to
wounds
.
Advertisement
Some medications have been associated with an increased risk of Fournier’s gangrene. Your provider should counsel you on this before starting the medications.
Complications of gangrene
Gangrene is serious and can be life-threatening. It may lead to:
Loss of a body part, like a finger, toe, hand or foot
Sepsis
Organ failure
Gangrene is sometimes fatal.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
See a healthcare provider right away if you think you have gangrene. Your provider will:
Ask you about your medical history and current conditions
Ask you about any recent injuries
Carefully evaluate the affected area of your body
Run tests to learn more
Tests you may need include:
Blood tests
Bacterial culture tests
Imaging tests, like
X-rays
,
CT scans
and
MRIs
Tests that check blood flow, like an
ankle-brachial index
These tests help your provider learn:
What’s blocking blood flow
Whether or not there’s an infection
How much tissue is damaged
What the best treatment options will be
Management and Treatment
How is gangrene treated?
Gangrene treatments aim to stop gangrene from spreading, remove dead tissue and help blood flow better. You may need one or more treatments, including:
Antibiotics
. When a bacterial infection causes gangrene, you need antibiotics. Your provider will prescribe the proper dosage for you.
Debridement
. This is the medical term for dead tissue removal. Gangrenous (dead) tissue doesn’t heal, and the only option is to remove these tissues. Doing so protects nearby healthy areas and helps damaged (but not dead) tissues heal.
Procedures to improve blood flow
. Your provider may perform a procedure to widen your arteries (
angioplasty
) or create a new path for blood to flow around the blockage (bypass surgery).
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT)
. HBOT sends high levels of oxygen through your body’s tissues, helping to heal them.
Amputation
. This is the removal of the affected body part, like a toe, foot, hand or finger. Providers only use amputation if other treatments won’t do enough to save healthy tissues (or your life).
Advertisement
After gangrene treatment, you may choose to have
skin graft surgery
. A provider uses healthy skin from another part of your body to cover scars or damaged skin.
When should I seek medical care?
Call 911 (or your local emergency service number) or go to your local emergency room if you have gangrene symptoms. You should also seek emergency help if you have symptoms of
septic shock
:
Fast but weak
pulse
Feeling confused or disoriented
Feeling
dizzy
when you stand up
Skin that’s cold, clammy and pale
Trouble breathing
Vomiting or
diarrhea
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy for people with gangrene?
What you can expect, including your life expectancy, depends on many factors, including:
How much the gangrene has spread
How soon you receive treatment
Which parts of your body are affected
Your overall health
Your healthcare provider knows your situation best and can give you the most accurate
prognosis
.
Without treatment, gangrene can quickly become fatal. How long it takes for gangrene to cause death depends on the type of gangrene you have. Gas gangrene progresses very fast. The area of dead tissue can expand several inches with every hour that passes. Gas gangrene is always fatal without treatment, and sometimes fatal even with treatment.
For any type of gangrene, the sooner you get treatment, the better your chances of survival.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Is gangrene contagious?
Gangrene itself isn’t contagious. That means gangrene doesn’t spread from person to person. But it may be possible for the bacteria that cause a gangrene infection to spread to others. How the bacteria affect an exposed individual depends on many things, like whether they have an open wound at the site of contact and their overall health status.
Talk to a healthcare provider if you or someone in your household has a gangrene infection. They’ll let you know if there are any precautions you should take.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A gangrene diagnosis is scary, whether it happens to you or a loved one. As with any diagnosis, remember that knowledge can give you power. Learn as much as you can about the condition and treatment options. Prompt treatment gives you or your loved one the best chance of surviving.
As you recover, work with your provider to manage underlying conditions. Targeting the root cause of gangrene can help lower your risk of future issues.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment