Panuveitis: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Panuveitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Panuveitis
Panuveitis is widespread inflammation throughout your eyeball. It causes irritation and also affects your vision. This inflammation can cause long-term damage. If you have these symptoms, seek immediate care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Panuveitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Panuveitis?
Panuveitis is inflammation from the front to the back of the eye throughout your uvea, the middle layer of your eye. It will cause symptoms of eye irritation as well as vision changes.
Panuveitis is a rare and serious form of
uveitis
, inflammation in the middle layer of your
eye
(your
uvea
). The word “panuveitis” means that you have
inflammation
all throughout your uvea, from the front to the back of your eye.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The middle layer of your eye includes your:
Choroid
Ciliary body
Iris
Inflammation in these parts can cause irritation. It can also spread to other nearby parts, including your:
Optic nerve
Retina
Vitreous humor
These parts are important to your
vision
, and inflammation in these parts can lead to vision loss.
Panuveitis can cause noticeable signs and symptoms of
eye irritation
and sensitivity, as well as vision changes. Having both types of symptoms is a sign that the inflammation in your eye is widespread. Seek care right away.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of panuveitis
Signs and symptoms of panuveitis may include:
Blurred vision
Eye flashes
Eye floaters
Eye pain
Eye watering
Light sensitivity
Reduced
visual acuity
You may notice symptoms in only one eye (unilateral) or in both eyes (bilateral panuveitis).
Panuveitis causes
Causes of panuveitis include infections,
autoinflammatory diseases
, eye trauma, certain medications and cancer. Some of these are temporary and others are chronic conditions, sometimes making panuveitis chronic, too.
Eye infections
can spread to your uvea from the surface of your eye if they’re severe. A penetrating injury to your eye can also introduce a
bacterial infection
into your eye.
Eye injuries
that cause deep trauma to your eye can also cause inflammation on their own. An injury in one eye can even cause inflammation in both. This is called sympathetic ophthalmia.
Infectious diseases
in other parts of your body can spread to your eyes through your bloodstream.
Syphilis
,
toxoplasmosis
and
tuberculosis
are common causes of panuveitis.
Autoimmune diseases
that cause inflammation throughout your body may also affect your eyes.
Sarcoidosis
, Vogt-Koyangi-Harada syndrome and
Behçet’s disease
are some examples.
Idiopathic panuveitis
is what healthcare providers call it when they can’t identify the cause precisely. This type acts like an autoimmune disease, but it doesn’t match any known profile.
Certain medications
to treat other diseases in other parts of your body can cause panuveitis; these include certain cancer medications and
bisphosphonates
, which help with bone loss.
Cancer in your eye
can cause widespread inflammation, although it’s very rare. Examples include
intraocular melanoma
, intraocular lymphoma,
retinoblastoma
and orbital carcinoma.
Advertisement
Complications of this condition
Severe or long-lasting inflammation can do permanent damage to parts of your eye, causing permanent visual impairment. Having panuveitis raises your risk of several secondary conditions, including:
Band keratopathy
Cataracts
Cystoid macular edema
Glaucoma
Posterior synechiae
Retinal detachment
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
To diagnose panuveitis, an
eye care specialist
will ask you about your symptoms, then thoroughly
examine your eye
. They’ll do a
slit lamp exam
with additional lenses to look at the back of your eye.
Your provider will look for evidence of inflammation in all the different parts of your eye. If they find evidence in the front, middle and back parts of your uvea together, they’ll diagnose panuveitis.
Additional tests
Diagnosing the cause of panuveitis can be another story, especially if you haven’t had any recent eye injury or infection. Your provider will ask you all about your health history and preexisting conditions.
They might ask you questions or check for signs and symptoms that seem to have nothing to do with your eyes. This helps them narrow down possible causes. They might want to run additional tests, like:
Blood tests
to check for infections,
antibodies
or other clues
Imaging tests on your eye, like ultrasound biomicroscopy or
optical coherence tomography
Fluorescein angiography
or indocyanine green angiography to look at blood vessels in your eye
Imaging tests of other parts of your body, like
X-rays
or a
CT scan
Management and Treatment
How is panuveitis treated?
Corticosteroids
are the primary treatment for panuveitis. They’ll help bring the inflammation down to protect your vision and also treat your discomfort. This is the first priority when treating panuveitis.
Your provider may prescribe steroid pills, steroid eye drops or a steroid injection into your eye — or all of the above, depending on your condition. Some people may need to take them on a long-term basis.
You may need additional treatment for the condition causing your panuveitis, like:
Antibiotics
or
antivirals
to treat an infection
Immunosuppressants
or
DMARDs
to treat inflammatory diseases
Other
cancer treatments
if a rare cancer is the cause of the inflammation
These treatments can affect people in different ways. Let your provider know how they work for you and if you experience any side effects. They’ll adjust your medications until they find the right fit.
You may also need additional treatment for complications of panuveitis that damage your vision. After treating panuveitis, your provider might recommend
eye surgery
to treat some of these complications.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have panuveitis?
Panuveitis is treatable, but you need to get treatment right away. Some of the damage it can do is irreversible. Your
prognosis
will depend on how severe it is and how soon you can get treatment.
Advertisement
If you have a chronic condition that causes panuveitis, it may come back again after treatment. You might need to treat it on a recurring basis. Some people might need to take medications long-term.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
The most important thing you can do to take care of yourself is to get treatment quickly. Once you do, keep in touch with your provider about how you’re doing so they can adjust your plan if needed.
While you’re recovering, it might also help to:
Apply warm compresses to your closed eye or eyes
Wear sunglasses to protect your eyes from bright light
Use
NSAIDs
(if recommended) to reduce pain and inflammation
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Panuveitis is a serious and sight-threatening condition. It’s both uncomfortable and scary. Healthcare providers treat panuveitis urgently with corticosteroids to bring the inflammation down quickly.
With treatment, you should feel better soon, and you may recover completely. But this isn’t always the end of the road for everyone. You may have a long-term condition or other complications to manage.
If you have a longer healthcare journey ahead of you, you may be facing a lot of unknowns. Whether you have a chronic disease, vision impairment or both, you may be unsure what your future holds.
Advertisement
Whatever comes next, your healthcare team will be there at every step to advise you and offer treatment options. They can also offer resources to take care of your overall health and well-being.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment