Chafing Causes, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Chafing
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chafing
Chafing happens when something rubs enough to wear away and damage your skin. It’s common, but usually nothing more than an annoyance. This common condition happens for all kinds of reasons, and it’s usually nothing to worry about. With the right care, it clears up quickly. And there’s plenty you can do to keep it from happening in the first place.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Chafing?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Chafing?
Chafing can happen anywhere on your body, especially where skin can rub repeatedly against skin, fabric or other materials.
Chafing is skin irritation from your skin rubbing against something else. It commonly happens around places where skin rubs against other skin. That’s especially true with sensitive skin or places that are warm and moist. That includes your inner thighs, groin, buttocks, armpits and chest. And it can happen when your clothing or surfaces rub against your skin.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Some common types of chafing you can have on your body are:
Armpit chafing
: This is common because of sweating, and there’s plenty of skin-on-skin contact. Having obesity or participating in activities that make you sweat a lot can raise your risk, too.
Breast and nipple chafing
: Nipple skin is very sensitive, making it easier for nipples to chafe. This is common among athletes or if you breastfeed. The skin under your breasts can also chafe.
Butt chafing
: This can happen where your buttocks and thighs meet or where your buttocks meet.
Feet chafing
: This can cause
blisters
on your feet, especially when your feet are sweaty or wet, or you have new shoes.
Groin and genital chafing
: The skin of and around your genitals is sensitive, so it’s prone to chafing.
Inner thigh chafing
: This can happen to people of all ages and body sizes. It’s often worse in hotter weather. It can happen with clothing or furniture material, or with skin-on-skin.
The more rubbing that happens, the worse chafing usually gets. And if there’s moisture there, chafing can cause issues that need medical care.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of chafing
The milder symptoms of chafing can include:
Chafing rash or redness
Irritation
Flaky, dry skin
Itching
Raised bumps
Skin that feels warm to the touch
Stinging or burning sensation
Tender or painful skin
Advertisement
As chafing gets worse, it can cause more serious symptoms, like:
Blistering, sores or welts
Color changes and skin turning puffy or wrinkly (like how wet skin becomes “
pruney
”)
Cracking, tearing or bleeding
Pain, ranging from mild to severe
Symptoms of inflammatory conditions like
intertrigo
, or infections like
impetigo
Chafing causes
Friction is always the root cause of chafing. There’s only so much friction your skin can take. And the more your skin rubs against something — especially rougher things — the more likely chafing becomes.
Moisture can make chafing much worse. It makes it easier for materials and surfaces to slip and rub against your skin. Moisture also makes your skin easier to damage.
Some other things that can cause or contribute to chafing include:
Activity choice
: Certain activities may cause chafing on specific body parts. Examples include
saddle sores
from cycling or horseback riding, or rower’s rump from rowing. It also includes
chafed nipples
for runners, joggers and weightlifters.
Activity level
: When you’re more active, just moving around makes friction possible. And if you’re sweating, the moisture from that can cause chafing or make it worse.
Body characteristics
: Your body’s natural shape might make chafing more likely.
Breastfeeding
: Chafing is common if you’re breastfeeding or pumping. And items like nursing pads and bras can also chafe your skin.
Clothing and footwear
: Your clothes and shoes are some of the most likely culprits for chafing, especially if they don’t fit well. Chafing is also a lot more likely with rougher fabrics or materials and swimsuits.
Diapers and adult undergarments
: Chafing can happen with diapers for babies. That’s called
diaper dermatitis
or diaper rash. It can also happen with
adult undergarments
for people with incontinence.
Medical conditions
: Having overweight (a BMI greater than 25) or obesity (a BMI greater than 30) can make chafing a lot more likely. And certain skin or sweating conditions can also add to it.
Weather
: When it’s hot and/or humid out, you sweat more. Humidity itself can contribute to chafing, too.
Complications of chafing
Chafing is more likely to cause complications when it lasts a long time and/or is severe. Some of the most likely complications include:
Infections
: Chafing damages your skin, making it easier for germs to enter. And bacteria and fungi both like growing in warm and moist places on your body, where chafing is more likely to happen.
Infection complications
: Infections can worsen and spread. That can lead to dangerous conditions like
cellulitis
or
resistant infections
that are harder to treat.
Wound complications
: Having an open wound for a long time can lead to scarring. This can be a major concern when it affects sensitive areas like your genitals.
Friction burns
: The heat from friction that can cause chafing can also cause burn injuries.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose chafing
Minor chafing is something you can recognize on your own. You don’t need to see a healthcare provider for it.
But when chafing is longer-lasting or severe, you should see a healthcare provider. They can diagnose chafing by looking at the affected area and asking questions about your recent activities.
If your provider suspects a skin infection, they might recommend taking a scraping sample. They’ll use the edge of a scalpel to gently scrape across the surface of your skin. That lets them collect skin cells they can test for bacteria or fungi. These tests can help your provider pick the best infection treatment.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is chafing treated?
You can self-treat minor chafing. That starts with stopping whatever’s causing or contributing to it. Some things you can do include:
Taking a break
: If an activity is causing chafing, you might need to avoid that activity while your skin heals.
Changing clothes
: You might just need to put on something clean to help your chafing. But it could also mean changing the type of clothing or wearing clothes made from other materials.
Getting rid of moisture
: Too much moisture on your skin can cause chafing or make it worse. Wear moisture-wicking fabrics. You can also put cornstarch on your skin to absorb excess moisture.
Soothing your skin
: Use mild soap and water to clean the affected skin. After drying it, you can put aloe vera gel and a thin layer of petroleum jelly on the area. These products reduce friction, irritation and pain.
If your chafing is severe enough to need medical care, treatment might include:
Antibiotics or antifungal lotions or creams (if you have an infection)
Bandaging or covering the area
Medicated creams like hydrocortisone for inflammation
Cold compresses soaked with aluminum triacetate solution (also known as Burow’s solution or under the brand name Domeboro®)
Your healthcare provider may also tell you how to keep the affected areas clean, like showering or using certain kinds of antiperspirants. These can help your skin recover and prevent chafing from coming back. Your provider can answer any questions and tell you more about how and why these help.
Advertisement
Recovery time
Minor chafing usually clears up within a few days. If it takes longer, you should talk to a healthcare provider.
If you have a more serious case that needs medical treatment, it might take longer to heal. Your healthcare provider can tell you what to expect.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if chafing symptoms don’t get better within a few days or get worse. That includes cases that you self-treat and those you got medical care for.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have chafing?
Chafing can be annoying, uncomfortable or painful. But it usually isn’t serious. With the right care, it should clear up on its own. And many of the things you do to self-treat chafing will also keep it from happening again.
Prevention
Can chafing be prevented?
To
prevent chafing
, you can:
Make sure clothes and shoes fit properly
: Tight or restrictive clothing causes chafing easily. And take the time to break in new shoes. That should
prevent foot chafing and blisters
.
Pick the right fabric or material
: Avoid cotton. It soaks up moisture and dries slowly, which can easily cause chafing. Moisture-wicking fabrics are best. And be mindful of tags and seams. They can chafe, too.
Find the right gear
: Depending on your activity, there might be gear or accessories that can help you avoid chafing. For example, the right bike seat can help avoid saddle sores.
Tape and pad
: Padding or athletic tape in the right places can stop chafing before it starts.
Try anti-chafing products
:
Apply these before you’re active.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between chafing and jock itch?
Chafing and
jock itch
can affect the same area, but they have different causes. Chafing happens because of friction, and it doesn’t spread to others. Jock itch is a fungal skin infection, and it’s very contagious.
But while they’re different, having chafing damages your skin. That can make it easier to get jock itch or other infections. And if you have jock itch and scratch yourself, it can lead to chafing. So, it’s possible to get these conditions back-to-back.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe it’s a blister from a new pair of shoes. Or you got a new swimsuit and your skin isn’t happy about it. Chafing happens when something literally rubs you the wrong way. But fortunately, it’s usually not serious, and you can treat it yourself. But if you have questions about chafing, talk to your healthcare provider. They can help if you have chafing that won’t go away and guide you on how to keep it from happening again.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider