Colpocephaly: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Colpocephaly
Advertisement
Advertisement
Colpocephaly
Colpocephaly is a rare condition that affects the size and structure of an area of your child’s brain. It can cause seizures and intellectual disability, among other symptoms. While there isn’t a cure for colpocephaly, healthcare providers can help your child manage this condition throughout their life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is colpocephaly?
Colpocephaly is a condition present at birth in which a portion of the fluid-filled spaces (ventricles) in the back of your child’s brain are larger than expected.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your child’s brain has four ventricles filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This is the fluid that surrounds their brain and
spinal cord
. Ventricles help their brain circulate and drain CSF. Your child has one lateral ventricle on each side of their brain. The portion of the lateral ventricles that extends toward the back of their brain, or the
occipital lobe
, is called the occipital horn of the ventricle.
Colpocephaly isn’t common. It usually happens when surrounding brain tissue hasn’t developed as expected. Symptoms can vary depending on brain tissue development. By itself, it’s not typically a life-threatening condition.
Colpocephaly is a type of
cephalic disorder
. These are conditions that target the development of your body’s brain and spinal cord, which make up the
central nervous system
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of colpocephaly?
The signs and symptoms of colpocephaly include:
Difficulty with problem-solving
Difficulties with attention and hyperactivity
Speech delay
Intellectual disability
Challenges with coordination and movement
Hearing
issues
Muscle spasms
Seizures
Small head size (
microcephaly
)
Vision
problems
Symptoms affect each person differently. In some cases, your child may not have any noticeable symptoms. If symptoms are severe, it may affect your child’s ability to be independent and safely do things on their own.
Advertisement
What causes colpocephaly?
Colpocephaly happens when certain parts of your child’s brain don’t develop fully. Specifically, the middle portion of the brain that helps the two halves of the brain communicate, called the
corpus callosum
, doesn’t fully form. This is called dysgenesis or
agenesis of the corpus callosum
. Because of this, there’s extra space that gets filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Researchers aren’t sure exactly why this happens and there are likely several underlying causes. Some cases may pass genetically in your biological family. Others may happen due to
genetic variants
or new changes in
DNA
.
What are the risk factors for colpocephaly?
Studies suggest the following
pregnancy complications
may put you more at risk of having a child with colpocephaly:
Alcohol use disorder
during pregnancy
Infection during pregnancy (such as
toxoplasmosis
)
Malnutrition
Decreased blood flow to the placenta
If you’re pregnant or planning on expanding your family, talk with a pregnancy care provider. They can help you and the fetus stay healthy.
What conditions can happen with colpocephaly?
It’s common for children to have a colpocephaly diagnosis in addition to another underlying condition like:
Cerebellar
atrophy
Coloboma
Hydrocephalus
Lissencephaly
Microgyria or macrogyria (small or large brain folds)
Myelomeningocele
Neurofibromatosis
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Diagnosis and Tests
How is colpocephaly diagnosed?
A healthcare provider may suspect colpocephaly during a
prenatal ultrasound
. An official diagnosis usually happens after your child is born, when more accurate imaging of your child’s brain can be obtained. Your child’s provider will perform a
physical exam
and a
neurological exam
and learn more about their family medical history.
They may recommend the following tests to make a diagnosis:
CT scan
MRI
Genetic testing
Can a colpocephaly diagnosis happen to adults?
An adult may receive a diagnosis for colpocephaly later in life if they have a very mild case. This is extremely rare.
Management and Treatment
Is colpocephaly curable?
There isn’t a cure for colpocephaly. But healthcare providers can treat some of the symptoms the condition causes. Talk with your child’s provider to learn more about treatments that can help.
How is colpocephaly treated?
Colpocephaly treatment focuses on symptom management. Your child’s healthcare provider may recommend:
Participating in special education programs at school
Speech therapy
Physical
and/or
occupational therapy
Wearing glasses
Using hearing aids
Taking
antiseizure medication
, if seizures occur
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis for colpocephaly?
Your child’s outlook depends on how much of the brain tissue didn’t develop, and if any additional brain structures didn’t develop as expected. Each child’s outlook is as unique as they are. Talk to their provider to learn more about what you can expect.
Advertisement
What’s the life expectancy for colpocephaly?
Colpocephaly itself isn’t life-threatening. If colpocephaly happens with other brain conditions, it may lead to disability and may affect your child’s outlook. Your child’s provider will give you the most accurate information about your child’s situation.
Prevention
Can colpocephaly be prevented?
There’s no definite way to prevent colpocephaly. But you can take steps to have a healthy pregnancy. Talk with your provider about the
prenatal care
that’s right for you.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Contact your child’s provider if you notice irregularities with their behavior or
developmental delays
. You know your child best, so let their provider know if anything doesn’t seem right.
If your child has a seizure for the first time, contact emergency services.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may have a lot of questions for your child’s healthcare provider like:
How can I best care for my child?
What symptoms should I look out for?
When should I be concerned about changes in behavior?
What therapies do you recommend for my child?
What educational resources can help my child?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that your baby has colpocephaly can be difficult. You might be worried about what your child’s future may look like or how this condition will affect their well-being. You may also wonder if they’ll need to enroll in special education programs at school one day or work closely with different types of therapists throughout their lives. But each person’s experience with colpocephaly is a little different, based on your child’s specific needs.
Advertisement
Your child’s care team will work with you to keep your child healthy and manage symptoms. Don’t hesitate to reach out to your child’s providers if you need assistance or support along the way. They’re a helpful resource and will make sure your child has everything they need.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/25/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment