Entropion: Symptoms, Causes, Treatment & Surgery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Entropion
Advertisement
Advertisement
Entropion
Entropion is a condition where your eyelid turns in toward your eye. As a result, your eyelashes and skin rub against your eyeball, causing discomfort to your cornea (the front part of your eye). Entropion is common in adults over the age of 60. You can treat it in several ways, including soft contact lenses, Botox® injections or surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
Entropion causes your eyelid to turn inward. This can cause eye irritation and redness.
What is entropion?
Entropion is a condition that occurs when your
eyelid
turns inward toward your eyeball. When this happens, your eyelid skin and eyelashes rub against the surface of your
eye
. This friction often causes discomfort and irritation to your
cornea
(front of your eye). Entropion is the opposite of
ectropion
, the outward turning of your eyelid.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Entropion usually occurs in your lower eyelid, and it can happen on one side or both (bilateral entropion). Without treatment, it can damage your cornea and lead to vision loss. If you’ve developed the condition, it’s important to see an
eye care specialist
for treatment. Entropion treatment typically starts with noninvasive measures but may require surgery.
Types of entropion
There are several types of entropion that can affect your eyes. These are:
Involutional
.
Muscles
and
tendons
in your eyes loosen and weaken as you age, resulting in this most common type of entropion.
Spastic
.
Irritation, infection and inflammation can lead to this type. It most commonly occurs after
eye surgery
in people who had previously unrecognized involutional entropion.
Cicatricial
.
Scar tissue
formation causes this type of entropion. It may result from burns, infections, inflammation, trauma, eye surgery or radiation therapy.
Congenital
. This means you’ve had the condition since birth.
Mechanical
. The weight of your eyelid is causing it to turn in on itself. This type commonly occurs due to a mass or
tumor
on your eyelid.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of entropion
Entropion causes many uncomfortable symptoms in your eye, including:
Feeling like there’s something in your eye
Red eyes
Tearing (watering)
Blurry vision
Eye pain
Itching
Sensitivity to light (
photophobia
) and wind
Drainage or crusting
Advertisement
When you first develop entropion, you may only notice occasional symptoms. But over time, the symptoms usually become constant.
Entropion causes
There are three characteristics of an eyelid with entropion: eyelid looseness (laxity), eyelid retractor disinsertion and excessively strong eyelid closing muscles which cause your eyelid to turn in rather than out. Lower eyelid laxity is common in people over the age of 60 because their eyelid supports weaken with age. Other causes of an in-turned eyelid include:
Eye injury
Infection
Previous eye surgery
Inflammatory conditions
Scarring, due to any of the above
Risk factors for entropion
Aging is the biggest risk factor for entropion. It’s most common in people over 60 years old. According to the American Academy of Ophthalmology, it affects about 2.1% of people over the age of 60.
People with
sleep apnea
may be at greater risk of developing entropion, as they tend to have excessively loose upper eyelids (
floppy eyelid syndrome
), which are prone to turning in on themselves.
Entropion also affects
women
more often than men.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose entropion
Your eye care specialist will start by asking you about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll perform an
eye exam
, looking for any signs of skin irritation, infection or scarring. They’ll pay close attention to the edges of your eyelid, as there are other medical conditions that can mimic entropion. They want to ensure they make the correct diagnosis to decide the proper treatment.
Tests that are used to diagnose entropion
Your provider may perform several tests to help diagnose entropion. These tests include:
Snap-back test
. Without allowing you to blink, your provider pulls your eyelid down and observes how long it takes to return to its original position.
Distraction test
. Your provider pulls your eyelid away from your eye and measures the distance. They consider more than 6 millimeters abnormal.
Slit lamp exam
. A slit lamp is a special microscope with a bright light that your provider uses to examine your eye, looking for signs of the condition.
Management and Treatment
How is entropion treated?
Your healthcare provider may treat entropion in several ways. Common entropion treatments include:
Lubricating eye drops
.
Lubricating your eye with ointment and
artificial tears
can provide moisture and relieve discomfort. This isn’t a long-term solution, though.
Soft contact lenses
.
Your healthcare provider might recommend wearing soft
contact lenses
to protect your eyes from irritation. Contact lenses act as a bandage to help ease your symptoms.
Tape
. You can use tape to reposition your eyelid temporarily.
Stitches
. Your provider will numb your eyelid and stitch it into a more favorable position. The resulting scar tissue can also help keep your eyelid turned outward for a few months.
Botox®
. Your provider can use a small amount of
botulinum toxin
to weaken the eyelid muscles that are causing your lid to turn in.
Eyelash removal
.
Epilation is a procedure where your eyelashes are plucked to keep them from irritating the surface of your eye.
Advertisement
If your eyelid is turned in due to chronic inflammation, your provider may order labs or perform a
biopsy
to investigate rarer causes, like ocular cicatricial pemphigoid or
trachoma
.
Entropion surgery
The above options may offer a temporary fix, but your healthcare provider will usually have to perform surgery to address the inward-turning eyelid and return it to a normal position. These surgeries typically involve
sedation
and local
anesthesia
to numb your eyelid. You’ll go home the same day as your surgery.
Surgical entropion repair methods include:
Eyelid tightening
.
This procedure shortens your eyelid (called a wedge resection or lateral tarsal strip) to tighten your lid.
Retractor reinsertion
.
This procedure tightens your lid retractor (the muscle that opens and closes your lid).
Orbicularis debulking
. This procedure weakens part of the muscle that’s responsible for closing your eyelids.
Eyelid margin reconstruction
. For trauma or chronic inflammation,
electrocautery
and/or
cryotherapy
(freezing) may be used to permanently remove (epilate) misdirected eyelashes.
While nonsurgical treatments are helpful in the short term, entropion surgery is usually necessary to fully and permanently correct the condition.
Advertisement
Most people experience temporary side effects following entropion surgery, including
swelling
and
bruising
. These symptoms are a normal part of healing and you can manage them with prescribed medication and cold compresses. In most cases, people fully recover from surgical entropion repair in about two weeks.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if your eyelid turns inward. Even if your eyelid doesn’t appear to turn inward, seek medical treatment if you feel like something is constantly in your eye.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you have entropion, you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What complications should I look out for?
Is there anything I should avoid during recovery?
Do I need a follow-up visit? And if so, when?
What can I do to prevent entropion from returning?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have entropion?
Most people who receive treatment for entropion before it causes eye damage have a good outcome. Entropion surgery usually resolves the problem, and the condition rarely returns.
It’s important to treat entropion to avoid complications that may become permanent. Complications associated with an inward-turning eyelid include:
Eye infections
Corneal abrasions (scratches)
Vision loss
Prevention
Can I prevent entropion?
Because entropion often occurs naturally with aging or after scarring, it’s difficult to prevent. To reduce your risk of developing entropion caused by injury, wear protective eyewear during activities that could injure your eye.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you feel like you always have something in your eye, or you notice your eyelashes are turning inward, it could be entropion. It’s important to correct the problem to avoid long-term issues like corneal injury and vision loss. Talk to your healthcare provider about your treatment options so you can improve your comfort, eye health and overall quality of life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Getting an annual eye exam at Cleveland Clinic can help you catch vision problems early and keep your eyes healthy for years to come.
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment