Oligohydramnios: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Oligohydramnios
Advertisement
Advertisement
Oligohydramnios
Oligohydramnios is when you have low amniotic fluid during pregnancy. Your healthcare provider diagnoses low amniotic fluid using an ultrasound. Oligohydramnios can cause pregnancy complications or be a sign of an underlying health condition. Treatment depends on how far along you are in pregnancy and how low your amniotic fluid is.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
High-Risk Pregnancy Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Oligohydramnios is when you have too little amniotic fluid for your baby's gestational age. Low amniotic fluid can cause pregnancy complications
What is oligohydramnios?
Oligohydramnios is a condition during pregnancy when your amniotic fluid is lower than it should be.
Amniotic fluid
is a water-like fluid that surrounds a fetus during pregnancy. It protects it from infection and umbilical cord compression and cushions their movements. Amniotic fluid also helps develop a fetus’
digestive
and
respiratory system
, as well as regulate its temperature.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Too little amniotic fluid can cause health issues in the fetus or be a sign of an underlying problem in the pregnancy. These conditions could affect
fetal development
or cause complications during
labor and delivery
.
Often, you don’t know your amniotic fluid is low. This is typically detected on
ultrasounds
being done for other reasons, like measuring a fetus’ growth. It can come as a surprise, and you may find yourself worried about how this will affect your pregnancy. Try not to panic. Most people with low amniotic fluid will deliver healthy babies. Treatment depends on how far along you are in pregnancy and if you have other
pregnancy
complications.
How common is it?
Low amniotic fluid affects about 4% of women during pregnancy. It’s most common in the last three months of pregnancy (
third trimester
). This rate rises to about 12% if you go past your due date because amniotic fluid levels tend to decline to low levels past that point.
How much amniotic fluid should I have during pregnancy?
It depends on how many weeks pregnant you are. You begin making amniotic fluid about 12 days after
conception
. Early in pregnancy, the amniotic fluid comes from the placenta. Starting at around 15 weeks, the amniotic fluid is pee from the fetus. The amount of amniotic fluid you produce increases until its peak at 36 weeks of pregnancy. After that, your levels of amniotic fluid start slowly decreasing. The amount of fluid in your uterus at any time will fluctuate as the fetus drinks the fluid and produces more pee.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs of low amniotic fluid?
You may not know you have low amniotic fluid. However, your healthcare provider may suspect it if:
You’re leaking fluid from your
vagina
Your
uterus
measures small for how far along you are in pregnancy
You don’t feel the fetus move enough
What causes oligohydramnios?
Often, the cause of low amniotic fluid is unknown. It can happen randomly in a healthy pregnancy. But other times, your healthcare provider can link low amniotic fluid to a specific cause.
Some possible causes of oligohydramnios are:
Congenital anomalies that affect how the fetus’ kidneys or
urinary tract
are developing
Problems with the
placenta
Going more than two weeks past your
due date
Hypertension
or
preeclampsia
Dehydration
Premature rupture of the membranes (PROM)
Having any of the above conditions or risk factors can make you more likely to have low amniotic fluid levels. You’re also at higher risk for low amniotic fluid if you’ve had low amniotic fluid in prior pregnancies.
What are the complications of oligohydramnios?
Low amniotic fluid in the first six months of pregnancy is generally more dangerous. These complications could include:
Problems with organ development, such as underdevelopment of the lung tissue or deformities to the fetus’ limbs from being compressed in your uterus
Preterm birth
Stillbirth
Infection if your water has broken early
If you receive an oligohydramnios diagnosis in the last trimester (weeks 28 to 40) of pregnancy, complications could include:
Umbilical cord compression (twhen the umbilical cord is squeezed, preventing nutrition and oxygen from reaching the fetus)
Fetal growth restriction
Increased risk of
C-section delivery
Need for an early delivery
Increased risk for
infection
if your water breaks too early
Diagnosis and Tests
How is oligohydramnios diagnosed?
Your pregnancy care provider measures the amount of amniotic fluid in your uterus a few times during pregnancy using an
ultrasound
. If the amount of fluid is less than the recommended amount for the gestational age of the fetus, you may have oligohydramnios.
There are two ways to measure amniotic fluid: amniotic fluid index (AFI) and maximum vertical pocket (MVP).
Amniotic fluid index (AFI)
involves dividing your uterus into four sections and measuring the deepest pocket in each section. The four measurements are added together to get the AFI. Normal AFI is greater than 5 centimeters (cm).
Maximum vertical pocket (MVP)
involves measuring the single deepest pocket of amniotic fluid. The MVP should be less than 2 cm.
Management and Treatment
How is oligohydramnios treated?
It depends on how far along you are in your pregnancy and if you have other pregnancy complications. If you’re close to full term (37 weeks of pregnancy), your healthcare provider may decide that inducing labor is the safest option for your baby.
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider will schedule extra prenatal visits to monitor you closely and make sure the fetus is growing. These visits could include:
Ultrasounds
Nonstress tests
Other treatment options depend on the cause of the oligohydramnios. If there is concern for ruptured membranes or if the fluid is persistently low, you may need to go to the hospital for close monitoring.
Can drinking water increase amniotic fluid?
Maybe. Some studies show that drinking water can help increase amniotic fluid levels in women who are pregnant.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
High-Risk Pregnancy Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can a baby survive oligohydramnios?
Yes, your baby will likely be born healthy. Low amniotic fluid can be serious, but in most cases, babies do well after birth.
Prevention
How can I prevent oligohydramnios?
There isn't anything you can do to prevent oligohydramnios. Attend all prenatal check-ups and be upfront with your healthcare provider about your symptoms and medical history. Knowing if you’re at risk for low amniotic fluid is your best chance for diagnosing and treating the condition.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call your healthcare provider if you experience any of the following:
Leaking amniotic fluid from your
vagina
(contact your provider if you’re unsure what kind of fluid you’re leaking)
Vaginal bleeding
Cramps or
pelvic pain
Contractions
Feeling the fetus move less
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hearing you have low amniotic fluid can be shocking and leave you with lots of questions. What does this mean for my baby? Can you fix it? These are all valid questions. But try to remain calm — most people with low amniotic fluid go on to have healthy babies.
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider will monitor you closely throughout the rest of your pregnancy. They’ll work with you to determine the safest treatment plan. Their goal is for both you and your baby to be healthy. Attending all of your prenatal appointments and sharing your pregnancy symptoms is the best way for your provider to detect potential issues with amniotic fluid volume.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Worried about your high-risk pregnancy? Want the best maternal and fetal health care? Look no further than Cleveland Clinic. We’re here for all your needs.
High-Risk Pregnancy Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/26/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment