Advanced Maternal Age: Pregnancy After 35
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Advanced Maternal Age
Advertisement
Advertisement
Advanced Maternal Age
Advanced maternal age describes a woman who is 35 or older and pregnant. You’re more at risk for complications like miscarriage and having a baby with a congenital disorder. Screening tests can help detect certain congenital disorders.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
High-Risk Pregnancy Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Advanced Maternal Age?
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Advanced Maternal Age?
Possible risks of advanced maternal age are preeclampsia, low birth weight and gestational diabetes.
“Advanced maternal age” is a term that describes anyone who is 35 or older and pregnant. This is the age when your chances of
pregnancy complications
increase. Some of these complications are higher rates of
miscarriage
and a greater chance of having a baby with a
genetic disorder
. Advanced maternal age is the newer and preferred name for a geriatric pregnancy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Pregnancy care providers don’t treat pregnancy after 35 much differently than typical
pregnancy
. It’s mostly a label that means “keep an eye out” because they know your risk of complications is slightly higher.
Despite this, you can have a healthy pregnancy and a healthy baby after 35. Attending all of your prenatal check-ups and tests is more important than ever. This is how your pregnancy care provider can identify and treat potential problems as soon as possible.
What are the risks of having a baby after 35?
Many
women
over 35 have healthy pregnancies and babies. But there is a greater risk of certain complications and health conditions. Some of those are:
High blood pressure
Preeclampsia
Gestational diabetes
Multiple pregnancy
Preterm birth
or
low birth weight
Large baby
Having a baby with
Down syndrome
or other genetic disorders
Miscarriage or
stillbirth
Needing a
c-section
delivery
Remember, these are just risks. Your overall health, access to prenatal care and lifestyle habits also play a huge role in your pregnancy.
Why are there more complications if you’re over 35 and pregnant?
The quality of your
eggs
declines as you age. This means that as your age goes up, your egg quality goes down. “Older” eggs are more likely to produce a baby with
chromosomal
anomalies. While these risks are still low, they increase with age.
Prenatal screening tests
in the
first trimester
check for many of these chromosomal anomalies.
Advertisement
Another reason there are more complications after 35 is that your chances of developing most chronic medical conditions increase as you age. Your body simply responds to these conditions differently. For example, even a woman who isn’t pregnant is more likely to have
high blood pressure
at age 38 than at 28. These chronic medical conditions can affect pregnancy and
delivery
.
Most complications increase as you get older, with most occurring after 40.
Diagnosis and Tests
What tests are recommended for an advanced maternal age pregnancy?
Pregnancy care providers usually recommend
prenatal genetic testing
for women of advanced maternal age. These screenings can detect if your baby is at a higher risk for certain congenital or chromosomal conditions (present at birth).
Most tests use a blood sample, an
ultrasound
or both. Blood tests look for certain substances in your
blood
that may indicate a congenital condition. Ultrasounds look at measurements like
nuchal translucency
, which can be a sign of Down syndrome or other chromosomal conditions.
Remember, these tests are
screenings
, meaning they detect the possibility of a genetic condition.
If your provider detects an abnormality on a screening test, they’ll recommend diagnostic tests, like:
Chorionic villus sampling
. In this test, your healthcare provider collects a sample of cells called villi from the
placenta
. These cells usually contain the same genetic makeup as the fetus.
Amniocentesis
.
In this procedure, your provider places a needle through your abdomen to remove
amniotic fluid
from your
uterus
. This fluid can help diagnose certain genetic conditions.
Pregnancy care providers may recommend that pregnant women over 35 have more frequent ultrasounds, an earlier gestational diabetes screening or more regular monitoring for preeclampsia.
Management and Treatment
How is an advanced maternal age pregnancy treated?
Healthcare providers typically don’t treat you differently
just
because of your age. But if genetic tests indicate your baby may have a congenital or chromosomal disorder or you have a condition like gestational diabetes, your provider will take precautions to keep you safe. They may refer you to a
maternal-fetal medicine specialist
. This is someone who specializes in
higher-risk pregnancies
. Other times, you may just need more frequent prenatal visits with your
obstetrician
to check on the fetus’s growth and well-being.
With advances in medical care and technology, most pregnancies in women over 35 are healthy and result in a healthy baby.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
High-Risk Pregnancy Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can I lower my risk of pregnancy complications if I’m older than 35?
If you’re over 35 and pregnant (or think you will be), there may be some steps you can take now to lower your risk for pregnancy complications:
Make sure all of your preventive care is up to date.
Manage any existing medical conditions.
Take a
prenatal vitamin
.
Get at least 30 minutes of physical activity on most days.
Quit smoking
and/or using tobacco products.
Stop drinking alcohol.
Eat a
healthy diet
with plenty of fruits, vegetables, lean meats and whole grains.
Stay within a healthy weight range during pregnancy.
Advertisement
What are my chances of miscarriage if I am over 35?
Your chances of having a healthy baby are still much higher than your chances of miscarriage.
Your chances of miscarriage
increase with age:
20 to 30 years old: 9% to 17% chance (approximately 9 to 17 per 100 people)
35 years old: 20% chance (or 1 in 5 people)
40 years old: 40% chance (or 4 in 10 people)
45 years old: 80% chance (or 8 in 10 people)
Your pregnancy care provider is the best person to discuss possible complications with.
What are the benefits of having a baby after 35?
Starting a family is a personal decision, and many people choose to wait until later in life to have children. One of the benefits of having a baby later in life is having more life experience and financial stability. Couples are getting married later than they were decades ago. This means people may delay starting or expanding their families. About
20% of women
in the U.S. now have their first child after age 35.
Additional Common Questions
What is the oldest age a woman can get pregnant naturally?
There isn’t one specific age. Having a healthy pregnancy is dependent on how healthy you are overall, not just how old you are.
But experts know that your chances of getting pregnant decline as you age. For example, by 40, your chance of getting pregnant naturally is about
10%
each
menstrual cycle
. In your early 30s, your chances are around 25% each cycle.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Most pregnancies after the age of 35 are healthy and successful. But it’s good to know about the potential complications with advanced maternal age pregnancies. Talk to your pregnancy care provider about what genetic screening tests they recommend or what you can do to stay healthy. In most cases, age during pregnancy is just a number. If you maintain good overall health, manage any conditions you have and listen to your provider, you should deliver a healthy baby.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Worried about your high-risk pregnancy? Want the best maternal and fetal health care? Look no further than Cleveland Clinic. We’re here for all your needs.
High-Risk Pregnancy Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment