Li-Fraumeni Syndrome: Symptoms, Causes & Outlook
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare hereditary disorder that increases the risk you and your family members will develop cancer. Li-Fraumeni syndrome can’t be prevented. But early and consistent cancer screenings and treatment can limit the syndrome’s impact on your life and your family’s lives.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Cancer Genetic Counseling and Testing
Find a Genetic Counselor
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is Li-Fraumeni syndrome?
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare
genetic disorder
that increases the risk you and your family members will develop
cancer
. Everyone with this condition has a
90%
chance of developing one or more types of cancer by age 60. About half develop cancer before they turn 40.
Females
with Li-Fraumeni syndrome almost always develop breast cancer.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Li-Fraumeni syndrome can’t be prevented. But early and consistent cancer screenings and treatment can limit its impact on your life. Meanwhile, researchers are actively investigating new ways to identify and treat cancers linked to Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
How common is this condition?
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is rare. Researchers estimate that over
1,000
families worldwide carry the gene mutation that causes it. Less than 50,000 people in the United States have Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of Li-Fraumeni syndrome?
Developing certain cancers at an early age is the most common sign of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. So, the symptoms you experience will depend on the type of cancer you develop.
What cancers are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome?
The syndrome is linked to more than a dozen different kinds of cancer. Some are considered core cancers because they’re commonly seen in people with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Those five core cancers include:
Sarcomas
. People with Li-Fraumeni syndrome are at risk of developing
osteosarcoma
and
soft tissue sarcoma
.
Breast cancer
. Females with Li-Fraumeni syndrome have a near 100% chance of developing breast cancer in their lifetimes.
Brain cancer
. Several types of malignant brain tumors are associated with this condition. Types include
gliomas
, choroid plexus carcinoma and medulloblastoma.
Adrenocortical carcinoma
. This type of cancer, which forms on the outer layer of your adrenal glands, is more common in people with this condition.
Leukemia
. Acute leukemia is associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
Advertisement
Other cancers are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome but occur less often than the core cancers. They include:
Colon cancer
Kidney cancer
Lymphoma
Lung cancer
Ovarian cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Prostate cancer
Skin cancer
Stomach cancer
Testicular cancer
Thyroid cancer
What causes Li-Fraumeni syndrome?
Li-Fraumeni syndrome happens when there’s a
mutation
(change) in the
TP53
gene. This gene contains the instructions for making a protein called tumor protein 53, or P53. The P53 protein is a tumor suppressor. It keeps your cells from growing abnormally and becoming
tumors
.
When your
TP53
gene changes, your body doesn’t make properly functioning P53 protein. Without properly functioning P53 proteins, cells can divide uncontrolled and become cancers.
People with Li-Fraumeni syndrome inherit altered
TP53
genes from a biological parent in an
autosomal dominant pattern
. This means you only need to inherit a copy of the altered gene from one parent to increase your cancer risk.
Although most cases of Li-Fraumeni syndrome are inherited, it’s possible to have an original genetic mutation (de novo) without family history.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Li-Fraumeni syndrome diagnosed?
Healthcare providers use
genetic testing
to diagnose Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Before these tests, they consider your medical history and your family’s medical history. Here are the criteria providers consider if they suspect Li-Fraumeni syndrome:
You have a sarcoma before age 45.
Your parents, siblings or children are diagnosed with any cancer before age 45.
Your grandparents, aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews or grandchildren are diagnosed with any cancer before age 45.
Once you receive a diagnosis, your provider will recommend a cancer screening schedule. Regular check-ins with your provider allow them to diagnose and treat any potential cancers early on.
Management and Treatment
How is Li-Fraumeni syndrome treated?
There’s no treatment specifically for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. For the most part, healthcare providers treat the cancers in a person with Li-Fraumeni syndrome the same way they would in someone without this condition.
Cancer treatments
may involve surgery or standard therapies like
radiation
and
chemotherapy
, among others.
There’s one important exception. People with Li-Fraumeni syndrome are more likely to develop cancers in response to radiation exposure. This means that if you have this condition, your provider will adjust your cancer treatment to minimize
radiation therapy
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Cancer Genetic Counseling and Testing
Find a Genetic Counselor
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Li-Fraumeni syndrome?
Being diagnosed with Li-Fraumeni syndrome means taking care of your and your family’s health with regular cancer screening.
Research
shows that cancer screenings in people with Li-Fraumeni syndrome improve
survival rates
. Screening schedules for children and adults are different.
Advertisement
An example screening schedule for children up to age 18 is as follows:
Every three to four months
: A complete
physical examination
and an
abdominal ultrasound
to check for adrenocortical carcinomas.
Every year
:
Brain MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) to check for brain tumor symptoms and whole-body
MRI
to check for signs of soft tissue and bone sarcoma.
An example screening schedule for adults is as follows:
Every six months
: Breast exam by a healthcare provider (starting at ages 20 to 25).
Every year
: Physical exam,
MRI breast screening
(starting at ages 20 to 25), brain and whole-body MRI, ultrasounds of the abdomen and pelvis, full-body skin check for skin cancer.
Every two to three years
:
Colonoscopy
to check for colon cancer and
upper endoscopy
to check for other gastrointestinal (GI) cancers.
Currently,
clinical trials
are underway to identify medications that can potentially
target
the
TP53
gene mutation in Li-Fraumeni syndrome and slow cancer progression. But more research is needed to understand the safety and effectiveness of these medications.
Prevention
Can Li-Fraumeni syndrome be prevented?
Li-Fraumeni syndrome isn’t preventable. But you can reduce your chance of developing cancer by avoiding certain activities, like:
Advertisement
Smoking
.
Drinking too much alcohol
.
Spending a lot of time outside without sun protection (like
sunscreen
).
Some women choose to have surgery to remove both breasts (
prophylactic mastectomy
) to reduce their breast cancer risk.
Still, even with these precautions, it’s possible to develop cancer if you have Li-Fraumeni syndrome. This is why one of the best things you can do is get regular screenings to catch cancers early, when treatment is most effective.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
You can take care of yourself and your family by following recommended cancer screening plans. It’s a good idea to speak to a
genetic counselor
about future pregnancies. It’s important to understand the risks of passing along the altered
TP53
gene to a child.
It’s also important to care for your emotional well-being. Living with a lifelong condition like Li-Fraumeni syndrome can take a physical and emotional toll. Reach out to a licensed therapist with a background in treating people with cancer or chronic conditions. Ask your healthcare provider to connect you with support groups for people living with rare, long-term diseases.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
People with Li-Fraumeni syndrome have an increased risk of developing cancer, including having more than one type of cancer at the same time. Even if you have a formal cancer screening program, contact your provider any time you notice a change in your body that might be a cancer symptom.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you have Li-Fraumeni syndrome, you probably have questions about how the syndrome will affect your health. You may also wonder about the impact it might have on your children or your plans to have children. Here are some questions to help you with those conversations:
How likely is it that I will develop cancer?
What signs and symptoms should I look out for?
Should I worry that my family members might have Li-Fraumeni syndrome?
Should I have genetic testing?
Should I encourage my family members to get tested?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that you have the genetic mutation for Li-Fraumeni syndrome is the first step toward limiting the condition’s impact on your life. Genetic testing can identify which family members have Li-Fraumeni syndrome, so they can begin regular cancer screenings, too. Living with Li-Fraumeni syndrome means a lifetime of vigilance to catch and treat cancer early. But knowing what you’re up against can help you plan and take control of your health. Ask your healthcare provider for help setting up regular cancer screenings and support.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic offers the latest cancer genetic counseling and testing to help you understand your cancer risk and make the most of your health.
Schedule Cancer Genetic Counseling and Testing
Find a Genetic Counselor
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/04/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials