Brachycephaly: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Brachycephaly
Advertisement
Advertisement
Brachycephaly
Brachycephaly makes the back of your baby’s head look flat. It’s common and most often happens from your baby lying on their back too frequently. Most cases are temporary and go away on their own. But some cases of brachycephaly require surgical treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Brachycephaly?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Additional Common Questions
What Is Brachycephaly?
Brachycephaly happens when your baby’s skull forms in a way that causes a flattened appearance on the back of their head.
Brachycephaly happens when the back of your baby’s head has a flattened appearance. The back of their skull may look shorter and wider than what’s typical.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Brachycephaly is a type of positional
plagiocephaly
(flat head syndrome). It’s common and usually doesn’t cause long-lasting health or
developmental
issues. Most cases improve naturally or with simple management strategies.
Types of brachycephaly
There are two types that vary based on the cause:
Positional
. Positional brachycephaly can happen if your baby spends a lot of time lying on their back (supine position).
Parents and caregivers should always put babies to sleep on their backs to prevent
sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
. But when infants spend a lot of time on their backs — including while they’re awake — they may develop the positional type.
Synostotic
. Synostotic brachycephaly happens because of
craniosynostosis
. This makes your baby’s skull bones join together too soon. It’s a congenital condition (your baby is born with it).
Symptoms and Causes
Signs and symptoms of brachycephaly
The main sign is flatness in the back of your baby’s head. They may have a wider-than-typical head shape — sometimes, wider than it is long, from front to back.
About 9 out of 10 babies with this condition will also have some level of
torticollis
. This affects your baby’s
neck muscles
. It causes their head to twist and tilt to one side.
Brachycephaly causes
Pressure on the back of your baby’s skull causes this condition. It happens because babies’ skulls are soft and somewhat moldable. This allows your baby’s
brain
room to grow. It also means that too much pressure on a certain area of their skull may change the shape of their head.
Advertisement
Causes of positional brachycephaly
Positional brachycephaly typically happens within the first three months of your baby’s life. Common causes may include:
Prolonged time on their back
. The back of your baby’s head may flatten from always sleeping and/or lying on their back. But it’s essential to put your baby to sleep on their back to reduce their risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).
Issues before birth or during delivery
. Sometimes, there’s a lack of space in the
uterus
or a lack of
amniotic fluid
to cushion the fetus’s head. This can cause positional brachycephaly before birth. Prolonged
labor
may also lead to it.
Preterm birth
is a risk factor for positional brachycephaly. This is because your baby’s skull is softer when they’re born early. It can also take longer for them to develop enough neck muscle strength to move their head into different positions.
Causes of synostotic brachycephaly
Synostotic brachycephaly develops due to a specific type of craniosynostosis — bicoronal synostosis. Craniosynostosis is when your baby’s skull bones fuse together too soon. Bicoronal synostosis affects the bones on the sides of your baby’s skull.
In most babies, experts can't identify one known cause of craniosynostosis. Sometimes, it happens because of a sporadic (random)
gene variation
, or it may run in biological families.
In other cases, some factors during pregnancy increase your baby’s risk for developing craniosynostosis. These include:
Fertility medications, like
clomiphene
(Clomid®)
Developing
thyroid disease
during pregnancy
Being born preterm
Complications of brachycephaly
The main complication of untreated positional brachycephaly is differences in how your baby’s head looks (aesthetic concerns). This type rarely affects your baby’s brain development.
If it’s not treated, synostotic brachycephaly or the resulting increased intracranial pressure can lead to:
Developmental delays
Seizures
Persistent head or facial deformities
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose brachycephaly
Your child’s healthcare provider (
pediatrician
) will start with a
physical exam
to diagnose brachycephaly. They’ll want to find out if it’s positional or synostotic. They’ll gently feel your baby’s head for hard edges along the areas where skull sections fuse. They’ll also look for unusual soft spots.
Hard edges typically point to the synostotic type. If there aren’t any hard edges but a flattened head, your baby likely has the positional type.
A physical exam is usually enough to diagnose positional brachycephaly. But if your baby’s provider is unsure, they may recommend imaging tests.
If your baby has signs of synostotic brachycephaly, they’ll need imaging tests to confirm the diagnosis. This may include one or more of the following:
Advertisement
Skull
X-ray
CT scan
of their head
Ultrasound
or
MRI
(if they suspect
hydrocephalus
)
Management and Treatment
How is brachycephaly treated?
Brachycephaly treatment depends on the type. It could range from changing your baby’s position to surgery.
Positional brachycephaly treatment
Most cases of positional brachycephaly improve naturally over time as your baby’s skull develops and they start moving around more.
In the meantime, your child’s pediatrician will offer strategies for repositioning your baby’s head. These will help during sleep and throughout the day to take pressure off the back of their head. For example, they may recommend:
Giving your baby time on their belly (
tummy time
) while they’re awake
Switching your baby between a sloping chair, a sling and a flat surface
Alternating the side on which you hold your baby when feeding and carrying them
Reducing the time your baby spends lying on a firm flat surface, like in car seats and strollers (try using a sling or front carrier when possible)
It’s important to remember that it’s safest for your baby to sleep on their back during naps and at night.
Other treatments may include:
Massage therapy
. Your child’s pediatrician may show you techniques to gently massage your baby’s head.
Physical therapy
for torticollis
. If your baby has difficulty turning their head, stretching exercises may help loosen and strengthen their neck muscles.
Helmet therapy
. Your baby can wear a custom-fitted helmet for several weeks. The helmet helps reshape their skull. Pediatricians only recommend helmet therapy for severe cases.
Advertisement
Synostotic brachycephaly treatment
Surgery is a necessary treatment for synostotic brachycephaly. It won’t go away without it. Surgery usually happens before your child’s first birthday.
Skull surgery will:
Reshape your baby’s skull
Relieve increased intracranial pressure (pressure inside their skull)
Give your baby’s brain room to grow and develop properly
There are different types of skull surgery. A surgeon will decide which one is best for your baby’s unique case. They’ll explain the pros and cons of it. Don’t hesitate to ask questions.
After surgery, your baby will likely need helmet therapy. They may need to wear a specially fitted helmet for up to a year after the surgery.
When should I see my baby’s healthcare provider?
Talk to a pediatrician if you're concerned about the shape of your baby’s head or think they may have problems turning their head. Visit the emergency room if your child has a seizure for the first time.
Also, take your baby to their
well-baby care appointments
so their pediatrician can regularly check their head shape and overall development.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Additional Common Questions
Can adults have brachycephaly?
Yes, adults can have brachycephaly. This is possible if the condition didn’t go away naturally or with treatment when you were a baby. It can cause self-esteem issues in adults. You may be self-conscious if the back of your head is flat.
Advertisement
Reach out to your healthcare provider and/or a mental health professional if this condition is causing you distress as an adult. There are some treatment options available.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Concern is often the first feeling when you think there’s something wrong with your baby, especially if it’s visible, like a flat head. Take a pause — and a deep breath. Know that brachycephaly is very common, and most cases are temporary. But it’s always a good idea to check in with your baby’s healthcare provider if you’re concerned about their head shape or any other issues. Your baby’s provider can do a simple physical exam to assess their head and offer strategies for treating it.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment