What Is Fat? Why You Need Fats
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Fats
Advertisement
Advertisement
Fats
Fats are a touchy topic when it comes to picking and choosing foods. It’s easy to think that reaching for a “low-fat” product is automatically good for you. But fats are more complicated than that. Some are vital for your body to work properly. Knowing the details about fats is important to making the most of your health and what you eat.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What are fats?
Fats are a
type of nutrient
that you need to consume to live. While you might see a lot of references to fats that recommend leaving them off your plate, they aren’t all bad. In fact, some fats are essential, and your body won’t work properly without them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Dietary fats are one of the four main types of nutrients (known as macronutrients). The other macronutrients are proteins,
carbohydrates
and water.
The main thing that sets fats apart is calorie density. Fats have the highest concentration of calories of any macronutrient. All fats, regardless of type, contain 9 calories per gram. That’s more than double the 4 calories per gram found in carbohydrates or proteins.
What fats do in your body
Fats belong to a type of
lipid
called
triglycerides
. Your body needs lipids, including fats, to do certain jobs. The walls of many of your cells are lipid-based. And lipids help store or carry things throughout your body more easily. Some key examples of that are the fat-soluble vitamins, A, D, E and K. Your body needs fat to use them properly.
Fat in your food helps activate your body’s feeling of satiety (pronounced suh-TY-eh-tee or SAY-she-uh-tee). That’s the feeling of satisfaction or fullness that tells you you’re no longer hungry and it’s time to stop eating.
The fats in your food don’t automatically turn into
body fat (adipose tissue)
. Your body only stores fat if you take in more calories from protein, carbs or fats than your body needs to burn for energy.
What are the types of fats?
People often group fats into just two categories: saturated and
unsaturated
. But fats are more complicated than that. In reality, there are four types of dietary fats:
Advertisement
Monounsaturated fats
Polyunsaturated fats
Saturated fats
Trans fats
You need unsaturated fats, but it’s best to minimize saturated fats and steer clear of trans fats.
Monounsaturated fats
Also known as monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), these mainly come from:
Avocadoes and avocado oil
Nuts and nut oils
Olives and olive oil
Experts recommend that monounsaturated fats make up 20% or less of your total daily calories. At most, that’s 400 calories out of the recommended 2,000 calories per day.
Polyunsaturated fats
These are also known as polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). Some of these are essential, meaning your body can’t work properly without them. Your body also can’t make them, so you need to include them in your eating habits.
The essential polyunsaturated fatty acids are:
Omega-3
.
Males
need about 1.6 grams per day, while females need about 1.1 grams per day.
Omega-6
. Males need about 17 grams per day, while females need about 12 grams per day.
There are two main types of
omega-3 fatty acids
, each coming primarily from different sources:
Long-chain
. You can get these from fatty fish, especially herring, mackerel, salmon, sardines and trout, and mussels, a type of shellfish. They’re also found in
breast milk
.
Short-chain.
These mainly come from plant and vegetable sources. Examples include leafy green vegetables, canola oil, flaxseed and flaxseed oil, soybeans, and walnuts and walnut oil.
There are many sources of omega-6 fatty acids. They include:
Corn and corn oil
Eggs
Legumes like soybeans and soybean oil
Sesame seeds and sesame seed oil
Sunflower seeds and sunflower seed oil
Softer types of margarine
Wheat germ
Saturated fats
Saturated fats are solid at room temperature.
In small amounts
, they’re not harmful. Experts recommend that less than 10% of your daily calories come from saturated fats.
But
research
shows that saturated fats in excess can be bad for you. That’s because they may increase your risk of developing
cardiovascular disease
or
heart disease
. Experts suspect it has something to do with how they raise your
LDL cholesterol
. That’s one of the biggest reasons that experts strongly recommend limiting the amount of saturated fat you eat and how often you eat it.
The main sources of saturated fats include:
Animal fats like tallow and lard
Cocoa butter and chocolate
Coconut milk and coconut oil
Dairy, especially butter, cream, whole milk and certain cheeses
Palm oil
Red meats
Trans fats
Trans fats are a lot like saturated fats. The only real difference is a quirk of their chemical structure. Both are still solid at room temperature, and both raise your LDL cholesterol. But trans fats also lower your
HDL cholesterol
(also known as “good” cholesterol).
Advertisement
Trans fats can come from:
Natural sources and processes
. There are trace amounts of them in red meats and dairy fat. Tiny amounts also form when oils reach high temperatures.
Artificial sources
.  Trans fats can be manufactured by processing liquid vegetable oils in certain ways.
But in many places around the world, including the United States, it’s illegal to make or add artificial trans fats to food products. That’s because of the long-term
health risks from eating trans fats
. And there’s evidence that links trans fats to increased risks of cancer and other health issues.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
Are there good and bad fats?
Fats aren’t a simple good vs. bad situation (except for trans fats, which are always bad).
Research
shows many sources of saturated (sometimes called “bad”) fats don’t necessarily up your heart disease risk. Examples include whole-fat dairy, dark chocolate and unprocessed meats.
And while unsaturated — what some people call “good” — fats are beneficial and you need them, you can still have too much of a good thing. That’s why experts recommend you limit the amount of unsaturated fats in your meals and snacks.
Is low-fat automatically better?
No, not always. Reducing the amount of fat in something often changes the way it tastes (often making it less tasty). To offset that, it’s common for food manufacturers to put more sugar and carbs into “low-fat” foods to make them taste better. But sugar and carbs, over time, can increase your risk of developing conditions like
Type 2 diabetes
.
Advertisement
To protect yourself from trading one unwanted thing for another, it’s important to read nutrition labels. Pay close attention to the amounts of carbs and sugars in the product.
And if you have questions, talk to your primary care provider. They may be able to offer resources and guidance to help you better understand how to get the best out of what you eat. They might also be able to connect you to other experts, like dietitians or nutritionists, who can help you.
Is there such a thing as a high-fat diet?
Some diets put a bigger priority on fat and protein than on carbohydrates. One example would be a
ketogenic diet
. This kind of diet is helpful for certain conditions, like
treatment-resistant epilepsy
, but it isn’t for everyone. For some people, a keto diet can put too much strain on their liver or kidneys. So, you shouldn’t try a keto diet without first talking to a primary care provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Grocery shopping can be overwhelming before you ever look at a nutrition label. And it’s easy to feel confused trying to make sense of food labels and things like fat content. If you wish it was as simple as some fats being good and others bad, you definitely aren’t alone.
Your primary care provider can help you find resources and information that can help. Learning how to read nutrition labels and tell apart the different types of fats can be an important first step. Once you know what to look for, making choices about fats and other food-related details may seem less daunting.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/09/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider