Marathon Training: How to Prepare
Search
Advertisement
Advertisement
August 10, 2023
/
Diet, Food & Fitness
/
Exercise & Fitness
The Long Run: How To Train for a Marathon
Months of preparation go into readying your body to run 26.2 miles
A marathon stretches 26.2 miles (42.19 kilometers). It’s a long and physically taxing distance to run. Famously, the first marathon runner, Philippides, collapsed and died after his final steps.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Yet despite the grueling nature of a marathon, the race itself is the shortest part of the journey. Months of training and preparation go into building strength and endurance to take on the challenge.
It’s a process that
requires planning to avoid injury
and cross the finish line healthy. So, how do you get there? Let’s find out from physical therapist, Monica Betchker, PT.
How long does marathon training take?
Most marathon training plans range from 12 to 20 weeks to give your body adequate time to prep for the distance. The amount of time you need varies depending on your fitness level and goals.
“Training plans are typically broken out into
beginner
, intermediate and advanced options,” says Betchker. “Figure out where you are in those categories first.”
Ideally, select a race you’d like to run and work backward to set a timetable. Training plans typically start at your current comfort level and build in a slow and steady manner to minimize injury risk.
First steps
Before you get into serious training, think about taking these critical first steps.
Shoe check
You’re going to be spending a lot of time on your feet over the next few months, so make sure you’re protecting your tootsies.
Proper-fitting running shoes
are critical for marathon training. Shoes that are too small or too large can cause blisters on your feet or rub your ankles raw, which will not make you feel like getting in miles.
Advertisement
But the importance of a good fit goes beyond comfort and skin issues: “You predispose yourself to injury if your shoes aren’t right — everything from muscle strains to
shin splints
to stress fractures,” says Betchker.
She recommends getting a comprehensive fitting for running shoes at the start of your marathon training. (That goes for long-time runners, too.) Fittings are regularly offered at running specialty stores or even through a physical therapist.
Gear up
Moisture-wicking material is your best friend when it comes to socks, shirts and shorts for marathon training, says Betchker. Look for fabrics made of polyester, nylon or bamboo, which draw sweat away from your skin to keep you dry and minimize
chafing
.
Invest in a few runner-friendly garments that will allow you to run comfortably
whether it’s hot
or
cold outside
, too. You may need to train in both.
Gait analysis
A
gait analysis
is an evaluation of your running form to assess your biomechanical movement. Everything from where you land on your feet and your knee placement to your posture is examined.
The evaluation can pinpoint bad form in advance of logging your miles, allowing for changes that increase running efficiency and decrease your chance of injury, notes Betchker.
A gait analysis can be beneficial to both novice and veteran runners.
Start running
Begin your marathon training where you’re comfortable. For a beginner, that might mean running 15 miles in week one of training. Those with some experience may start at upwards of 40 miles per week.
From there, though, common rules apply across most training plans. The general rule of thumb is to increase weekly mileage by no more than 10% in any given week during training.
The reason? Doing too much too soon can increase your risk of injury.
But Betchker says the 10% rule can be modified depending on how well-conditioned you are and what your current base mileage is. “We find that for many people, the 10% rule might not be challenging enough,” she notes.
But remember, the goal is the marathon finish line. Overdoing it early can create issues later. Trust your plan and build your mileage sensibly until it’s time to taper. (More on that later.)
Don’t neglect warm-ups and cool-downs
A five-to-10-minute dynamic warm-up and cool-down is usually the sweet spot for most people.
When warming up, the focus is on getting your body moving and muscles activated for the training session, says Betchker.
Dynamic stretching
(movement that mimics running) is great for warm-ups.
Advertisement
Cooling down is all about lowering your heart rate and relaxing. Make sure to stretch those muscles, too, which can keep them from tightening up and causing stiffness.
Pro tip: Try
foam rolling
to relieve sore or achy muscles and help your body’s repair process.
Embrace cross-training
Overuse injuries are common in marathon training, a byproduct of doing the same motion repeatedly while grinding out miles.
Embracing cross-training activities such as
cycling
and
swimming
can target different muscle groups while advancing your fitness. This allows you to build strength and endurance while also limiting wear and tear.
An
elliptical workout
is especially beneficial for those who might already be injured because it mirrors the movement of running without the impact.
Betchker says your effort level during cross-training should match what you give during running.
“Try to keep the ratios similar if you’re subbing in cross-training for a run,” she adds. “If it takes you an hour to run five miles and that’s in your plan, then you can swap it for an hour of cross-training instead.”
Strength training
Can you lift weights during marathon training? Absolutely! But your lifting needs to complement ­— not compete with — your running schedule.
Advertisement
And dial down the intensity of your strength workouts as your running mileage increases and peaks during marathon training. Your body is already being taxed during this period. Don’t add to that stress it by trying to lift more.
As your marathon gets closer on the calendar, strength training should consist primarily of calisthenics, ball exercises, Pilates or other workout methods with minimal external resistance.
(Basically, it’s more about muscle maintenance than muscle building as race day approaches.)
Make healthy choices
To state the obvious, you’ve already made a healthy choice by starting your marathon training. Physical fitness is a key part of a healthy lifestyle.
But it’s not the
only
part. During your training, it’s also important to:
Get enough sleep
. Adults need at least seven hours of
sleep
at night. Getting this restorative rest daily will be especially important as you push your body through training.
Hydrate
. Runners sweat a lot. It’s important to replace those fluids to avoid
dehydration
and the problems that come with it. (Learn the
recommended amount of fluid to consume per day
.)
Eat more carbs
. Look to load your plate with more complex carbohydrates such as bread, rice, pasta and starchy vegetables to maximize your glycogen (energy) supply during training. (Get more
marathon nutrition tips
.)
Advertisement
Tapering
The best thing to do just before your marathon is … well, to do less. Your mileage two weeks before the race should be reduced by 25% to 50% versus the previous week. You should further cut this mileage in half the week before the race.
The idea is to let your body fully recover from any training-induced muscle damage, explains Betchker. Basically, a little rest is best at this point.
So, resist the temptation to squeeze in one more long run or a tough workout. Your goal now is to have fresh legs for the race. And don’t worry — you won’t “de-condition” during this tapering period.
“Your training has you as ready as you can be,” emphasizes Betchker.
Race day
Training for a marathon can be a marathon itself, notes Betchker. You’ll likely log more than a million steps running before setting one foot across the starting line.
Race day is a celebration of that preparation and dedication. Enjoy the moments across those 26.2 miles. Focus on the experience and soak in the atmosphere. Smile a lot, even when your leg muscles start to object a bit.
And when you cross that finish line, you’ll have earned the right to be called a marathoner.
Learn more about our
editorial process
.
Health Library
Aerobic Exercise
Overview
Health Library
Aerobic Exercise
Overview
Advertisement
Related Articles
June 20, 2025
/
Eye Care
How To Keep Chlorine Out of Your Eyes This Summer
To avoid swimmer’s eye, wear goggles, use eye drops and flush out your eyes with fresh, clean water when irritated
June 9, 2025
/
Children's Health
Pool Safety: How To Keep Kids Safe in the Water
Keep kids safe while they swim by staying vigilant and setting up a safe pool environment
April 28, 2025
/
Exercise & Fitness
What Athletes Need To Know About Sports Nutrition
Having a well-rounded, healthy nutrition plan is just as important as staying consistent with your exercise routine
March 26, 2025
/
Exercise & Fitness
14 Cycling Accessories To Keep You Safe on the Road
Whether you’re cycling consistently or occasionally, it’s important to have safety essentials like a helmet, shirts with sleeves, eye protection and more
October 16, 2024
/
Orthopaedics
Understanding the Concussion Protocol, From Little League to the NFL
Concussion protocol describes the steps needed to test for concussion and return to play — timelines vary
July 25, 2024
/
Mental Health
What Are ‘The Twisties’ in Gymnastics?
The mental block is a brain-body disconnect that causes gymnasts to lose their sense of space on flips
July 22, 2024
/
Mental Health
Mental Health in Athletes: Breaking the Stigma
A more open conversation on athletes and their mental health needs is overdue
June 18, 2024
/
Infectious Disease
How To Stay Safe From Recreational Waterborne Diseases
You can reduce your risk by not swallowing water, and showering before and after swimming
Trending Topics
Sleep
Breathing Problems? Try These Sleep Positions
If you’re feeling short of breath, sleep can be tough — propping yourself up or sleeping on your side may help
Mental Health
What Is Anxious Attachment Style — and Do You Have It?
If you fear the unknown or find yourself needing reassurance often, you may identify with this attachment style
Nutrition
Are Prebiotic Sodas Good for You?
If you’re looking to boost your gut health, it’s better to get fiber from whole foods
Health Categories to Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Ad
Rendered:
Fri Oct 31 2025 11:27:59 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)