Sleep Paralysis: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Sleep Paralysis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sleep Paralysis
Sleep paralysis is when you can’t move right before falling asleep or waking up. It’s temporary. As you sleep, your brain helps the muscles in your arms and legs relax. With sleep paralysis, you’re stuck between sleep phases. Finding the source of your symptoms and addressing them can help you avoid future episodes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parasomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is sleep paralysis?
Sleep paralysis is when you can’t move any part of your body right before falling asleep or as you wake up. It happens when your body is in between stages of
sleep
and wakefulness. An episode is temporary and only lasts for a few seconds to a couple of minutes. It’s a type of
parasomnia
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You’ll likely feel scared or
anxious
during a sleep paralysis episode. When it ends, you may feel confused because you’ll regain movement of your body as if nothing happened.
Even one sleep paralysis episode can make you nervous about going to sleep. This can affect how you feel and function during the daytime.
There’s no treatment available to stop a sleep paralysis episode when you’re in the middle of one, but treatment is available to reduce how often episodes affect you.
Is sleep paralysis dangerous?
Sleep paralysis isn’t dangerous, but it can cause emotional distress during an episode. Some cases of sleep paralysis link to other sleep disorders, so let a healthcare provider know if you’re not sleeping well.
How common is sleep paralysis?
An estimated 30% of people around the world experience at least one sleep paralysis episode within their lifetimes.
Symptoms and Causes
Sleep paralysis symptoms happen before you fall asleep or as you wake up.
What are the symptoms of sleep paralysis?
You may experience the following symptoms during a sleep paralysis episode either right before falling asleep or as you’re waking up:
You can’t move your arms or legs.
You can’t speak.
Sensations of pressure against your chest (suffocation) or moving out of your own body.
Hallucinations
(like there’s a dangerous person in your room).
Daytime sleepiness.
What does sleep paralysis feel like?
During a sleep paralysis episode, you’re aware of your surroundings but can’t move or speak. You can still move your eyes and breathe. You may feel:
Advertisement
Fear.
Panic.
Helplessness.
How long does sleep paralysis last?
The length of time you’ll experience a sleep paralysis episode varies. It could only last for a few seconds or up to 20 minutes. It usually only lasts a couple of minutes.
What happens if you wake someone up during sleep paralysis?
You can safely wake someone up during a sleep paralysis episode. The person having an episode may wake up fully and regain movement when you touch or talk to them. Someone in a sleep paralysis episode won’t be able to tell you what they feel or indicate with movement that they’re having an episode until they’ve recovered from one.
What causes sleep paralysis?
The exact cause of sleep paralysis is unknown. Healthcare providers notice they could happen with the following:
Narcolepsy
.
Not sleeping enough (
sleep deprivation
).
An irregular sleep schedule (
shift work
sleep disorder).
Obstructive sleep apnea
.
Mental health conditions
like
anxiety
,
bipolar disorder
,
post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) or
panic disorder
.
Certain medications (like ones that treat
ADHD
).
Substance use disorder
(SUD).
Why does sleep paralysis happen?
Sleep paralysis happens when you regain awareness going into or coming out of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Your body hasn’t fully switched sleep phases or woken up during sleep paralysis.
When you’re sleeping, your
brain
sends signals that relax the muscles in your arms and legs. The result — muscle atonia — helps you remain still during REM sleep. As you’re in the REM sleep stage, you’ll likely have dreams. Your brain prevents the muscles in your limbs from moving to protect yourself from acting dreams out and causing injury.
What are the risk factors for sleep paralysis?
Sleep paralysis can happen to anyone at any age. It’s more common among people who have a varying sleep schedule (like with shift work). Symptoms may first appear in childhood or adolescence. Episodes are more frequent in your 20s and 30s.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is sleep paralysis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers confirm or rule out sleep paralysis after a
physical exam
and a sleep evaluation. Your provider may ask you about:
Your symptoms, such as how often you experience sleep paralysis, what it feels like and when it started.
The quantity and quality of sleep you get, such as how many hours you sleep at night and whether you feel tired during the day.
Your medical history, including what medications you currently take and whether you
smoke
, use alcohol or unprescribed drugs.
Your mental health, like if you experience stress or have an underlying mental health condition like anxiety or depression.
Your family history and if you’re aware of any biological family members who experience sleep paralysis.
What tests diagnose sleep paralysis?
Your healthcare provider may recommend testing if they suspect a sleep disorder that causes sleep paralysis like narcolepsy. You may need:
An overnight
sleep study
(polysomnogram)
: The test monitors your breathing, heartbeat and brain activity while sleeping. It may enable healthcare providers to observe an episode of sleep paralysis or detect issues like sleep apnea.
Multiple sleep latency test (MSLT)
: This test measures how quickly you fall asleep and what kind of sleep you experience during a nap. The test helps uncover issues such as narcolepsy.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is sleep paralysis treated?
Your treatment will depend on the reason why you have sleep paralysis. Your provider may recommend the following:
Taking medications that prevent you from reaching the REM stage of sleep.
Taking medications to treat an underlying mental health condition or sleep disorder (like
antidepressants
, for example).
Improving your
sleep hygiene
(habits that help you sleep better).
Talking to a mental health provider if you experience frequent
stress
.
How to stop sleep paralysis in the moment?
There’s no way to stop a sleep paralysis episode as it happens. You may notice that you come out of an episode sooner if you focus on making small body movements, like moving one finger, followed by moving two fingers, etc.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parasomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
If I’ve only had one sleep paralysis episode, will it happen again?
You may experience only one episode in your lifetime. But this varies from person to person. You’re more likely to have an episode during periods of high stress or when you’re not sleeping well.
How can I take care of myself after a sleep paralysis episode?
It’s natural to feel tired, confused and scared after a sleep paralysis episode. Sleep paralysis is a frightening experience. Be kind to yourself, including getting extra rest if you need it. Talk to a loved one for comfort or see your healthcare provider if you have concerns.
Prevention
Can sleep paralysis be prevented?
There isn’t much you can do to prevent sleep paralysis from happening. But there are steps you can take to lower your risk.
Advertisement
One of the best ways to avoid sleep paralysis is to improve the quality of your sleep. You can do this by:
Having a set sleep schedule with specific times for going to bed and waking up.
Creating a comfortable sleep environment that’s dark and quiet.
Putting phones, tablets, e-readers and computers away before bedtime.
Relaxing before bed by taking a bath, reading or listening to soothing music.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
If you have frequent sleep paralysis episodes, you should discuss them with your healthcare provider. There may be an underlying cause that they can treat.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your provider include:
What’s causing sleep paralysis?
How can I come out of a sleep paralysis episode sooner?
Should I talk to a mental health provider?
Do you recommend treatment?
Are there side effects of treatment?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Sleep paralysis can leave you feeling worried and scared after an episode. When you regain movement, you might wonder what caused this to happen or if it’ll happen again. The experience could’ve felt so strange that you may wonder whether anyone will believe you. These feelings can prevent you from getting quality rest at night and feeling well enough to perform at your best during the day.
If sleep paralysis is a concern, don’t let these feelings hold you back from getting medical attention and the support you need. A provider can pinpoint the causes, provide treatments or offer self-care recommendations to lower your risk of future episodes.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Yelling, kicking, walking and even eating in your sleep can be serious. When you have parasomnias, Cleveland Clinic’s sleep experts can help.
Parasomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/03/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment