CGRP Inhibitors: What They Are, Uses & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
CGRP Inhibitors
Advertisement
Advertisement
CGRP Inhibitors
CGRP inhibitors are medications that treat (and, in some cases, prevent) migraine headaches. There are a few types, including injections under your skin, infusions into a vein or pills you can take orally (by mouth). CGRP inhibitors work by destroying or blocking extra CGRP proteins in your body that can make migraine pain more severe or last longer.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Headaches and Migraines Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What are CGRP inhibitors?
CGRP inhibitors are prescription medications that treat
migraine headaches
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your healthcare provider may suggest a CGRP inhibitor if you experience
chronic migraines
. They can also treat occasional (episodic) migraines, too.
How do CGRP inhibitors work?
CGRP inhibitors get their name from how they prevent migraines. Inhibit means to stop or slow down.
CGRP stands for calcitonin gene-related peptide. Normally, CGRP is a helpful protein. It helps control your
blood pressure
by expanding your blood vessels (
vasodilation
).
But if you have migraines, your body creates extra CGRP. This excess CGRP activates
nerves
in your
brain
that make pain signals worse. It can also make pain last longer. CGRP inhibitors stop this before it can happen.
There are two types of CGRP inhibitors.
CGRP monoclonal antibodies
Monoclonal antibodies (moAbs)
are proteins made in a lab. They act like the
antibodies
your
immune system
uses to fight off invaders. But instead of fighting
germs
or other foreign substances, they target specific cells in your body. They’re like an army of security robots that automatically target and destroy extra CGRP in your blood.
Examples of monoclonal antibody CGRP inhibitors include:
Eptinezumab
Erenumab
Fremanezumab
Galcanezumab
Eptinezumab is an intravenous (IV) infusion your provider will inject into one of your veins. You’ll need an infusion every three months.
Advertisement
The other three are injections that go put under your skin (subcutaneously). You’ll give yourself the injections at home once a month. Your provider will teach you how. Some people who use fremanezumab only need four injections a year. Your provider will tell you which medication is best for you and why.
CGRP receptor antagonists (gepants)
CGRP receptor antagonists block the receptors in your brain that CGRP binds to.
It’s like a game of musical chairs. The medication steals seats CGRP would normally fill — the receptors on your nerves. If the receptors are filled, CGRP can’t bind to your nerves and trigger pain signals.
Examples of CGRP receptor antagonists include:
Atogepant (a pill you take by mouth every day)
Rimegepant
(a pill you dissolve under your tongue)
Ubrogepant
(a pill you take by mouth)
Zavegepant (a nasal spray you put in your nose)
CGRP receptor antagonists may also manage migraine symptoms after one has started. Your healthcare provider will tell you if it’s safe to take one to treat symptoms. Atogepant is the only daily pill that can help you prevent migraines.
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of CGRP inhibitors?
CGRP inhibitors are the first medications designed to directly treat and prevent migraines.
Taking a CGRP inhibitor can:
Reduce how often you experience migraines
Make the migraines you do experience shorter and milder
Prevent some migraines completely
What are CGRP inhibitor side effects?
CGRP inhibitor side effects can include:
Back pain
Constipation
or
diarrhea
Dry mouth
Feeling
tingling, numbness or pins and needles (paresthesia)
Joint pain
Nausea
and
vomiting
Non-migraine
headaches
Pain or reactions at the injection or infusion site
Severe complications are rare, but can include:
High levels of liver enzymes (
transaminitis
)
Liver
damage
Vision
issues
Call your healthcare provider if you experience any side effects.
Recovery and Outlook
How soon will I feel better?
It can take a month or two to start feeling better. How soon you’ll notice improvements depends on a few factors, including:
Which CGRP inhibitor you need
How often you experience migraines
How severe the migraine symptoms you experience are
Your overall health
Your healthcare provider will explain which CGRP inhibitor they think is right for you. They’ll help you understand what to expect and when you should start seeing changes.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll need checkups with your healthcare provider after starting a CGRP inhibitor. They’ll want to make sure the medication is helping. Let them know if you’re having fewer migraines and/or less severe symptoms. Tell your provider about any side effects you’re experiencing.
You might need to see your provider for infusions. Ask your provider if you have questions about how to give yourself your injections at home.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You know better than anyone that having a migraine can grind your day to a halt. That frustrating, annoying feeling gets even worse if you have chronic migraines. A CGRP inhibitor can help you feel more like yourself again.
It’s possible that you’ll still have some migraines. But the ones you do experience should be milder and interrupt your routine less. Talk to your provider about the risk of side effects and complications. Most side effects are mild and manageable, but don’t be afraid to ask lots of questions before starting a new medication.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Do you have headaches that won’t go away? Or ones that come back regularly? Cleveland Clinic’s headache and migraine experts are here to help.
Headaches and Migraines Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment