Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis (GPA, formerly Wegener’s)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (formerly Wegener’s Granulomatosis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (formerly Wegener’s Granulomatosis)
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is the new name for what used to be called Wegener’s granulomatosis. It’s an autoimmune disease that can affect your whole body, but especially affects your lungs and kidneys. Polyangiitis is chronic inflammation in your smaller blood vessels. Granulomatosis involves small masses forming in your blood vessels and other organs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis primarily affects your kidneys and respiratory system (sinuses, nose, ears and lungs). But you may experience symptoms throughout your body.
What is granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA)?
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is a type of
vasculitis
— chronic inflammation in your
blood vessels
. It was formerly called Wegener’s granulomatosis, but the new name describes it more precisely. GPA involves:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Inflammation
in many different types of blood vessels throughout your body (polyangiitis)
Inflammatory masses called
granulomas
forming in your blood vessels and organs (granulomatosis)
Different types of vasculitis affect different blood vessels. GPA affects the many smaller blood vessels throughout your body. This means it can cause issues throughout your body, but especially in organs that rely on many small blood vessels. GPA tends to affect your
respiratory system
and
kidneys
the most.
Inflammation in your blood vessels can cause them to swell, break and bleed. It can also cause scarring that restricts the blood flow through your vessels, depriving your tissues of oxygen and nutrients. GPA can cause bleeding and organ damage in your renal and pulmonary systems (pulmonary-renal syndrome).
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s granulomatosis)?
GPA affects your respiratory system and kidneys the most. But it can also affect many other organs and tissues, and how you feel overall. The smaller blood vessels that it targets travel throughout your body.
Vasculitis in your
connective tissues
may cause
muscle pain
and
joint pain,
along with an overall feeling of unwellness (malaise). Other general symptoms may include
fatigue
,
loss of appetite
and
weight loss
.
Advertisement
Respiratory symptoms
Many people with GPA first notice and seek treatment for symptoms in their respiratory system. Early symptoms might resemble a cold or infection, but they linger too long. They might include:
Sinus headaches
or
pressure
Persistent sinus infections
Persistent
runny nose,
with crusting around your nostrils
Nasal congestion
Unexplained, repeated
nosebleeds
Earache
Chest pain
Chronic cough
Shortness of breath
As granulomatosis with polyangiitis worsens, you might develop inflammation of the
cartilage
in your ears, nose and throat (
polychondritis
). This can cause more severe symptoms, including:
Nasal swelling so severe that your nose bridge collapses (
saddle nose
)
Narrowing in your throat (
subglottic stenosis)
, causing
hoarseness
,
wheezing
or
stridor
Inner ear inflammation,
causing
vertigo
and
hearing loss
You can also bleed in your lungs, which may cause
shortness of breath
or
coughing up blood
.
Kidney symptoms
You may not experience
kidney pain
with GPA. But you may notice changes in your pee, like
foamy pee
or
blood in your pee
. Swelling in your face or feet (
edema
) is another symptom of
kidney disease
.
If you have GPA, healthcare providers will continue to check on your kidneys, even if you never develop symptoms. While kidneys aren’t always involved in GPA early on, they almost always are eventually.
Eye symptoms
GPA can affect your eyes, causing inflammation on the surface or the inner parts of your eye. This can cause
eye pain
and
pressure
and make your
eyes red and swollen
. Severe cases can lead to vision loss.
Skin symptoms
Vasculitis in your skin may show up as:
Mottled skin,
with a bluish-red pattern.
Purple, red or brown splotches (
purpura
).
Skin lesions
, like hard nodules or
papules
.
Open sores (ulcers).
Nervous system symptoms
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis may affect your
nervous system.
It usually affects your
peripheral nervous system
— the nerves that extend from your spinal cord to the rest of your body.
Inflammation and swelling may compress or damage just one nerve, causing symptoms in just one area (
mononeuropathy
). More commonly, it may affect multiple nerves (polyneuropathy). Symptoms can include:
Motor symptoms, like muscle weakness
Sensory symptoms, like
numbness
and
tingling
or
nerve pain
Loss of autonomic control of your blood pressure, bladder or sweating
What are the most serious complications of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)?
Severe GPA can be organ-threatening and life-threatening. Complications can include:
Bleeding in your lungs (pulmonary hemorrhage), which can lead to
respiratory failure
Rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis
(kidney disease), which can lead to
kidney failure
Permanent vision loss or
hearing loss
Loss of skin sensation or muscle control (
peripheral neuropathy
)
Advertisement
What causes granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA)?
GPA, like other types of vasculitis, is an
autoimmune disease.
This means your
immune system
generates ongoing inflammation in your blood vessels. Normally, your immune system sends inflammation to target infections. But in autoimmune diseases, it targets your healthy tissues by mistake.
What triggers granulomatosis with polyangiitis?
Researchers aren’t sure why autoimmune diseases occur. There are probably multiple factors involved. Sometimes, extra stress on your immune system seems to push it into overdrive, triggering dysfunction. Researchers have associated the onset of GPA with certain severe
bacterial
and
viral infections
.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) belongs to a group of conditions called
ANCA-associated vasculitis
, or AAV. These are types of vasculitis that involve a specific
antibody
called ANCA. Researchers believe this antibody plays a role in triggering the inflammation in these conditions, including GPA.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is granulomatosis with polyangiitis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will begin by asking about your symptoms and physically examining you. If your symptoms and medical history suggest GPA, they’ll follow up with tests to investigate further.
Tests for granulomatosis with polyangiitis include:
Blood tests
, including
testing for ANCA antibodies
Urinalysis,
including testing your urine for blood and protein
Chest X-ray
and
CT scans
to look at your lungs
Biopsy
of lung, sinus or kidney tissue to look for specific types of inflammation
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)?
Healthcare providers treat granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) with anti-inflammatory and immune system-suppressing drugs (
corticosteroids
and other
immunosuppressants
).
Some of these medications are stronger than others. Which combination your provider prescribes will depend on how severe your condition is and how much you’re at risk of the side effects.
Initial treatment for active GPA includes:
High doses of corticosteroids, such as
prednisone
. These doses will eventually taper off.
Rituximab
. This newer
biologic medication
is now standard treatment.
Cyclophosphamide
(for severe disease) or
methotrexate
(for milder disease). These drugs also
treat cancer
, but for GPA (at much lower doses), they function as immunosuppressants.
Avacopan
. This drug can be used as an adjuvant treatment to reduce your dosage of corticosteroids.
If you have severe complications, you might need additional treatment, such as:
Dialysis
Organ transplantation
Once GPA is in remission, you’ll take milder medications to maintain remission. These typically include:
Rituximab
Milder immunosuppressants, such as
azathioprine
, methotrexate or
mycophenolate
mofetil
You’ll have ongoing testing during treatment to monitor your condition and response to the treatment. Your healthcare provider will adjust your prescription and dosage according to your response.
Advertisement
Each medication comes with its own potential side effects, and they can occur at any time during your treatment. You might need to change medications to avoid or reduce the risk of certain side effects.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for this condition?
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a lifelong condition that requires lifelong care. With treatment, the disease can go into remission and stop causing symptoms. But symptoms can also return (relapse).
You may have to take medications off and on for the rest of your life to manage relapses. Since these medications suppress your immune system, you’ll also have to take extra care to prevent getting sick.
Can you live a normal life with GPA?
With effective treatment, you can live a relatively normal life with GPA. Most people with chronic diseases have periods of remission and relapse, so the course of the disease can be up and down.
What is the life expectancy of someone with granulomatosis with polyangiitis?
Without treatment, the average life expectancy is five months, with less than 50% surviving one year. But with treatment, follow-up studies show more than 80% of people are alive at least eight years later.
What is the most common cause of death in granulomatosis with polyangiitis?
Before treatment,
organ failure
is the biggest mortality risk with GPA. During treatment, you’re more at risk of life-threatening infections that can take hold when your immune system is suppressed.
Living With
How should I take care of myself while living with granulomatosis with polyangiitis?
When you’re living with a chronic autoimmune disease like granulomatosis with polyangiitis, you need to maintain a certain awareness of your body. Even when you’re feeling well, you should live defensively.
Take steps to protect yourself from common illnesses while taking immunosuppressants. Make sure to notice any new or unusual symptoms and let your healthcare provider know about them right away.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis can affect you in many ways, some of which are life-threatening. Recognizing that something’s wrong and getting timely treatment for it can make all the difference.
With treatment, most people can live without symptoms at least some of the time. But your healthcare team will continue to monitor your condition. They’ll be your lifelong partners in maintaining your health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/02/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment