Insulinoma: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Insulinoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Insulinoma
Insulinoma is a rare tumor that releases excess insulin. This causes low blood sugar episodes. Most cases of insulinoma don’t spread to other areas of your body. And most cases are curable with surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Pancreatic Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
Insulinomas release excess insulin. This is the hormone that helps control your blood sugar level.
What is insulinoma?
Insulinoma is a rare
tumor
in your
pancreas
that releases excess
insulin
. Insulin is the
hormone
that helps keep your blood sugar (glucose) at healthy levels.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Insulinoma is one of several
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs)
. These are rare tumors that start in your pancreas’s
endocrine
cells.
About 85% to 90% of insulinomas are nonmetastatic (“indolent”). This means they don’t spread outside of your pancreas (
metastasize
). Metastatic (“aggressive”) insulinomas are very rare. Metastatic insulinomas are most likely to spread to your
lymph nodes
and/or
liver
.
How does insulinoma affect my body?
Insulinomas release insulin. If you have insulinoma, it typically floods your body with insulin. This results in
low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)
. When that happens, you may feel shaky. You may also feel like your heart is racing. In extreme circumstances, you may faint or have seizures.
Your symptoms should improve if you consume something that has sugar (carbohydrates). This could include apple juice, regular soda or a banana.
Experiencing low blood sugar can be scary, especially when you don’t know why it’s happening or when it’ll strike again. Keep snacks on hand and see your healthcare provider as soon as possible.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of insulinoma?
Insulinomas mainly cause low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) episodes. Symptoms of low blood sugar include:
Confusion
or difficulty concentrating
Sweating
Rapid heartbeat
Anxiety or irritability
Advertisement
Symptoms of severe low blood sugar include:
Vision changes, like
blurred vision
Slurred speech
Clumsiness or difficulty with coordination
Seizures
Loss of consciousness
Most people with insulinoma experience low blood sugar when fasting — usually in the morning when they wake up. Some people with insulinoma experience low blood sugar episodes after meals.
Persistent hypoglycemia can interfere with daily activities and cause irreversible brain damage. It can even lead to coma and death. It’s very important to see your healthcare provider if you have low blood sugar symptoms.
What causes insulinoma?
Insulinomas happen when the cells in your pancreas that create insulin multiply uncontrollably. Researchers aren’t sure why that happens.
But they do know that insulinoma can happen alongside
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1)
. This is an inherited condition in which multiple tumors affect different parts of your endocrine system. About 5% to 10% of insulinoma cases affect people with MEN1.
If one of your first-degree relatives (biological parents and siblings) has a MEN1 diagnosis, talk to your healthcare provider. They can recommend
genetic testing
that can screen for the condition. If you have MEN1, genetic testing could help detect tumors in their early phases.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose insulinoma?
Your healthcare provider will likely suspect you have insulinoma if you have the following signs (called Whipple’s triad):
Symptoms of low blood sugar
A documented low blood sugar test result (a fingerstick blood sugar result at least less than 55 mg/dL)
Improvement of your symptoms when you eat or drink sugar (carbohydrates)
They’ll then recommend some tests to help diagnose insulinoma.
72-hour fast
Your provider may recommend fasting up to 72 hours to bring on a low blood sugar episode. This is the gold-standard test for diagnosing insulinoma. But you won’t be alone. A provider will monitor you during your fast.
Once you develop low blood sugar symptoms, you’ll get
blood tests
that check your:
Blood sugar level
Insulin level
Proinsulin level
C-peptide
level
Beta-hydroxybutyrate level
Sulfonylurea level
After the blood draw, a provider will give you treatment for the low blood sugar.
The results of these tests can show if too much insulin (
hyperinsulinemia
) is causing your low blood sugar episodes.
Imaging tests
If the 72-hour fast points to insulinoma, your provider may suggest one or more of the following imaging tests:
CT scan
MRI scan
Abdominal ultrasound
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)
These tests can assess the tumor’s size and its location in your pancreas. If imaging tests don’t provide enough information, your provider may recommend a selective arterial calcium stimulation test. For this test, a provider measures insulin levels in your hepatic (liver)
vein
after stimulating
arteries
in various parts of your pancreas.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for insulinoma?
Surgery is the main treatment for nonmetastatic (indolent) insulinomas. Surgical options include:
Enucleation
. Your surgeon removes the insulinoma without cutting into it. This is kind of like the way you might remove the yolk from a hard-boiled egg.
Partial
pancreatectomy
. As the name sounds, this surgery involves removing part of your pancreas. In this case, it’s the part where the insulinoma is.
Whipple surgery
. Your surgeon removes part of your pancreas and other nearby tissues. You may need this surgery if the insulinoma is metastatic.
Each of these surgeries has different risks. Your provider will go over the risks and which surgery would be best for you.
Prevention and treatment of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)
In the time leading up to surgery (or if surgery isn’t possible), it’s important to prevent and treat low blood sugar episodes. Your provider may recommend getting a
continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
system. A CGM can help you catch low blood sugar episodes before they get too severe, especially during the night.
It’s important to remember that you shouldn’t use a CGM to diagnose insulinoma or other low blood sugar conditions. They’re for monitoring conditions after a diagnosis.
Your provider may recommend one or more of the following treatments for low blood sugar:
Advertisement
Dietary changes
. Regular meals or snacks rich in complex
carbohydrates
can help prevent low blood sugar. A bedtime or late-night meal may also help.
IV glucose
. If you experience frequent severe episodes of hypoglycemia, you may need to receive IV glucose.
Diazoxide
. This medication can help control how much insulin your pancreas releases. It may also increase how much
glucagon
your liver releases. Glucagon raises your blood sugar.
Octreotide
and
lanreotide
. These medications may help reduce the release of insulin from certain types of insulinoma tumors.
It’s important to wear medical identification that states that you experience low blood sugar. This way, someone can get you help as soon as possible if you have a severe episode. Also, tell people close to you about your low blood sugar episodes and how they can help.
Treatment of metastatic insulinoma
Your provider may recommend combining surgery with other treatments for metastatic (aggressive) insulinoma. Or they may use medical treatments when surgery isn’t an option. Your provider might recommend:
Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT)
Targeted therapy
Chemotherapy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Pancreatic Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can insulinoma be cured?
Yes, most insulinomas can be cured with surgery.
One study
showed that 87% of people who had surgery for nonmetastatic insulinoma were alive 10 years after diagnosis. Your healthcare provider will consider factors like the tumor’s size and location before recommending a specific surgery.
Advertisement
The 10-year
survival rate
for metastatic insulinomas was 33%. It’s important to remember this is just an estimate. Your healthcare team will be able to give you a better idea of what to expect based on your unique situation.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Receiving a tumor diagnosis can be alarming and confusing, especially when it’s a rare one like insulinoma. The good news is that most insulinomas are curable with surgery. Even so, it’s not easy to learn you have a rare condition that requires surgery. Know that your healthcare team will be by your side to answer questions and support you. If you’re feeling like you’re mentally and emotionally on your own with insulinoma, ask your provider about services that might help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A pancreatic cancer diagnosis can make your world tilt. Cleveland Clinic experts are here to start personalized treatment for the best possible outcome.
Pancreatic Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/21/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes