Pet Allergies: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pet Allergies
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pet Allergies
Pet allergies cause your immune system to react to substances in animals that are normally harmless. Symptoms include itchy eyes, a stuffy nose, hives and sneezing. Treatment involves medications. You can prevent pet allergies by avoiding animals, using air filters, cleaning, and brushing and bathing your pets regularly.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Pet Allergies?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Are Pet Allergies?
Pet allergies are certain proteins (allergens) on your pet that cause your allergic
immune system
to overreact. Usually, these proteins are harmless. But if you have pet allergies, your allergic immune system views them as harmful “invaders” that it must get rid of, like
bacteria
or
viruses
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The most common cause of allergy is pet dander. Pet dander is tiny scales from your pets’ skin, fur, hair or feathers. But other sources of pet allergens include animal:
Fur
Saliva (spit)
Skin
Urine (pee)
What are the most common pet allergies?
Any pet can produce allergens. But cats and dogs are the most common source of pet allergens. This is because they’re two of the most popular pets. Up to 3 out of every 10 people in the U.S. are allergic to cats and dogs. You’re more than twice as likely to be allergic to a cat than a dog.
Other pets that cause allergies include:
Birds
Horses
Rabbits
Rodents (gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, rats)
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of being allergic to pets?
The most common pet allergy symptoms include:
Coughing
Hives
Itchy skin
Nasal passage
inflammation
, including itchy eyes,
nasal congestion
,
runny nose
,
shortness of breath
and
watery eyes
Scratchy throat or mouth
Sneezing
Worsening
asthma
symptoms
Pet allergies share many of the same symptoms as other conditions, including
influenza
(flu) and the
common cold
. Reach out to a healthcare provider if you’re not sure whether your symptoms are from pet allergies or an illness. They can help figure out the cause of your symptoms.
Can pet allergies cause fatigue?
Yes, pet allergies can cause
fatigue
(tiredness). When allergies cause nasal passage inflammation (swelling), you may feel tired.
Advertisement
Some pet allergy symptoms, including nasal congestion and coughing, can make it difficult to fall asleep and stay asleep. Interrupted or restless
sleep
can contribute to your fatigue.
How long after being around pets do symptoms appear?
It depends on how severe your pet allergies are.
If you have severe pet allergies, symptoms may appear within 30 minutes of encountering allergens.
If you have mild pet allergies, symptoms may appear a few hours to a few days after encountering allergens.
What causes animal allergies?
To understand what causes animal allergies, you must understand how your allergic immune system works.
If you have pet allergies, your body creates immunoglobulin E (IgE) the first time you encounter a pet allergen. IgE is an
antibody
that your immune system makes. Each type of IgE is sensitive to a specific kind of pet allergen and other allergens.
You may only have IgE antibodies that are sensitive to one particular animal. Or you may have many IgE antibodies that are sensitive to many types of allergens.
The antibodies find the allergens in your body and help remove them by taking them to the
mast cell
(allergy cell), where they attach to a special receptor that helps send and receive signals in your body. This causes the allergy cell to release
histamine
and other allergy mediators. Histamine is what causes your allergy symptoms. Your allergy symptoms are your immune system’s way of removing the allergens from your body.
Risk factors
Pet allergies can affect anyone. But you’re more likely to have or develop pet allergies if your biological parents have pet allergies.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose pet allergies
If you notice you have allergy symptoms after being around pets, it’s a good idea to see a healthcare provider. They’ll review your medical history, ask about your symptoms and perform a physical exam. If they suspect a pet allergy, they may ask questions like:
Do you have a biological family history of pet allergies?
Has a healthcare provider ever diagnosed you with allergies before?
What are your symptoms?
Do you take any over-the-counter (OTC) medications to treat your symptoms?
What kinds of animals are you around when your allergies start to act up?
They may recommend tests to help confirm a pet allergy diagnosis. They may also refer you to an
allergist
.
Tests that are used
Healthcare providers may use different allergy tests to help diagnose pet allergies according to your symptoms. Tests may include:
Blood (IgE) test
: A provider will remove a small amount of blood, usually from a
vein
in your arm, and expose it to allergens. If you have high levels of IgE antibodies in your blood sample, you may have pet allergies.
Skin prick (scratch) test
: A provider will place droplets of possible pet allergens on your skin and look for reactions.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
Can you get rid of pet allergies?
No, you can’t get rid of pet allergies. But you can help reduce your symptoms with:
Nasal
antihistamines
Nasal
corticosteroids
Over-the-counter antihistamine pills
For some people,
allergy shots
(immunotherapy) offer a long-term solution for managing pet allergies. Each time you get an allergy shot, your body responds by lowering your sensitivity to the allergen. In some people, allergy shots help prevent pet allergy symptoms even after they stop receiving treatment.
A healthcare provider can help figure out which treatment options are best for you.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
Antihistamines start to work about 30 minutes after you take them. They’re most effective within the first few hours.
Nasal antihistamines may start working as fast as 15 to 30 minutes.
Nasal corticosteroids may take at least two weeks for you to start feeling better.
If you have pets or are around animals a lot, a provider may recommend taking antihistamines every day to prevent symptoms.
How long do animal allergies last?
Once you’re no longer around pet allergens, your symptoms usually go away after a few hours. But your symptoms may last for several days if your pet allergies are severe. Showering and washing your clothes can help you recover faster.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider if you have pet allergy symptoms that affect your day-to-day quality of life. During your appointment, you may wish to ask the following questions:
Advertisement
What animals are causing my allergy symptoms?
Do you recommend allergy medications?
Should I take allergy medications every day or only when I develop symptoms?
Are there any side effects to your recommended allergy medications?
Are there any pets I can be around?
Should I rehome my pet?
How do I know when I have pet allergy symptoms or cold and flu symptoms?
Should I see an allergist?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have pet allergies?
Living with pet allergies can be challenging. Most symptoms are mild. But some may cause breathing problems. Most people can manage their pet allergies with medications and by avoiding pets that have known allergens.
Prevention
Can pet allergies be prevented?
The best way to prevent pet allergies is to avoid animals that trigger allergic reactions. You can take antihistamines daily to help manage your symptoms and reduce your reaction.
If avoiding pets isn’t possible, the following tips can help prevent symptoms or reduce their severity:
Avoid petting, hugging and kissing pets
: Try not to let pets rub against you. It’s also a good idea to create “pet-free” areas where animals aren’t allowed. These may include your furniture or bedroom.
Filter the air in your home
: Use a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter to remove as many pet allergens as possible.
Regularly brush and bathe your pets
: Brush your pets outdoors. If possible, have someone who doesn’t have pet allergies brush and bathe them. Use a pet-specific shampoo.
Vacuum rugs, carpets and other surfaces regularly
: It’s a good idea to vacuum at least twice a week. Use a microfilter vacuum bag to prevent pet dander from escaping. If possible, remove rugs and carpets. They can trap pet allergens in the fibers.
Advertisement
In severe cases, you may need to find a new home for your pet.
Additional Common Questions
Can you have a pet if you’re allergic?
Your body is unique. If you have pet allergies, certain breeds of furry pets may cause minor symptoms or no symptoms. Experts can’t predict which breeds will be the least irritating.
You may have more luck with a pet that doesn’t have fur or feathers. These animals are the least likely to cause pet allergies. These include:
Amphibians (frogs, salamanders, toads)
Fish
Reptiles (lizards, snakes, turtles)
Are there hypoallergenic pets?
No. Some people believe that certain breeds of furry pets won’t cause allergic reactions (hypoallergenic) because they shed less fur. But
studies
show that there aren’t any hypoallergenic furry animals. Pet allergens are more than fur alone.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Pets make a lot of people feel good. They can provide unconditional love, companionship and structure to your life. But pet allergies can be a major source of frustration, no matter how much you care for your fur baby. Some extra steps, like running a HEPA filter and regularly vacuuming, can make a big difference. It’s also a good idea to talk to a healthcare provider. They can recommend medications that help reduce your symptoms so you can increase your cuddles.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergies can wreak havoc on your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our team of experts can help create a treatment plan that’ll help you breathe easier.
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment