Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs (DMARDs)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs (DMARDS)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs (DMARDS)
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDS) are medications that treat autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis. Your provider will help you find the best combination of DMARDS and other medications to manage symptoms like pain and inflammation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What are DMARDS?
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are prescription medications that calm down your
immune system
when it’s overly active. Healthcare providers sometimes call DMARDS antirheumatic drugs or disease-modifying drugs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you have an
autoimmune disease
, your immune system attacks your body instead of protecting it. DMARDS are a type of
immunosuppressant
that regulates your immune system and stops it from damaging tissue in your body.
DMARDS can:
Decrease
inflammation
Relieve pain
Slow down how quickly some conditions spread (or become more severe)
Reduce or prevent how much a condition damages your
bones
and joints
Help maintain how well you can use your
joints
(preserve your joint function)
Which conditions do DMARDS treat?
Healthcare providers use DMARDS to manage several autoimmune conditions that cause inflammation, including:
Rheumatoid arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Psoriatic arthritis
Lupus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Scleroderma
Multiple sclerosis
Sjögren’s syndrome
Myositis
Rheumatoid vasculitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn’s disease
It’s less common, but you may need a DMARD to treat certain kinds of
cancer
. Providers also sometimes use them to manage
uveitis
that’s not from an infection and hasn’t gotten better after other treatments.
What are the types of DMARDS?
There are two main groups of DMARDs — traditional DMARDS and biologics.
Traditional DMARDS
Traditional DMARDS broadly target your whole immune system. Your provider may prescribe one of these medications before trying biologics because they usually cause fewer side effects. Traditional DMARDS are usually pills you take by mouth (orally).
Advertisement
Examples of traditional DMARDS include:
Azathioprine
Hydroxychloroquine
Leflunomide
Methotrexate
Sulfasalazine
Biologics
Biologics
are made of proteins that target a specific set of immune system cells. They’re usually more effective than traditional DMARDS, but are stronger and can have a higher risk of causing side effects.
Your provider may prescribe a biologic if you’ve tried traditional DMARDs and they didn’t work well. You’ll probably take biologics via an intravenous (IV) infusion — your provider will inject the medication into one of your
veins
. You may also use an injection you give yourself under your skin (a subcutaneous self-injection). Your provider will show you how to give yourself an injection correctly and safely.
There are several subcategories of biologics. They each target different parts of your immune system. Some biologic DMARDs include:
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors
Interleukin inhibitors
T-cell
inhibitors
B-cell
inhibitors
Janus kinase inhibitors (medications that aren’t technically biologics but work in a similar way — they target a specific set of immune cells)
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of taking DMARDS?
DMARDS can effectively treat lots of different conditions. They can help you manage symptoms like pain and inflammation that make it hard to move or do all your usual activities. They can also slow down and prevent damage inside your body that you might not be able to see or feel.
DMARDS are very flexible. They can work in lots of combinations (including with other medications). For example, your provider may prescribe you:
A single traditional DMARD
A single traditional DMARD combined with a
corticosteroid
, or other medications
Two or more traditional DMARDs
A traditional DMARD alongside a biologic
Your provider will work with you to find the right DMARD or combination of medications that work the best and have the fewest side effects.
Do DMARDS have side effects?
Which side effects you might experience will depend on which type of DMARD you need.
Both types of DMARDS share some potential side effects, including:
An increased risk of infections (biologics have a higher risk of this)
Low white blood cell count
(leukopenia)
Low red blood cell count (
anemia
)
Low platelet count (
thrombocytopenia
)
Elevated liver enzymes
Traditional DMARD side effects can also include:
Loss of appetite
Nausea
and
vomiting
Diarrhea
Abdominal pain
Skin rash
Other side effects of biologic DMARDS can include:
Reactivation of chronic (long-term) infections you have, including
tuberculosis
,
herpes
or
hepatitis
Elevated
cholesterol
Increased risk of
blood clots
Infusion or injection site reactions
Talk to your provider about the risk of experiencing side effects before you start DMARDS. They’ll help you understand what to watch out for.
Advertisement
Recovery and Outlook
How quickly do DMARDS work?
It usually takes at least a few weeks for DMARDS to start regulating your immune system and managing symptoms. You won’t get immediate pain or inflammation relief when you first take them. Traditional DMARDs can take a month or more to start working. Biologics usually begin to work after several weeks.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you how often you’ll need follow-up appointments after you start or change DMARDS. You might need some regular tests, including:
Blood tests
to make sure the medications are working and to check for signs of side effects
Tests to monitor for infections (especially if you have a chronic infection)
Imaging tests like
X-rays
to monitor changes in your joints
Talk to your provider if you notice any new or more severe side effects. Tell them if it feels like you’re experiencing symptoms or side effects more often, or if it feels like your medication isn’t working as well as it used to.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
DMARDS can be a great option to help you relieve symptoms and manage an autoimmune condition. They can help you get back to feeling like yourself.
But they may seem overwhelming at first. There are lots of different kinds, subtypes and complicated names and abbreviations. Your provider will help you navigate all the jargon and find the right combination of medications. Don’t hesitate to ask them questions about your DMARDS, potential side effects or the condition you have.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/01/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment