Fournier’s Gangrene: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Fournier’s Gangrene
Advertisement
Advertisement
Fournier’s Gangrene
Fournier’s gangrene is a type of flesh-eating disease that affects your genitals or perineum. You’re more likely to get it if you have a penis and scrotum. Symptoms include discoloration, swelling and tenderness. If you have symptoms, get to the emergency room as soon as possible for treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Fournier’s Gangrene?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Fournier’s Gangrene?
Early symptoms of Fournier’s gangrene include discolored skin and genital swelling. Go to the ER if you have these symptoms.
Fournier’s gangrene (FOR-nee-ayz GANG-green) is a rare, life-threatening
bacterial infection
of your genitals or surrounding genital areas. It’s a type of
necrotizing fasciitis
(flesh-eating disease) that worsens quickly and requires emergency care. Necrotizing fasciitis destroys your soft tissues.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When
bacteria
enter your genitals or genital area, they infect your
hypodermis
(subcutaneous tissue, the deepest layer of your
skin
) and muscle
fascia
.
There are
arteries
within your subcutaneous tissue and muscle fascia. Your pudendal artery takes blood to your:
Sex organs (in
females
, your
ovaries
,
fallopian tubes
,
uterus
,
cervix
and
vagina
, and in males, your
prostate
,
scrotum
(scrotal skin)
testicles
and
penis
)
The skin of your
perineum
(perineal skin)
When bacteria enter the subcutaneous tissue and muscle fascia, they kill the branches of your pudendal artery. When the pudendal arterial tree dies, the bacteria spread further. They travel to the muscles and skin of your genitals and perineum and destroy arteries there, too. From there, they can go through the fascia to other areas of your body, such as your thighs, abdomen and chest.
It’s important to pay attention to the early symptoms of Fournier’s gangrene. By the time the bacteria affect the outer layer of your skin, they have already destroyed the arteries in your subcutaneous tissue and muscle fascia. Fournier’s gangrene gets worse (progresses) quickly. It’s so dangerous that just a few hours can mean the difference between life and death.
Advertisement
How common is Fournier’s gangrene?
Fournier’s gangrene is rare. In the U.S., experts estimate that fewer than 2 out of 100,000
males
will get Fournier’s gangrene. It’s even less common in females and children.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Fournier’s gangrene
Early symptoms of Fournier’s gangrene affect your genitals and perineum. They include:
Discoloration (red, purple, brown, blue-gray or black)
Tenderness
Swelling
If you have diabetes, your
blood glucose levels
might be high, even if you take your
insulin
as prescribed by a healthcare provider.
You might have other symptoms, as well, including:
Altered mental status
Dehydration
Fever
Chills
Low energy (
lethargy
)
Nausea and vomiting
Moderate to severe pain around your abdomen
A foul or putrid smell
Late-stage Fournier’s gangrene symptoms include:
Blood clots
Septic shock
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
What does Fournier’s gangrene feel like?
Fournier’s gangrene pain develops suddenly in your genitals and/or perineum. The pain can range from mild to severe.
What does Fournier’s gangrene look like?
If you have Fournier’s gangrene, your affected skin will change color. It may look red, purple, brown, blue-gray or black.
How does someone get Fournier’s gangrene?
Bacteria can enter your genital or
rectal
areas of your body in several ways. Some examples include:
Abscess
Anal fistula
Diverticulitis
Bladder infection
Urinary tract infection
(UTI)
Rectal cancer
Genital ulcer
Scratch or burn, which may occur during sexual intercourse
Genital piercing
Insect bite or sting
Which bacteria can cause Fournier’s gangrene?
Anaerobic bacteria or aerobic bacteria can cause Fornier’s gangrene. Anaerobic bacteria can’t live or grow in environments that contain oxygen. Aerobic bacteria can live and grow when oxygen is present.
The most common aerobic bacteria that can cause Fournier’s gangrene include:
Escherichia coli
(E.
coli
)
Klebsiella
Proteus
Staphylococcus
Streptococcus
The most common anaerobic bacteria that can cause Fournier’s gangrene include:
Bacteroides
Clostridium
Peptostreptococcus
Risk factors
Anyone at any age can get Fournier’s gangrene. But males are 10 times more likely to get it than females.
You’re at a higher risk of developing Fournier’s gangrene if you have any of the following conditions:
Diabetes
Cardiovascular diseases
Cirrhosis of the liver
HIV
High blood pressure (
hypertension
)
Kidney failure
Liver failure
Substance use disorders
, including
alcohol use disorder
Unmanaged
diabetes
Urethral stricture
You’re also at a higher risk of Fournier’s gangrene if:
You’re 50 or older
You have a
body mass index
(BMI) greater than 30 (have
obesity
)
You
smoke
or use other tobacco products
You’re receiving
chemotherapy
You’re taking
anabolic steroids
You had some sort of trauma to the area
Your
immune system
response is slow (immunosuppression)
Advertisement
Complications of Fournier’s gangrene
Fournier’s gangrene complications may include:
Kidney failure
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS)
Vascular occlusion
Needing to use a
colostomy
bag
Heart failure
Arrhythmia
The absence of normal muscle contractions in your intestines (ileus)
Sexual dysfunction
Stroke
UTIs
Fournier’s gangrene may also cause
death
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Fournier’s gangrene
A healthcare provider will review your medical history, ask about your symptoms and examine your skin. If there’s time, they’ll likely order imaging tests.
Which tests will be done to diagnose Fournier’s gangrene?
Often, there’s no time for tests. You may need immediate surgery if Fournier’s gangrene progresses to a dangerous point. But if there’s time, a healthcare provider may order the following imaging tests:
CT scan
. They’ll look for gases and fluids in your body to help identify the source of the infection.
Ultrasound
. An ultrasound can help diagnose Fournier’s gangrene or another condition that has similar symptoms, such as
epididymitis
or
orchitis
. It also checks for air in your soft tissues.
X-ray
. This can help determine if and where air in your soft tissues has spread.
Blood tests
. Blood tests, including a
complete blood count
(CBC), look for
elevated white blood cell count
,
electrolyte
abnormalities, septic shock and
arterial blood gas
.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the best treatment for Fournier’s gangrene?
Surgery is the best treatment for Fournier’s gangrene. It’s often necessary to skip the diagnosis process and immediately surgically remove the damaged tissues (debridement). This often leaves a large wound. Many people with Fournier’s gangrene need many surgeries to remove dead tissue. They also need daily or twice-daily dressing changes on the wound. You may also need:
A temporary colostomy to divert poop away from the wound
A
suprapubic catheter
to divert pee away from your penis
After surgery, healthcare providers will likely prescribe
antibiotics
that target many different types of bacteria (broad-spectrum antibiotics). If you also have sepsis, you’ll receive
anticoagulants
(blood thinners) to reduce your risk of developing blood clots.
After the surgeon removes the damaged tissues, you’ll likely need
reconstructive surgery
to help restore the appearance and function of your affected genital tissues. This happens after providers treat the infection and the wound is clean.
Finally, you may need
hyperbaric oxygen therapy
(HBOT). During HBOT, you enter a pressured chamber that fills with 100% oxygen. Extra air pressure helps your body absorb more oxygen. The oxygen helps:
Your damaged tissues heal
Reduce blood vessel damage
Prevent bacteria from growing
Advertisement
Will a surgeon have to remove my genitals?
Rarely, a surgeon will have to remove your entire penis, scrotum or labia.
Are there any at-home treatments for Fournier’s gangrene?
No, there aren’t any at-home treatments for Fournier’s gangrene. If you have Fournier’s gangrene symptoms, go to the emergency room. You need surgery and antibiotics as soon as possible.
Recovery time
Your body is unique, and how long it takes you to recover from Fournier’s gangrene may be different from others. You may be in the hospital from three to six weeks. A healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room if:
Your genitals or perineum are discolored (red, purple, brown, blue-gray or black), tender or swollen
You have a fever of at least 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius)
You feel generally unwell
The sooner you get treatment, the greater chance you have of recovering.
You may also wish to ask a healthcare provider the following questions:
How did I get this infection?
How far has the infection spread?
Do I need emergency surgery?
What treatments will I need after surgery?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Fournier’s gangrene?
Fournier’s gangrene is life-threatening. Your outlook depends on many factors, including how quickly you see a healthcare provider and the amount of dead or infected tissue. Fournier’s gangrene affects more and more tissue the longer you wait to get care. It’s important to get treatment right away to prevent serious and fatal complications.
When can I go back to work or school?
Most people must stay in a hospital for at least three weeks to treat Fournier’s gangrene. You’ll likely need to spend even more time at home to recover. A healthcare provider will give you a better idea of when you can expect to return to work or school. Recovery can be a long process.
Prevention
Can Fournier’s gangrene be prevented?
Staying healthy and managing other medical problems, like diabetes or substance use disorders, are the best ways to prevent Fournier’s gangrene. You can help reduce your risk of bad complications by regularly checking your genitals for signs of infection, including discoloration, swelling and tenderness.
You may also be able to reduce your risk by:
Keeping your genitals and perineum clean
Using a clean, sharp razor if you shave in the area to help prevent cuts
Caring for any wounds in the area
Maintaining a healthy weight for you
Stopping smoking
or using other tobacco products
Improving your blood flow may also help reduce your risk. You can help improve your blood flow by:
Eating a
heart-healthy diet
low in saturated fat and cholesterol
Participating in regular physical activity
Additional Common Questions
Is Fournier’s gangrene caused by poor hygiene?
Yes, it’s possible that your hygiene habits can increase your risk of Fournier’s gangrene. Not regularly and thoroughly cleaning your genitals and the surrounding area with soap and clean water can increase your chances of developing Fournier’s gangrene.
Which bug causes Fournier’s gangrene?
In rare cases, insect (bug) bites or stings can cause Fournier’s gangrene. Ant bites were responsible for one reported case. Healthcare providers have reported that spider and tick bites are responsible for causing gangrene in other parts of your body.
Which drugs cause Fournier’s gangrene?
You have a higher chance of getting Fournier’s gangrene if you take sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors to manage Type 2 diabetes. Examples of these inhibitors include:
Canagliflozin
Dapagliflozin
Empagliflozin
Ertugliflozin
It’s important to remember that Fournier’s gangrene is rare. Very few people who have diabetes get it.
Is Fournier’s gangrene an STI?
No, Fournier’s gangrene isn’t a
sexually transmitted infection
(STI). You won’t get this infection from anyone else, and they won’t get it from you.
Is Fournier’s gangrene an emergency?
Yes, Fournier’s gangrene is an emergency. Fournier’s gangrene is
fatal
in just under 30% of people who have it. Go to the emergency room as quickly as possible if you have symptoms of Fournier’s gangrene.
Go to the emergency room if:
Your genitals or perineum are discolored (red, purple, brown, blue-gray or black), tender or swollen
You have a fever of at least 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius)
You feel generally unwell
What is the meaning of Fournier’s gangrene?
The condition got its name from Jean Alfred Fournier, a French physician who first identified it.
Gangrene
is a condition that causes your tissues to die because of a bacterial infection.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Looking at Fournier’s gangrene symptoms and its treatments would frighten anyone. But remember — it’s a very rare type of necrotizing fasciitis. Fewer than 2 out of every 100,000 males get it, and it’s even less common in females. You can help reduce your chances of developing Fournier’s gangrene by regularly checking for symptoms and keeping the area clean. If you have any symptoms, make sure to have a healthcare provider check you out right away.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment