Breast Anatomy: Milk Ducts, Tissue, Conditions & Physiology
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Breast Anatomy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Breast Anatomy
The breast anatomy of males and females is slightly different. Female breasts have milk ducts and glandular tissue that aid breastfeeding. Male and female breast nipples have many nerves that enhance sexual arousal. All sexes can get breast cancer. Females are more prone to benign (noncancerous) breast disease.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Anatomy of female breast.
What are breasts?
Breasts are part of the female and male sexual anatomy. For
females
, breasts are both functional (for
breastfeeding
) and sexual (bringing pleasure). For males, there isn’t a physiological function. However, their breasts can still provide sexual pleasure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The visible parts of your breast anatomy include your
nipples
and areolas. Most people are born with two breasts.
What are the three layers of a woman’s breast?
Several kinds of tissue form the female breasts. Muscles connect your breasts to your ribs. The three different types of breast tissue include:
Glandular
. Also called lobules, glandular tissue produces milk for
lactation
.
Connective or fibrous
. This tissue holds glandular and fatty breast tissue in place.
Fatty
. This tissue fills in the areas between glandular and connective tissue and determines your breast size.
Males have gynecomastia glandular tissue and fatty tissue. Their glandular tissue contains underdeveloped milk ducts.
What is the anatomy of the breasts?
There are many different parts to female breast anatomy, including:
Adipose tissue
.
Your breast is mainly made up of fatty tissue (adipose tissue). It extends from your collarbone to your armpit and across your ribcage.
Lobes
. Each breast has between 15 to 20 lobes, or sections. These lobes surround your nipple like spokes on a wheel.
Glandular tissue (lobules)
. These small sections of tissue found inside lobes have tiny bulblike glands at the end that produce milk.
Milk (mammary) ducts
. These small tubes, or ducts, carry milk from glandular tissue (lobules) to your nipples.
Nipples
. The nipple is in the center of your areola. Each nipple has about nine milk ducts, as well as hundreds of nerves.
Areolae
. The areola is the circular darker-colored area of skin surrounding your nipple. Areolae have glands called Montgomery’s glands that secrete a lubricating oil. This oil protects your nipple and skin from chafing during breastfeeding.
Blood vessels
.
Blood vessels
circulate blood throughout your breasts, chest and body.
Lymph vessels
. Part of your
lymphatic system
, these vessels transport lymph, a fluid that helps your body’s immune system fight infection. Lymph vessels connect to
lymph nodes
, which are found under your armpits, in your chest and in other places.
Lymph nodes
.
Small organs that help fight infection.
Nerves
. Nipples have hundreds of nerve endings, which makes them extremely sensitive to touch.
Advertisement
What is the anatomy of a male breast?
Males have breasts, too. During puberty, the hormone
testosterone
usually stops breasts from developing. On the outside, there are nipples and areolae. Internally, they have undeveloped milk ducts and no glandular tissue. Male breast problems can include
gynecomastia
, a benign condition that causes the breasts to enlarge, and very rarely,
breast cancer
.
What are the physiological functions of the breast?
Female hormones — namely, estrogen, progesterone and prolactin — play a key role in breast development and function. The main role of the breasts is to produce breast milk.
Estrogen
stretches milk ducts and helps them create side branches to carry more milk.
Prolactin
promotes the production of progesterone and prepares glands for milk production.
Progesterone
increases the number and size of lobules in preparation for breastfeeding. This hormone also enlarges blood vessels and breast cells after
ovulation
.
Oxytocin
helps release (or eject) breast milk.
What conditions and disorders affect breast anatomy?
Breast cancer
is the number one threat to breast health. Approximately 1 in 13 females will receive a breast cancer diagnosis in their lifetime. Other conditions that affect breast health include:
Benign (noncancerous) breast disease
Breast cysts
Breast lumps
Breast pain (mastalgia)
Breast rash
Fibrocystic breast changes
(noncancerous lumps and tenderness)
Mammary duct ectasia
(swollen milk ducts)
Mastitis (breast infection)
Nipple discharge
What are dense breasts?
Your
mammogram
report may note that you have
dense breasts
. Dense breasts have more glandular and fibrous tissue and less fatty tissue. Dense breast tissue and tumors both look white on mammograms, making it more difficult to detect breast cancer. Up to half of females between the ages of 40 and 74 have dense breasts. The condition isn’t related to breast size, look or feel. If you have very dense breasts, you have a slightly higher risk of breast cancer. Talk to your healthcare provider about your risk for breast cancer based on your breast density.
How can I keep my breasts healthy?
As breast cancer is a top concern, talk to a healthcare provider about when and
how often to get mammograms
. Recommendations vary depending on risk factors, such as family or personal health history.
Breast self-exams
can help you get familiar with how your breasts look and feel so you’re more likely to notice changes in your breasts.
What part of the breast is most sensitive?
Your nipples contain hundreds of nerve endings. Generally, a female breast is more sensitive to stimulation due to hormones. However, males can also experience pleasure from the nerve endings in their nipples.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You should call a healthcare provider if you experience:
Newly discovered lump in your breast
Nipple discharge
Breast pain
Changes in the way your breast or skin looks or feels
Nipple that suddenly turns inward (
inverted nipple
)
Breast rash
Advertisement
If anyone in your biological family has received a breast cancer or
ovarian cancer
diagnosis before age 50, talk to a healthcare provider about
genetic testing
or earlier mammogram screenings.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Female breasts can produce milk for breastfeeding and serve as an erogenous (pleasure) zone. Males also have breasts, but they don’t serve the same purpose. The tissues in your breasts can become cancerous. Regular mammograms, or breast screenings, can help detect cancer early when it’s most treatable. Call your healthcare provider anytime you notice a change in the way your breasts look or feel.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/05/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us