Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD): What It Is & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD)
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a condition that causes skeletal and heart muscle weakness that quickly gets worse with time. Symptoms usually begin by age 6. The disease mainly affects boys. There currently isn’t a cure. Treatment involves managing symptoms and improving quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy?
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a progressive condition that causes muscles to get weaker over time. It mainly affects the muscles used for movement, breathing and
heart
function.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It’s inherited and it typically affects
males
. Symptoms usually start in early childhood and slowly get worse. You might notice developmental delays, toe walking or muscle weakness in your child as they grow.
This disease
affects
about 1 in every 3,600 male infants. It’s the most common form of
muscular dystrophy
and the leading type of severe inherited muscle disorder (
myopathies
).
While there’s no cure, and it will shorten life expectancy, treatments are available to slow its progression and help your child manage symptoms.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Duchenne muscular dystrophy may start during infancy but become more noticeable during early childhood.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy symptoms
DMD symptoms worsen over time and may include:
Muscle weakness
Stiff joints
Developmental delay, like saying their first words and sitting up
Fatigue
Loss of muscle bulk
Muscle weakness can affect how your child walks and moves. You might notice these signs:
Difficulty climbing stairs, running or jumping
Frequent falls
Increase in calf muscle size
Toe walking
Using their arms to push themselves up from the ground
Waddling
Symptoms of DMD usually appear between the ages of 2 and 4. They can start as early as infancy, but you might not notice them until later in childhood.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy causes
A genetic variant causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy. This gene tells their body how to make a protein called dystrophin. Dystrophin keeps muscles strong and protects them when they move.
Advertisement
If your child has this condition, their body makes little or no dystrophin. Without it, their muscles become weak and start to break down. Over time, muscle cells
die
, and their body can’t replace them. Instead, the empty spaces fill with fat and scar tissue. This makes movement even harder.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy inheritance
DMD is usually passed down through families. It’s X-linked
recessive
. Here’s how that works.
The gene that causes it is on the X chromosome. This is one of the two sex chromosomes:
Boys have one X and one Y chromosome (X comes from mom, Y comes from dad).
Girls have two X chromosomes (one X from each parent).
As boys only have one X chromosome, if that X chromosome has the gene change that causes DMD, they’ll have the disease. This is because they have no backup copy on another X chromosome to make up for it. Girls, on the other hand, have a backup copy on their other X chromosome and typically won’t be affected.
Girls either don’t have symptoms or they’re very mild. Girls may become carriers. Carriers inherit the gene change but don’t have symptoms. They may pass the gene on to their future children.
However, in
about
3 out of 10 cases, the gene change happens randomly. This means it wasn't passed down and there wasn’t a family history. There’s no way to prevent Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Duchenne muscular dystrophy
If your child shows signs, see their pediatrician. Their provider will do a physical, neurological and muscle exam. They’ll also ask about your child’s symptoms and medical history.
If they think it’s DMD, their provider may refer you to a pediatric neurologist or order these tests to confirm a diagnosis:
Creatine kinase (CK) blood test
: High CK levels suggest muscle damage. In DMD, levels can be 10 to 20 times above normal by age 2.
Genetic test
: This confirms the condition by checking for missing or faulty dystrophin genes.
Muscle biopsy
: A small muscle sample (usually from their thigh or calf) helps their provider look for DMD-related changes.
Electrocardiogram
(EKG)
: This test checks your child’s heart function, as this disease often affects the heart.
Management and Treatment
How is Duchenne muscular dystrophy treated?
There’s currently no cure for DMD. The main goal of treatment is to manage symptoms and slow progression. Supportive therapies may include:
Steroid medications
:
Prednisone
or
deflazacort
may slow muscle damage and help maintain strength and independent movement, breathing and heart function.
Steroid alternatives
: Vamorolone helps fight inflammation in the muscles and heart cells, which may help protect them from damage. This helps maintain mobility and strength longer.
Gene-based therapy
: Medications like
eteplirsen
, delandistrogene, golodirsen, casimersen and viltolarsen help their body produce a shorter but functional form of dystrophin. Some of these only work for certain types of variants that cause DMD.
HDAC inhibitor
: Givinostat is a medication that helps turn on genes that repair and grow muscles and reduce fibrosis (scar tissue). This may slow muscle function decline.
Heart care
:
ACE inhibitors
or
beta-blockers
may protect their heart. Regular check-ups and heart imaging usually begin around age 6.
Physical therapy
: Stretching and exercises can prevent joint and muscle issues.
Therapists
may also recommend braces, splints or mobility aids.
Nutrition
: Calcium and vitamin D supplements support bone health. A
nutritionist
can help ensure balanced meals throughout the day.
Exercise
: Light activities like swimming or supervised play keep muscles active. Your provider can guide you on what’s safe.
Breathing support
: Devices like a
BiPAP
or
ventilator
may help over time with breathing, especially during sleep.
Advertisement
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
If your child has this condition, they’ll need regular visits with their care team to manage treatment and track symptoms. You’ll get to know their providers well, as ongoing care is essential. As your child grows and their symptoms change, their treatment plan may need to adjust, too.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has Duchenne muscular dystrophy?
This disease is progressive despite treatment. That means it gets worse over time. The outlook is poor, as it shortens your child’s
lifespan
.
You can expect that your child will need to use a wheelchair by their 12th birthday. But this loss of mobility shouldn’t take away from their ability to play and enjoy childhood moments.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy life expectancy
People with this condition typically live into early adulthood, though life expectancy varies. Advances in treatment and supportive care have helped many live longer than once expected.
Most face complications related to their heart or breathing. In some cases, issues like
pneumonia
or airway blockages can also become serious.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that your child has Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is incredibly difficult. It’s a life-changing diagnosis, and it’s OK to feel overwhelmed.
While DMD will bring challenges, it doesn’t take away their ability to be a kid. They can still splash in the pool, play with friends and tell silly jokes. They’ll grow, learn and find their own way to thrive. And you’ll be right beside them.
Advertisement
As you care for your child, remember to care for yourself, too. Talking with a mental health professional or connecting with others through a support group can make a difference. If you have any questions about your child’s condition or how to get yourself support, talk to a provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment