When Do Kids Start Having Nightmares?
Search
Advertisement
Advertisement
December 14, 2022
/
Living Healthy
/
Children's Health
Is Your Kid Having Nightmares? Who Has Them and How You Can Help
Nightmares in children are common and more likely when your child is overtired or stressed
You probably know well that feeling of waking up in a
cold sweat
. You know you’re not really in danger, but you also know the nightmare you’re waking from was a real doozy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But when kids have nightmares, the feeling that they’re still in trouble can seem all too real. They yell. They kick and squirm. And that mid-sleep intrusion can keep them (and you) from getting back to sleep anytime soon. Further complicating things, fear of future nightmares can make your child nervous about going to sleep the next night … and the next night … and so on.
“Nightmares in children can cause a cycle of sleeplessness,” says pediatric psychologist Catrina Litzenburg, PhD. “Nightmares can lead to a
fear of the dark
or a fear of sleeping. That fear can mean they get less sleep. But being overtired can lead to nightmares. It’s a vicious circle.”
It’s normal for kids to have nightmares. Up to half of all children have them. But why? And how can you help your child overcome them?
We ask Dr. Litzenburg to share some advice for helping your child when their nightmares become … well, nightmarish.
Alaina Tiani, PhD, explains what causes nightmares.
When do nightmares start?
According to the
Pediatric Sleep Council
, researchers don’t think that babies have nightmares. It’s common for infants and toddlers to cry out when they wake during the night, but that doesn’t necessarily mean they’re having a nightmare.
But it’s a tough area to study. Babies and younger toddlers can’t readily express their fears and dreams, so we can’t know for sure what they’re experiencing in their sleep.
Advertisement
“It’s thought that very young kids, younger than 4 or so, generally don’t have fears at nighttime because they don’t developmentally know that there might be things to be afraid of,” Dr. Litzenburg explains. “We start to see more fear and nightmares in preschoolers. At that age, they’re becoming more creative thinkers, and they have the verbal skills to tell us what they are feeling and dreaming about.”
Younger kids, particularly those under the age of 7 or so, may experience sleep terrors more readily than nightmares. Here’s how you can tell the difference.
Nightmares vs. sleep terrors
Nightmares happen during
REM sleep
. It’s a lighter phase of sleep. When your child has a nightmare, they wake up startled, confused and scared. They may cry out and be able to tell you about their nightmare.
Night terrors (or sleep terrors)
typically occur during the deepest stage of non-REM sleep (also called “slow-wave sleep”). When your child has a sleep terror, they may yell or scream but they’re not actually awake. They won’t readily respond to your comforting words or hugs, and they won’t remember the episode in the morning.
“Younger children have more slow-wave sleep compared with adolescents and adults,” Dr. Litzenburg says. “There’s so much happening as their body is growing, they need to spend more time in that deep sleep pattern to encourage their healthy development and growth.”
Why kids have nightmares
We tend to think of sleep as a time when not much is happening. But looks can be deceiving.
When your kid nods off, their brain is working hard to process the day’s events and their emotions. Sleep also plays a role in learning and memory consolidation. According to the National Institutes of Health,
recent research
suggests sleep also plays a “housekeeping role.” That is, while you sleep, your brain clears away toxins that build up during the day.
And while your child’s brain is busy working its night shift, they
dream a little dream
. But on some nights, those dreams can turn dark, and the result is the stuff of nightmares.
Nightmares can be more common if your child is experiencing:
Anxiety.
Fear.
Sleep deprivation (
too little sleep
or poor quality of sleep).
Stress.
Trauma.
Nightmares in kids are common. But the content of those dreams is likely to vary as your children age.
“Preschoolers can have big imaginations, and they often can’t tell what’s real from what’s not, so often their nightmares are going to be things like being chased by imaginary creatures and that kind of thing,” Dr. Litzenburg explains. “As they grow up, your child’s nightmares are probably going to be more closely related to the stressors in their lives. Things like negative experiences at school or troubles with friends.”
Advertisement
How to help prevent nightmares
An occasional nightmare can just be a blip on your child’s nocturnal radar. But recurring nightmares or nightmares that lead to
sleep anxiety
can wreak havoc on your children’s sleep needs — and yours, too.
Dr. Litzenburg suggests these four ways to help your child overcome their nightmares:
1. Remind them of what’s real and what isn’t
Toddlers and younger children especially can have a hard time understanding what’s real and what’s not. Case in point: Just try explaining to a preschooler why Elsa can make a snowman out of thin air and they can’t. (Go on. We dare you.)
It’s the same thing with nightmares. They can feel so alarmingly real that little ones can have a hard time separating what they experienced in their sleep from what’s actually happening.
“Nightmares can feel so vivid and real, they can be really scary,” Dr. Litzenburg says. “It can help to remind your child during the day that dreams aren’t real. You can say things like, ‘Nightmares can be really scary, but it’s not actually happening. You’re safe in your bed and in your room.’”
Another helpful tactic can be exploring your kid’s room with them and asking what they see. You can show them the tricks that their eyes can play on them, like, “See, it’s not a witch, it’s just your coat hanging from a chair.” Or, “See the shadows that are moving on your wall? Those aren’t bad guys creeping into the house, they’re the headlights from the cars driving by.”
Advertisement
Older children can take a more active role in separating fact from fiction. For children who can write, Dr. Litzenburg suggests they make notecards that they leave out in places they’ll see. On the cards, they can write down reminders like, “Nightmares aren’t real,” or “I am safe in my bed.”
2. Make sleep a priority
Your child is more likely to have nightmares when they’re going on too little sleep.
“Nightmares are a form of
parasomnia
(sleep disruption), so they can be associated with poor sleep quality, or not getting enough sleep,” Dr. Litzenburg states.
Keep your kids to a regular bedtime schedule, based on the recommendations for
how much sleep children need
. (Check out these
kids’ sleep tips
for bedtime routines, strategies to keep kids in bed and more.)
3. Encourage independence
When your child wakes up from a nightmare, or is delaying bedtime (again!) with protests that they’re scared to go to sleep, it can be easy to give in and bring them in your bed with you. While bed-sharing is a preference for some families, if it’s your intention for your child to sleep independently, you’ll want to stand firm on that.
“Even if you need to stay in your child’s room for a bit to help them relax and sleep, that’s OK,” Dr. Litzenburg advises. “When you take the child out of their room and let them sleep with you, though, it can reinforce the idea in their mind that their room somehow isn’t safe, which may not be the message you’re trying to send.”
Advertisement
4. Offer comfort items
If your kid is intent that they neeeeeeeeed youuuuuuuu to stay with them, Dr. Litzenburg suggests offering an intermediary.
“Having a comfort item that is special to them in their bed can help them develop a sleep onset association — your child can associate the thing with sleep,” she says. “It also helps them to be more independent because they can get comfort from their special item without needing a person.”
Sleep association items can be anything that your child can keep in bed that provides them comfort. Common ones are blankets and stuffed animals. Dr. Litzenburg says it can also be something like a parent’s shirt or pillowcase. Something that smells like a person they love can be a source of comfort for a child.
When should I worry about my child’s nightmares?
If nightmares are affecting your child’s school success or their ability to interact with friends or family, Dr. Litzenburg says it’s probably time to talk with their pediatrician or another healthcare provider about strategies to support them.
And remember, as a parent or primary caregiver, you know your child and their needs better than just about anyone. If you’re worried about your child’s nightmares and the effects that nightmares are having on their sleep and healthy development, don’t hesitate to contact a healthcare provider for support.
Learn more about our
editorial process
.
Advertisement
Related Articles
October 1, 2025
/
Children's Health
When and How To Transition to a Toddler Bed
Your child may be ready if they’ve outgrown their crib or keep escaping it, or if they seem mature enough to make the switch
June 20, 2025
/
Children's Health
Baby Grunting in Their Sleep? Panting? Snoring? Here’s Why
Babies can be noisy little sleepers! Blame small nasal passages and short sleep stages
February 13, 2025
/
Children's Health
Co-Sleeping With Your Baby: How To Be Safe
Experts recommend having infants sleep in your bedroom but not in your bed
January 31, 2025
/
Children's Health
What Is the Cry-It-Out Method for Babies?
This sleep training method can bring quick results, but it may be stressful for parents
January 31, 2025
/
Children's Health
How To Help Your Child With a Sleep Disorder
Help children get their needed rest by teaching good sleep hygiene, using mindfulness techniques and creating a calming environment
January 29, 2025
/
Parenting
What Is the ‘Pick Up, Put Down’ Method of Sleep Training for Babies?
This technique involves picking up your baby to soothe them if they fuss or cry, but then, returning them to their crib before they fall asleep
January 27, 2025
/
Children's Health
What Is the Ferber Method of Sleep Training Your Baby?
Also known as graduated extinction, ‘Ferberizing’ teaches your child to self-soothe and fall asleep on their own
January 24, 2025
/
Children's Health
How To Do the Chair Method of Sleep Training for Babies
This technique can initially take a lot of time and patience, but it can also comfort your child as they learn to fall asleep on their own
Trending Topics
Sleep
Breathing Problems? Try These Sleep Positions
If you’re feeling short of breath, sleep can be tough — propping yourself up or sleeping on your side may help
Mental Health
What Is Anxious Attachment Style — and Do You Have It?
If you fear the unknown or find yourself needing reassurance often, you may identify with this attachment style
Nutrition
Are Prebiotic Sodas Good for You?
If you’re looking to boost your gut health, it’s better to get fiber from whole foods
Health Categories to Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Ad
Rendered:
Fri Oct 31 2025 11:36:05 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)