Sleep-Related Eating Disorders (SRED): Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Sleep-Related Eating Disorders
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sleep-Related Eating Disorders
Sleep-related eating disorder (SRED) causes you to eat while you’re asleep. You often have little or no memory of eating the next day. SRED tends to occur with other sleep disorders. Some medications, including sedatives for insomnia, can cause SRED. Treatment options are available.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parasomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a sleep-related eating disorder?
Sleep-related eating disorder (SRED) is a type of
parasomnia
(abnormal behavior that happens during
sleep
). It causes you to prepare and eat food while you’re sleeping. When you wake up, you have little or no memory of what you did.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You probably found out that you’ve been sleep eating from someone who shares your living space. Or you woke up to dirty plates and silverware in the kitchen sink or peanut butter and jelly smeared all over the countertops. It’s common to feel confused about what happened at night, especially as you don’t remember it. It can seem like it was just a dream.
A healthcare provider can confirm that you’re not dreaming. In fact, sleep eating might be a side effect of certain medications or it could happen with other sleep disorders. You may hear your healthcare provider refer to sleep eating as a nocturnal sleep-related eating disorder (NS-RED).
It’s important to talk to a provider about sleep eating because it can be dangerous. It can lead to injuries like
burns
and cuts. You may even eat non-food substances that could be harmful or poisonous.
Treatment is available to address the cause. Your provider may also recommend lifestyle changes to improve your sleep.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a sleep-related eating disorder?
The symptoms of a sleep eating episode include:
Sleep eating
: You eat or drink a lot in a short amount of time (binge) while you’re sleeping. The food you choose is usually high in calories. In the morning, you may have a
loss of appetite
, feel full and choose to skip breakfast.
Variable memory of episodes
: If you have SRED, you probably have little or no memory of getting out of bed and eating, though some people have partial recall.
Eating toxic or non-food substances
: You may eat unusual food combinations that you wouldn’t put together while awake, or you may eat inedible or toxic substances. You might eat or drink things that aren’t food or that shouldn’t be eaten, such as coffee grounds, raw meat or cigarette butts.
Advertisement
When do sleep-eating episodes happen?
Sleep eating episodes can happen every once in a while or they can happen every night. They can also happen multiple times each night.
As a nonrapid eye movement (NREM)
sleep disorder
, sleep eating usually occurs during the first few hours of sleep in the NREM sleep stage. Episodes typically happen when you transition from one sleep cycle to the next.
Can you wake up someone who is sleep eating?
It’s difficult to wake someone up during a sleep-related eating disorder episode. It may appear as if the person is confused or in an altered state. If you can, gently try to safely guide them back to bed.
What causes a sleep-related eating disorder?
Experts aren’t sure exactly why sleep eating happens, but research shows the following factors may contribute to symptoms:
An underlying medical condition (like
encephalitis
or
hepatitis
)
An underlying mental health condition (like
anxiety
,
depression
,
eating disorders
,
stress
or
substance use disorder
)
Changes to your routine (like
quitting smoking
or dieting)
Medication side effects (
sedative
-hypnotics and
benzodiazepines
or benzodiazepine receptor agonists and some psychiatric drugs)
Sleep disorders that cause SRED
An underlying sleep disorder may cause SRED, including:
Circadian rhythm sleep disorders
Narcolepsy
Periodic limb movement disorder
Restless legs syndrome
Sleep apnea
Sleepwalking
These sleep disorders run in families. You may be more likely to have SRED if you or one of your biological family members has a sleep disorder.
What are the risk factors for a sleep-related eating disorder?
Women
experience sleep eating more often than men. Symptoms usually begin in your 20s and you may need to manage it throughout your life.
What are the complications of a sleep-related eating disorder?
Preparing and eating food while you’re sleeping can lead to:
Physical injury (cutting or burning yourself)
Food poisoning (eating raw food)
Poisoning (consuming inedible products)
It’s also possible to put yourself and others in danger if you’re cooking food. For example, you may leave the stove’s gas on, set something flammable on a lit stove or set the oven on a high temperature. These could cause a fire.
You’re also at risk of other complications associated with sleep eating like:
Weight gain
Obesity
Depression
Daytime
fatigue
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a sleep-related eating disorder diagnosed?
To diagnose SRED, a healthcare provider will ask you about your symptoms during a
physical exam
. They may ask a family member, partner or roommate about your sleep habits, too, as you likely won’t remember sleep eating. The provider will examine you to see if a sleep disorder, health condition or medication you take might be causing symptoms.
To get more information about your sleep habits, they may ask you to keep a sleep diary for a few weeks. This is a record of when you go to bed, when you wake up, how you feel when you wake up and if, to your knowledge, you had any sleep eating episodes throughout the night.
Advertisement
Your provider may request a
sleep study
to get a better understanding of your sleep behaviors in a sleep center.
Management and Treatment
How is a sleep-related eating disorder treated?
Treatment varies based on what causes your symptoms. Your provider might recommend the following to treat sleep eating:
Adding, stopping or changing certain medications you take (don’t make changes unless a healthcare provider approves it)
Treating or managing any underlying medical conditions, mental health conditions or sleep disorders by taking medications or going to therapy
Setting up safety measures by placing locks on refrigerators, cabinets or the oven — or putting an alarm on your bedroom door, and moving furniture and other hazards out of your path so you don’t fall
Your provider might recommend making lifestyle changes or improving your
sleep hygiene
to help you sleep better. These may include:
Managing
stress
levels and practicing relaxation techniques, such as
yoga
and
meditation
Avoiding caffeine, screens and too much alcohol before bed
Setting and sticking to a regular bedtime schedule
It can be difficult to make changes to your routine, even if it means you’ll sleep better. Try making one change at a time and mastering it before moving on to the next one. Your provider may have additional suggestions based on what you and your body need.
Advertisement
Medications for sleep-related eating disorders
Treatment for an SRED may include taking
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs). SSRIs are antidepressant medications that increase the levels of
serotonin
in your brain. Serotonin is a hormone that performs many different functions in your body, including regulating your mood.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parasomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for sleep-related eating disorders?
With treatment, many people sleep eat less or stop the behavior over time. Treatment varies from person to person, so follow your healthcare provider’s treatment plan and instructions for the best results.
You can expect to see a healthcare provider a few times a year so they can monitor the effectiveness of your treatment and make adjustments to fit your lifestyle.
Untreated SRED may lead to injuries, food poisoning and illnesses. Sleep eating episodes will likely continue and may happen more often if you don’t seek care.
Prevention
Can a sleep-related eating disorder be prevented?
You can’t prevent all causes of sleep eating. But you can lower your risk of SRED by not taking sedatives to help you sleep. If you take antipsychotic drugs, ask your provider if that medication may cause SRED. They may offer alternative medications if you’re at risk of sleep eating.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
See your provider right away if you suspect you’ve had episodes of sleep eating. A sleep-related eating disorder can be dangerous to your health and the health of those within your household, so don’t delay getting the care you need.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
What caused my symptoms?
What lifestyle changes should I make?
What treatment do you recommend?
Are there side effects of the treatment?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be confusing and frustrating to do things in your sleep that you don’t have any control over. People within your household may show concern that they can’t get you back to bed during an episode or worry about you accidentally harming yourself. While sleep eating might seem like something you see in a movie, it’s often a dangerous medical condition that could lead to health issues.
If you have a history of a sleep-related eating disorder, talk to a healthcare provider. They’ll work with you to figure out what’s causing your symptoms and offer treatment specific to your situation so you can rest easier.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Yelling, kicking, walking and even eating in your sleep can be serious. When you have parasomnias, Cleveland Clinic’s sleep experts can help.
Parasomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/13/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment