Vaginal Fistula: Types, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vaginal Fistula
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vaginal Fistula
Prolonged labor, trauma and pelvic surgeries can cause vaginal fistulas. These openings form when vaginal tissue dies, creating a hole between your vagina and organs in the urinary or digestive systems. The most common type, vesicovaginal fistulas, form between your vagina and bladder. Surgery can close a fistula.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a vaginal fistula?
A vaginal fistula is an abnormal connection or opening that develops between your vaginal wall and a nearby organ. Most often, they develop between your
vagina
and an organ in your
urinary system
or in your
digestive system
. They most often occur due to damage to your vaginal tissue from things like childbirth, surgery, injury or infection.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What are genitourinary vaginal fistulas?
Genitourinary vaginal fistula is a term to describe a fistula that forms between your vagina or
uterus
and organs in your urinary system. The most common type is a
vesicovaginal fistula
, where an opening develops between your vagina and
bladder
(the organ that holds your pee).
Genitourinary vaginal fistulas also include:
Ureterovaginal fistulas
between your vagina and ureters, the tubes that carry pee from your
kidneys
to your bladder.
Urethrovaginal fistulas
between your vagina and
urethra
, the tube that carries pee from your bladder out of your body.
What are other types of vaginal fistulas?
Fistulas can also form between your vagina and digestive system organs. These include:
Rectovaginal fistulas
between your vagina and rectum, the tube that sends poop (stool) through your anus (butthole) and out of your body.
Colovaginal fistulas
between your vagina and
large intestine (colon)
.
Enterovaginal fistulas
between your vagina and
small intestine
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are vaginal fistula symptoms?
Vaginal fistulas that form between your vagina and nearby organs don’t always cause
pain
. Your symptoms typically depend on where the fistula is, how large the opening is or other factors. You may notice any of the following symptoms if you have a fistula:
Leaking pee or
urinary incontinence
.
Skin irritation in your vagina,
vulva
or perineum (area between your vagina and anus).
Painful intercourse
(dyspareunia).
Recurrent
urinary tract infection
s (UTIs),
kidney infections
or vaginal infections (
vaginitis
).
Foul-smelling
vaginal discharge
.
Poop (
fecal incontinence
) leaking from your vagina.
Rectal bleeding
or
vaginal bleeding
.
Advertisement
Can you feel a vaginal fistula?
No, you can’t feel a vaginal fistula by inserting your fingers into your vagina. You also may not feel pain or discomfort from a fistula.
What does a vaginal fistula look like?
You won’t be able to see a fistula. Your healthcare provider will be able to determine where it is in your body based on an exam and imaging tests that’ll show tissue damage and where the leakage is occurring.
What causes vaginal fistulas?
A lack of blood supply to vaginal tissue causes the tissue to die or become damaged. A hole or fistula forms in the tissue where this damage occurs. These openings can develop in a few days or over several years. Rarely, a person is born with a vaginal fistula.
Causes of vaginal fistulas include:
Prolonged
labor
during childbirth.
Vaginal tears during childbirth
or an
episiotomy
.
Abdominal or pelvic surgery, including
C-sections
and
hysterectomies
.
Cancer in your pelvic area, like
cervical cancer
or
colorectal (colon) cancer
.
Inflammatory bowel diseases
(IBD) like
Crohn’s disease
and
ulcerative colitis
.
Colon infections like
diverticulitis.
Radiation therapy
to the pelvic region.
Trauma or injury.
Is a fistula an STD?
No, a vaginal fistula isn’t a
sexually transmitted infection (STI)
.
What are the risk factors for vaginal fistulas?
Your risk of developing a vaginal fistula increases if you experience one of the direct causes of a fistula like childbirth, infection, surgery or any of the medical conditions listed above.
What are the complications of vaginal fistulas?
Vaginal fistulas can be a burden both physically and emotionally. You may feel awkward if you leak pee or poop in front of others. Other potential complications include:
Frequent infections in your urinary tract, vagina or kidney.
Narrowing of your vagina, anus or rectum (stenosis).
A fistula coming back.
What happens if a vaginal fistula bursts?
A vaginal fistula can’t burst because it’s not a fluid-filled sac. A fistula is an abnormal opening that can cause fluid like pee and poop to flow freely. But the flow isn’t contained within a sac that can burst.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a vaginal fistula diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will perform a
physical exam
, including a
pelvic exam
, and assess your symptoms. Let your healthcare provider know about all your symptoms so they can best help you. Sometimes, a pelvic exam and going over your symptoms are enough to diagnose a fistula. Other times, your provider will order more tests.
Diagnostic tests for vaginal fistulas include:
Complete blood counts
(CBC) and
urinalysis
to look for infections.
Dye test
, inserting dye in your bladder or rectum and checking for signs of leakage from your vagina.
Fistulogram
X-ray
to determine the number and size of fistulas.
CT urogram
(computed tomography urogram) to view your vagina and urinary tract.
Pelvic
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) to view your vagina and rectum.
Cystoscopy
to view inside your bladder and urethra.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy
to view your rectum and the lower part of your large intestine (colon).
Colonoscopy
to examine the inside of your rectum and all of your large intestine.
Retrograde pyelogram
using an injectable dye and X-rays to find leakage between your vagina and ureters.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What are vaginal fistula treatments?
Treatment depends on where the fistula is and the type. Some small fistulas heal on their own with conservative treatments like:
Antibiotics
for infections or medications for inflammatory bowel disorders.
Temporary
catheterization
to drain your bladder while a vesicovaginal fistula heals.
Ureteral stents
to keep your ureters open while a ureterovaginal fistula heals.
Most times, surgery is necessary to close the opening. There are a few ways your surgeon can do this. How your surgeon reaches the fistula depends on what kind of fistula you have. Surgical methods include vaginally, laparoscopically or robotically (through small incisions on your abdomen and a camera and instruments), or rectally.
A surgeon may use your own tissue, lab-made tissue or a surgical mesh patch to close or seal the opening.
As many as 9 in 10 women with a vaginal fistula have a complete recovery after surgery.
What happens after a rectovaginal fistula repair?
If your provider repairs a large fistula between your vagina and a digestive system organ like your rectum, you may need a temporary
ostomy
:
A surgeon creates an opening (stoma) in your belly (abdomen).
A
colostomy
for your large intestine or
ileostomy
for your small intestine sends stool to the stoma.
A bag outside your body collects the stool. Your provider will teach you how to change the bag and keep the stoma clean.
When the fistula heals, you’ll need another surgery to reconnect your intestine to your rectum and close the stoma.
Advertisement
What is recovery like after vaginal fistula repair surgery?
These steps can aid your recovery after vaginal fistula repair surgery:
Take antibiotics, if prescribed, to prevent an infection.
Don’t have sexual intercourse, use tampons or place anything inside your vagina until your provider gives the OK.
Prevent
constipation
and diarrhea by eating a high-fiber diet and drinking water. Ask your provider if it’s OK to use laxatives or
stool softeners
.
Can a vaginal fistula go away on its own?
Yes. Sometimes, a small vesicovaginal fistula or rectovaginal fistula can go away with antibiotics and a catheter to drain pee away from the fistula (giving it time to heal).
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for women with vaginal fistulas?
Surgical treatments for vaginal fistulas are highly successful. Most women experience a full recovery and no longer have symptoms.
Some fistulas don’t heal properly or come back after treatment. Problems with healing are most likely to happen if you have cancer or Crohn’s disease. Living with symptoms of an untreated vaginal fistula can lead to
depression
or
anxiety
.
Prevention
Can you prevent a vaginal fistula?
Developing a vaginal fistula is usually something you can’t prevent. But you can be aware of the things that cause fistulas and try to modify those things. For example, you can:
Manage chronic conditions like Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis.
Treat pelvic infections right away and follow your provider’s exact treatment plan.
Get regular prenatal care so that your provider can detect complications that may prolong your labor and delivery.
Choose a provider who has extensive experience with surgeries like hysterectomies to minimize your risk for complications that lead to fistulas.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I contact my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you notice any signs of a vaginal fistula, including:
Leaking poop or pee from your vagina.
Pain during sex.
Abdominal pain, fever, nausea or diarrhea.
What doctors treat vaginal fistulas?
Depending on the fistula type, you may receive care from one or more of these doctors:
Gynecologist
.
Urologist
.
Urogynecologist
.
Colorectal surgeon
.
What should I ask my provider?
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What caused the vaginal fistula?
What type of vaginal fistula do I have?
How should I care for myself while I have a fistula?
What are my treatment options?
What complications could occur from surgery?
Are there steps I can take to prevent getting another vaginal fistula?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Vaginal fistulas can cause embarrassing symptoms like urinary or fecal incontinence. Certain events like prolonged labor or pelvic surgery may put you at a higher risk for developing fistulas. Developing a fistula isn’t always something you can prevent, especially if it happens after trauma or injury. Tell your provider if you have symptoms like leaking pee and poop or pain with sex. You may be able to heal small fistulas with nonsurgical treatments. Surgery to close a fistula is highly successful and your risk of developing one again is small.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/01/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment