Oligospermia (Low Sperm Count): Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Oligospermia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Oligospermia
You may not know you have a low sperm count until you’re trying to have a baby and aren’t succeeding. Healthcare providers will diagnose oligospermia by collecting a semen sample and evaluating it in a lab. There are different causes for oligospermia, and treatment exists for many of them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Male Infertility Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Oligospermia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Oligospermia?
Oligospermia (AH-li-go-SPER-me-uh) is the medical term for a low
sperm
count. A typical sperm count ranges from 15 million to over 200 million sperm per 1 milliliter of
semen
. If you have oligospermia, you have fewer than 15 million sperm in 1 milliliter of semen.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A low sperm count can cause
male infertility
. Having a low sperm count doesn’t mean your partner can’t get
pregnant
. But it can take longer or be more challenging.
Another name for oligospermia is oligozoospermia (AH-li-go-zo-SPER-me-uh). You may also hear healthcare providers use the term, “severe oligospermia.” That means you have fewer than 5 million sperm in 1 milliliter of semen.
Symptoms and Causes
What are signs of low sperm count?
In most cases, you probably won’t realize you have oligospermia because it doesn’t usually have any signs. The main symptom of a low sperm count is the inability to
conceive
with a partner after one year of repeated sexual intercourse without
birth control
.
Some
males
may have low sperm count signs that relate to the cause. These may include:
Decreased body hair and facial hair
Erectile dysfunction
Low sex drive
(libido)
Swelling, pain or a noticeable lump on your
testicle
Oligospermia causes
Many different situations may cause you to experience oligospermia or other sperm disorders. These may include:
Certain conditions
Environmental toxins
Heat
Lifestyle factors
Medications and drugs
Diseases and conditions
Some diseases and conditions that can cause oligospermia include:
Bacterial
and
viral infections
, including
urinary tract infections
(UTIs) and
sexually transmitted infections
(STIs) like
gonorrhea
and
HIV
Blockages in your
reproductive system
that stop sperm from leaving your body
Conditions that affect your
hormones
, like
hypogonadism
Genetic disorders
, such as
Klinefelter syndrome
and
cystic fibrosis
Advertisement
Environmental toxins
Environmental toxins can affect any part of your body, including your sperm. These may include:
Heavy metals like arsenic, cadmium, lead and mercury
Industrial chemicals like insecticides and pesticides
Heat
Your testicles work best at a particular temperature, which is slightly lower than your body temperature. Heat-related situations that can affect your sperm production include:
Undescended testicles
, which get too hot if they’re up near your groin
Swollen
veins
in your
scrotum
(
varicoceles
)
Spending a long time in very hot environments, like a hot tub
Lifestyle factors
Lifestyle factors that may contribute to oligospermia include:
Drinking a lot of alcohol over long periods
Having a
body mass index
(BMI) greater than 25 (having overweight/
obesity
)
Smoking
or using other tobacco products
Stress
Using certain recreational drugs
, such as marijuana and cocaine
Medications and drugs
Many categories of prescribed medications and nonprescription substances can cause a low sperm count. These may include:
Clomipramine
(Anafranil®)
Finasteride
(Proscar®)
Lamotrigine
(Lamictal®, Subvenite®)
Methadone
(Dolophine®, Methadose®)
Methotrexate
(Rheumatrex®, Trexall®)
Nitrofurantoin
(Macrobid®, Macrodantin®, Urotoin®)
Paroxetine
(Paxil®, Pexeva®)
Prednisone
(Deltasone®, Predone®, Sterapred®)
Sirolimus
(Rapamune®)
Testosterone
There are many other medications that may affect your sperm count. Check with a healthcare provider if you think your medications may be causing oligospermia. Don’t stop taking prescribed medications without first discussing it with a provider.
What is the main cause of oligospermia?
Varicoceles are one of the most common causes of oligospermia. About
4 out of 10
males with low sperm counts have a swollen vein in their scrotums.
How to lower your risk
If you have oligospermia or are at risk of a lower sperm count, a healthcare provider may suggest lifestyle changes such as:
Cutting back on drinking alcohol
Maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you through
regular physical activity
and
healthy eating patterns
Quitting marijuana, cocaine and other substances
Quitting smoking
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose oligospermia
Healthcare providers will review your medical history and perform a physical exam. If they think you have a low sperm count, they’ll recommend a
semen analysis
. They may also recommend other tests to help determine oligospermia’s cause, including:
Genetic testing
Imaging tests of your reproductive organs, including
transrectal
and
testicular ultrasounds
Tests of your
endocrine system
to measure your hormone levels
Urinalysis
Management and Treatment
Can oligospermia be corrected?
It depends on the cause. In some cases, you may increase your sperm count by stopping medications or behaviors that contribute to low sperm levels.
Advertisement
Other causes may need treatments. Treatments may include:
Antibiotics
Counseling to treat issues like erectile dysfunction
Hormone supplements
Surgery to treat an enlarged scrotal vein or blockage
There are cases when you won’t be able to increase your sperm count. If you’re trying to have a biological child, a healthcare provider may suggest other options, like
in vitro fertilization
(IVF).
Can vitamins increase my sperm count?
Malnutrition
may affect your sperm health and contribute to a low sperm count. Vitamins, minerals or
herbal supplements
may help, including:
Coenzyme Q10
L-carnitine
Vitamin C
Talk to a healthcare provider before you try any of these remedies.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you and your partner can’t get pregnant, reach out to a healthcare provider for testing.
If a provider diagnoses you with oligospermia, you may wish to ask the following questions:
What’s causing my low sperm count?
Is there anything I can do to make my sperm count higher?
Is a serious condition causing oligospermia?
Should I see another provider for additional help, such as a
urologist
?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Male Infertility Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have oligospermia?
Each oligospermia cause has a different prognosis. But many causes are treatable. If a healthcare provider diagnoses you with oligospermia, you’ll work together to determine the cause and your treatment options.
Advertisement
Is pregnancy possible with oligospermia?
It depends on the cause and whether it’s treatable. Pregnancy may still be possible through unprotected sexual intercourse. You can also explore assisted reproductive techniques, like IVF. A healthcare provider can explain treatment options and family planning with you.
Additional Common Questions
What drink can increase sperm?
Juices that contain 100% juice — no added sugar — have lots of vitamins and minerals that help promote sperm health and may increase your sperm count. These include:
Citrus fruits, including oranges, grapefruits, lemons and limes
Goji berries
Pomegranates
Tomatoes
What is the difference between oligospermia and azoospermia?
Oligospermia means that you have a measurable amount of sperm in your semen. But the numbers are lower than expected. If you have
azoospermia
, it means there are no sperm in your semen.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You likely won’t know that you have oligospermia until you’re trying to conceive. It’s not something you can feel or tell without lab testing. But you may begin to wonder if you and your partner can’t conceive after a year of regular unprotected sexual intercourse.
A low sperm count doesn’t affect your quality as a person, and it doesn’t mean you can’t be a parent. Many causes are reversible, and assisted reproductive technologies can also help you achieve pregnancy. If you have any questions, healthcare providers are here to help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infertility can change your plans. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can work with you to get to the bottom of male infertility and create a customized treatment plan.
Male Infertility Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment