Lipoma: What Is It, Causes, Symptoms, Types, Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Lipoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Lipoma
A lipoma is a lump of fatty tissue that grows just under the skin. Lipomas move easily when you touch them and feel rubbery, not hard. Most lipomas aren’t painful and don't cause health problems so they rarely need treatment. If a lipoma is bothering you, your provider can remove it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a lipoma?
A lipoma is a round or oval-shaped lump of tissue that grows just beneath the skin. It’s made of fat, moves easily when you touch it and doesn’t usually cause pain. Lipomas can appear anywhere on the body, but they’re most common on the back, trunk (torso), arms, shoulders and neck.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Lipomas are
benign soft tissue tumors
. They grow slowly and are not cancerous. Most lipomas don’t need treatment. If a lipoma is bothering you, your healthcare provider can remove it with an outpatient procedure.
How common are lipomas?
Lipomas are very common. About 1 of every 1,000 people has a lipoma. Lipomas appear most often between ages 40 and 60, but they can develop at any age. They can even be present at birth. Anyone can get a lipoma, but they're slightly more common in women.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a lipoma?
Lipomas aren’t usually painful, but they can be uncomfortable if they press against a nerve or develop near a joint. Many people who have a lipoma don’t notice any symptoms. Lipomas are usually:
Encapsulated
: They don’t spread to the tissues surrounding them.
Painless:
However, some lipomas cause pain and discomfort depending on their location, size and if blood vessels are present.
Round or oval-shaped:
The fatty lumps of rubbery tissue are usually symmetrical.
Moveable:
They sit just beneath the skin’s surface and move when you touch them.
Smaller than 2 inches in diameter
: In a few cases, lipomas can be larger than 6 inches wide.
Where do lipomas grow?
Lipomas can develop anywhere on the body. Rarely, lipomas grow on the muscles, internal organs or brain. The majority of people with a lipoma only have one, although more than one lipoma can grow. Most lipomas develop just under the skin on the:
Advertisement
Arms or legs.
Back.
Neck.
Shoulders.
Trunk (chest and torso).
Forehead.
What causes a lipoma?
Healthcare providers aren’t sure what causes lipomas to grow. They are inherited (passed down through families). You’re more likely to develop a lipoma if someone in your family has one.
Some conditions cause multiple lipomas to form on the body. Lipoma-causing conditions include:
Dercum’s disease:
This rare disorder causes painful lipomas to grow, most often on the arms, legs and trunk. It’s also called adiposis dolorosa or Anders’ syndrome.
Gardner syndrome:
A form of a disorder called
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
, Gardner syndrome causes lipomas and a range of health problems.
Hereditary multiple lipomatosis:
Also called familial multiple lipomatosis, this disorder is inherited (passed down through families).
Madelung’s disease:
This condition occurs most often in men who drink alcohol excessively. Also called multiple symmetric lipomatosis, Madelung’s disease causes lipomas to grow around the neck and shoulders.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are lipomas diagnosed?
Providers usually diagnose a lipoma during a physical examination. Your provider will touch the lipoma and ask if it’s painful or tender. You may need a
biopsy
to confirm that the lipoma isn’t cancer. During this procedure, your provider removes a sample of the lipoma and sends it to a lab for testing.
Oftentimes, these may be mistaken for a cyst. To see a clear picture of this lump, your provider may order an imaging test such as an
ultrasound
,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
scan, or
computed tomography (CT) scan
. These imaging studies help your provider determine if it is a lipoma versus a cyst. It can also help identify the lipoma’s location and how deep it is if it has blood vessels and whether it’s pressing against nerves or other tissues.
What are the types of lipomas?
All lipomas are made of fat. Some lipomas also contain blood vessels or other tissues. There are several types of lipomas, including:
Angiolipoma
:
This type contains fat and blood vessels. Angiolipomas are often painful.
Conventional:
The most common type, a conventional lipoma contains white fat cells. White fat cells store energy.
Fibrolipoma:
Fat and fibrous tissue make up this type of lipoma.
Hibernoma:
This kind of lipoma contains brown fat. Most other lipomas contain white fat. Brown fat cells generate heat and help regulate body temperature.
Myelolipoma:
These lipomas contain fat and tissues that produce blood cells.
Spindle cell
:
The fat cells in these lipomas are longer than they are wide.
Pleomorphic:
These lipomas have fat cells of various sizes and shapes.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for lipomas?
Most lipomas don’t need treatment. If a lipoma is bothering you, your provider can remove it surgically. Lipoma removal procedures are safe and effective, and you can usually go home the same day.
As an alternative to lipoma surgery, your provider may recommend
liposuction
to remove the lipoma. Your provider uses a long, thin needle to remove fatty tissue from the growth.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for people with lipomas?
Many people live with lipomas, and they may not even notice them. Most lipomas don’t need treatment, but providers can remove them if necessary. Lipomas rarely grow back after lipoma treatment, but another one may grow in a different spot on your body.
Prevention
Can I prevent lipomas?
Lipomas (and many of the conditions that cause lipomas) are inherited. Since they’re passed down through families, it isn’t possible to prevent them. You can lower your risk of developing Madelung’s disease (a condition that causes lipomas to grow) by limiting the amount of alcohol you drink.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider about lipomas?
If you have a skin growth, lump or knot under your skin, see your provider. It’s essential to get evaluated and rule out serious conditions, such as
liposarcoma
(a type of cancer). Symptoms of liposarcoma are similar to signs of a lipoma.
If you have a lipoma, see your provider if you notice any changes, such as sudden pain. Call your provider if it’s growing rapidly (over weeks), feels hard or doesn’t move as easily when you touch it. Your provider will check the lipoma to see if it has blood vessels, which is a sign of a rare type of painful lipoma called an angiolipoma.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Millions of people live with lipomas. They can be annoying and unsightly, but they don’t usually cause problems. Most lipomas don’t need treatment. But if a lipoma causes pain or you’re concerned about its size or location, see your provider. Usually, providers can remove lipomas during an outpatient procedure, which means you’ll probably go home the same day. Lipomas rarely grow back after they’ve been removed.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/13/2020.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment