What Is Cholesterol? Types & Function
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
What Is Cholesterol?
Advertisement
Advertisement
What Is Cholesterol?
Cholesterol is a type of lipid that your body needs to function. It forms part of your cell membranes, helps your liver make bile and serves as a building block for hormones. But high levels of LDL cholesterol in your blood can raise your heart disease risk. Healthy levels of HDL cholesterol may help protect your arteries and lower your risk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Function
Anatomy
Conditions and Disorders
Care
Overview
HDL and LDL are two main types of cholesterol. HDL particles are “good” because they remove excess LDLs from your blood.
What is cholesterol?
Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance (lipid) that does many essential jobs in your body. It’s vital for you to live. But too much can be harmful. It may raise your risk for
heart and blood vessel problems
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There’s cholesterol in all your body’s cells. But you’re probably most familiar with it as something that travels in your
blood
. When your healthcare provider does a test called a
lipid panel
, they measure how much cholesterol is in your blood. This test can help them offer treatment to
protect your heart
.
What are the different types of cholesterol?
You might see these types of cholesterol listed on your lipid panel results:
HDL cholesterol
is a “good” cholesterol that experts believe can help protect your arteries.
LDL cholesterol
is a “bad” cholesterol that can make a sticky substance called
plaque
build up in your arteries.
VLDL cholesterol
is another “bad” cholesterol that can also make plaque build up.
Non-HDL cholesterol
refers to all the cholesterol in your blood
except
for HDL.
Non-HDL cholesterol includes LDL and VLDL. It also includes cholesterol carried on intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs) and chylomicrons. These last two usually aren’t listed separately.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Function
What does cholesterol do?
Cholesterol has many important functions in your body. These include:
Giving structure to the protective cover around each cell (cell membrane) and guarding what can enter or leave the cell
Helping your liver make a liquid (
bile
) that
breaks down
food after you eat
Serving as a building block for certain
hormones
(including sex hormones) and
vitamin D
Advertisement
Anatomy
Where does cholesterol come from?
Your
liver
makes enough cholesterol to support your body’s needs. In fact, it makes about 80% of all the cholesterol in your body. The rest comes from the
foods you eat
. The biggest sources are foods high in saturated
fat
(like whole-fat dairy and red meat) or
trans fat
(like packaged desserts and fried foods).
Usually, your body can filter out the cholesterol it doesn’t need. But many factors can affect how much cholesterol stays in your body. These include things like your age and the
genes
you’re born with.
Where is it located?
Cholesterol is in every cell in your body. It also travels through your blood — but it can’t do this by itself because of the way it’s made. Cholesterol molecules need to be attached to other molecules. So, cholesterol teams up with proteins and another type of lipid called
triglycerides
. These molecules bind together to form a particle called a
lipoprotein
.
Lipoproteins transport cholesterol in your body. They’re like little boats that travel through your bloodstream. They deliver cholesterol to your body’s
tissues
to help them work properly.
Some lipoproteins pick up extra cholesterol and carry it to your liver. Your liver then breaks down the cholesterol and gets rid of it. This process is called reverse cholesterol transport. It helps support healthy cholesterol levels in your blood.
Conditions and Disorders
What conditions are related to cholesterol?
Your healthcare provider will measure your
cholesterol levels
and tell you if they’re in the healthy range. Conditions related to unhealthy cholesterol levels include:
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
: This means your total cholesterol is higher than 200 mg/dL.
High LDL cholesterol (hypercholesterolemia)
: This is when your LDL cholesterol is too high. This usually means over 100 mg/dL, but it can vary by person. High LDL cholesterol that runs in families is called
familial hypercholesterolemia
.
Metabolic syndrome
: Low HDL cholesterol is a sign of this condition.
High cholesterol can cause a wide range of
health problems
. For example, it can contribute to plaque buildup in your
arteries
. This can lead to conditions like
coronary artery disease
or
carotid artery disease
. You won’t have symptoms of high cholesterol until these complications develop.
We often think of high cholesterol as something that affects adults. But it’s important to know that it can also affect kids. There are often genetic causes for
high cholesterol in children
.
What factors affect my cholesterol levels?
Many things can affect your cholesterol levels. These include:
Age
: As you get older, your cholesterol levels rise.
Foods you eat
: Saturated fat and trans fat in foods raise your LDL (“bad”) cholesterol.
Exercise
: Regular exercise can raise your HDL (“good”) cholesterol.
Your genes
: The genes you’re born with partly control how much cholesterol your body makes. High blood cholesterol can run in biological families.
Your
sex
: Before
menopause
, females usually have lower total cholesterol levels than males. But after menopause, their LDL levels tend to rise and their HDL can drop.
Advertisement
When should I see a healthcare provider?
See a provider for an
annual physical
. Your provider will tell you how often you need to have your cholesterol levels checked. It depends on your age and your risk factors for heart disease.
You might need treatment to support healthy cholesterol levels. If so, you may need more frequent cholesterol checks. These help your provider keep an eye on how well the treatment is working. Your provider will tell you when to come back for these visits.
Care
How can I improve my cholesterol?
You can help support healthy blood cholesterol levels by:
Limiting
foods
high in saturated fat
Avoiding foods that contain trans fat
Upping your intake of
foods
that contain
soluble fiber
and
omega-3 fatty acids
Using plant-based fats (like
extra virgin olive oil
) instead of animal-based fats (like butter)
Exercising
for at least 30 minutes, five to seven times per week
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Cholesterol is a substance your body needs to work properly. But too much cholesterol in your blood can be dangerous for you. This is why your healthcare provider will want to check your cholesterol levels every so often. There’s usually no way to know your cholesterol levels simply by how you feel. Your provider will explain what your numbers mean for your heart health and how you can improve them.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment