Esophageal Perforation (Rupture): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Esophageal Perforation (Esophageal Rupture)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Esophageal Perforation (Esophageal Rupture)
Esophageal perforation is a tear or hole in your esophageal wall. It’s usually an acute injury, but some slow-progressing conditions can also cause it. If a rupture occurs — no matter how small — it’s an emergency. Contents from your esophagus can escape through the hole into your chest and into your bloodstream, causing life-threatening complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Esophageal Disorders
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Esophageal Perforation?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Esophageal Perforation?
An esophageal perforation is a rupture, tear or hole in your esophagus wall. It’s a medical emergency.
Esophageal perforation is a rupture, tear or hole in your
esophagus
wall. It’s a medical emergency.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your esophagus is the swallowing tube that connects your mouth to your stomach, passing through your chest. It carries the food and liquids you ingest, along with bacteria and chemicals produced by your digestive system. These contents are safe in your esophagus, but harmful to other parts of your body.
If these contents escape through a hole in your esophagus, they can cause infection and inflammation in your neck, chest, abdomen or bloodstream. These conditions can quickly become life-threatening, so prompt treatment is essential. Ideally, a torn or ruptured esophagus should be treated within 24 hours.
Symptoms and Causes
Esophageal rupture symptoms
Esophageal perforation is typically an acute injury, causing sudden, noticeable pain when it occurs. Most ruptures happen in your chest cavity, causing chest pain. If your rupture is higher or lower in your esophagus, you might feel pain in your neck or upper abdomen, or it might be
referred
to your shoulder. It might feel sharp, tearing, burning or penetrating. Other symptoms might include:
Air bubbles under your skin
Difficulty swallowing
Fast heart rate
Fever
Low blood pressure
Nausea
Shortness of breath
Vomiting blood
If you suspect you have a rupture, go to the ER right away. Severe pain and difficulty breathing or swallowing are emergency symptoms. Tell a healthcare provider about what was happening when they began. If they started after an injury or surgery, an episode of violent vomiting or swallowing something you shouldn’t have, an esophageal rupture is possible. Your provider will check for it.
Advertisement
Esophageal perforation causes
All causes of esophageal perforation are rare. But among them, the most common cause is injury during a medical procedure on your esophagus. This is called iatrogenic injury, and it causes about half of all perforations. Examples of esophageal procedures include
esophageal dilation
to treat esophageal stricture,
myotomy
to treat esophageal dysmotility and
Nissen fundoplication
to treat GERD.
The second most common cause is a spontaneous rupture from tremendous stress within your esophagus. This is also called an effort rupture, or
Boerhaave’s syndrome
. It represents about 15% of all esophageal ruptures and affects about 0.0003% of the population. It usually happens during forceful and repeated vomiting. But excessive strain during weightlifting, seizure or childbirth can also cause it.
Other possible causes of esophageal rupture include:
A perforated peptic ulcer in your esophagus
A tumor that erodes through your esophagus wall
Puncture or erosion from a sharp chicken bone
Swallowing a battery or caustic chemical
Traumatic injury, like a stab or gunshot wound
Risk factors
Your esophagus is more prone to
perforation
than other gastrointestinal organs because it doesn’t have an outer layer (serosal layer) like others do. This makes the wall thinner and weaker to begin with.
Having certain
esophageal disorders
can also raise your risk of esophageal perforation. Your esophagus might be more likely to rupture if it’s already been injured or damaged by
inflammation on the inside
.
Some of these risk factors include:
Chronic acid reflux (GERD)
Chronic alcohol use
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Esophageal diverticulum
Esophageal cancer
and radiation therapy
Previous medical procedures on your esophagus
Complications of esophageal perforation
A torn esophagus can lead to life-threatening complications, including:
Mediastinitis
: Leaked contents from your esophagus can cause chemical inflammation and infection in your chest, including the part that contains your heart (mediastinum). This can cause complications for your heart and lungs. Infection can also spread to your bloodstream.
Sepsis
: Bacteria that transfer from your esophagus to your bloodstream can quickly spread infection through your body. This can lead to widespread inflammation and septic shock, which can lead to organ failure and death.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose esophageal perforation
A healthcare provider will take X-rays in the region where your symptoms occur (your neck, chest or abdomen). They’ll look for signs of esophageal perforation, including air pockets and leaked fluids. To confirm the diagnosis, they might follow up with another imaging test called an
esophagram
. For this test, you’ll swallow a contrast solution that will highlight the inside of your esophagus on the X-ray.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for esophageal perforation?
Once your diagnosis is confirmed, your healthcare team will want to treat it as soon as possible. They’ll need to address the tear while also managing any complications. Standard treatment includes:
IV fluids and medications
: An IV tube in your vein will restore fluid volume lost by bleeding, vomiting or dehydration, and also deliver systemic antibiotics to treat or prevent infection.
Percutaneous fluid drainage
: A healthcare provider will attempt to drain and sterilize leaked fluid collections in your body cavities by inserting a hollow needle or tube through your skin.
Direct intervention or repair
: A healthcare provider will address the perforation directly, either through endoscopic interventions or open surgery. They’ll seal off or repair the tear.
IV or tube feeding
: After emergency treatment, you’ll have supplemental nutrition through a tube in your vein or in your intestine. You won’t be able to swallow food during your recovery.
The type of repair or intervention you’ll need will depend a lot on the size of the hole or tear and the overall condition of your esophagus. Some people with very minor injuries may not need direct repair. A stent or tube in your esophagus can seal off the perforation until it heals by itself. In other cases, a surgeon might need to remove dead tissue, a foreign body or a tumor and then close the wound.
Advertisement
If you have a severe injury and/or preexisting damage to your esophagus, you might need
part or all of your esophagus removed
. If you have other complications, you may need additional interventions.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Esophageal Disorders
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis after treatment for an esophageal rupture?
You can recover from a torn esophagus, but your prognosis (outlook) depends on how severe the tear is and how soon you get treatment. Minor tears that get treatment within 24 hours have the best prognosis. If you go 48 hours or more before treatment, you’re more likely to develop life-threatening complications. Those who need more extensive surgery or other emergency interventions have higher mortality rates.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Esophageal ruptures are frightening. Fortunately, they’re rare. But when they do occur, they can be difficult to recognize right away. This is one of many reasons to always take chest pain seriously.
Your esophagus wall is thin and vulnerable, and it can be injured unexpectedly. When it’s injured, you might not realize where the pain is coming from or what it means. Regardless, don’t try to tough it out. If you ever feel a sudden, severe pain in your chest, or even in your throat or upper abdomen, go to the emergency room. Even a small esophageal tear can lead to infection and all of its possible complications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Esophageal disorders can cause many symptoms, including heartburn or trouble swallowing. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll find a treatment that works for you.
Esophageal Disorders
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us