What Is a Food Coma (Postprandial Somnolence)?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Food Coma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Food Coma
What’s the meaning of “food coma”? Known medically as postprandial somnolence, a food coma is that tired feeling you get after eating a big meal. Scientists have several theories as to why it happens. Fortunately, a food coma usually doesn’t cause any serious health issues. There are ways to treat and prevent the condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypersomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Food Coma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is a Food Coma?
A food coma means a short-term increase in
sleepiness
and sluggishness after eating a meal. Sleep tests show sleepiness rises after meals, usually peaking one to two hours afterward. The effect is stronger after larger, higher-energy meals, and then fades. The medical term for a food coma is postprandial somnolence.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
“Post” means after.
“Prandial” refers to eating a meal.
“Somnolence” means drowsiness or sleepiness.
Postprandial somnolence means a state of drowsiness or sleepiness after eating a meal. You may also see the term postprandial dip.
Postprandial somnolence (pronounced “post-pran-dee-uhl” “saam-nuh-luhns”) can affect your ability to get things done. You may notice your mind doesn’t think as clearly. You may have trouble performing tasks that require sharp mental focus. This may include things like taking a test or
driving a car
. Most people have felt this short-lived experience. Thankfully, a food coma doesn’t usually cause any major health issues.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a food coma
With postprandial sleepiness, you may become noticeably more
tired after eating
. The condition can develop anywhere from 30 minutes to four hours after a meal. With the tiredness, you may feel your mental alertness drop off. You may have a harder time completing certain tasks.
What causes a food coma?
At one time, researchers believed that blood flowing away from your brain after a meal led to a food coma. Now, they know this isn’t accurate. Multiple factors can cause postprandial somnolence:
Signals from your gut
Changes in blood metabolites, like glucose and
amino acids
Shifts in your brain’s arousal pathways
Advertisement
Your body clock also has an early afternoon dip that can make you feel sleepier.
Risk factors
The risk of postprandial somnolence is greater in:
Night-shift workers
Young adults who haven’t gotten a lot of sleep
People age 65 and older (especially with other medical conditions)
Food comas are also more likely to occur in people with certain health conditions, including:
Type 2 diabetes
Overweight
Obesity
Metabolic syndrome
Sleep disorders
Depression
Medicines that can worsen after-meal drowsiness include:
Sedatives for sleep or anxiety, like benzodiazepines and Z-drugs
Sedating antidepressants
Antipsychotics
Sedating antihistamines
Gabapentinoids
Opioids
Some blood pressure medicines, like beta-blockers and alpha-blockers
Talk to your healthcare provider about your medications if you’re concerned about feeling sleepy after meals.
Complications of postprandial somnolence
Most of the time, a food coma will pass quickly and not lead to any issues. But the condition can be a problem for many different types of workers. Office workers may fall asleep at their desks after lunch. It can also affect their work performance.
A food coma can have a more serious effect on people who drive or work with heavy machinery. They run the risk of experiencing accidents and injuries.
Do not drive or operate machinery if you feel sleepy after a meal.
Pull over, take a short nap or delay the task until you’re alert.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose a food coma
Most of the time, you won’t see a doctor for a food coma. The condition will pass without the need for treatment.
But you should see a provider if you have:
Frequent or severe daytime sleepiness
Loud snoring or breathing pauses
Dizziness or fainting after meals
Shakiness, sweating or confusion a few hours after eating
Symptoms of diabetes, like thirst, frequent urination or blurred vision
A provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. They’ll also want to know about your eating habits, including:
What you eat
When you eat
How much you eat
They may also test your level of fatigue using a screening tool like the
Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)
. This test can help your provider figure out how daytime sleepiness is affecting you.
Management and Treatment
How to wake up from a food coma
Once you’re in a food coma, it can be hard to get out of the
afternoon slump
. Treatment for postprandial somnolence usually isn’t necessary. If it’s having a great effect on your life, your healthcare provider may suggest:
Eating smaller, balanced meals that prioritize protein, fiber and lower-GI carbohydrates
Limiting alcohol at lunch
Taking a 10- to 30-minute walk after eating
Taking a
20-minute nap
when possible
Advertisement
How long can you be in a food coma?
Sleepiness often starts 30 minutes to two hours after a meal. The condition can last up to three to four hours.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypersomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Most often, a food coma won’t have any long-term or serious effects on your health. These periods of tiredness usually pass within a few hours of eating. If you have excessive daytime sleepiness, talk to a healthcare provider. They can offer treatment options that may work for you.
Prevention
How to avoid postprandial somnolence
Western-style eating patterns are linked with poorer sleep and more daytime sleepiness. These include:
Foods high in saturated fat
Refined grains/sugars
Processed meats
Plant-forward, Mediterranean-style eating patterns are linked with better sleep and less excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS). These include:
Fiber
Fruits/vegetables
Whole grains
Unsaturated fats
Additional Common Questions
Is a food coma a sign of diabetes?
Not by itself. Occasional post-meal sleepiness is common. If it’s frequent or you also have symptoms of diabetes (or signs of reactive hypoglycemia or postprandial hypotension), talk with a healthcare provider about screening. For example,
A1c
and, sometimes, an
oral glucose tolerance test
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
We’ve all felt it. That unmistakable feeling of sleepiness after a big meal. Food comas, or postprandial somnolences, are a unique phenomenon. Researchers still aren’t clear on why they happen. But fortunately, the effect doesn’t usually have any serious impacts on your health.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypersomnia disorders cause you to be sleepy all day long. And can get in the way of life. Cleveland Clinic’s sleep experts are here to help.
Hypersomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider