Arthritis in Wrist: Causes, Types, Prevention & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Arthritis in Wrist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Arthritis in Wrist
Arthritis in your wrist causes pain, swelling and stiffness that worsens the more you use it. Sometimes, it’s an inflammatory condition (like rheumatoid arthritis), but more often, it’s just old-fashioned wear and tear (osteoarthritis). Many people can manage wrist arthritis with self-care. If you need more, steroid injections or surgery can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Wrist and Elbow Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
Distal radioulnar joint arthritis affects the joint at the base of your wrist, where your two forearm bones meet.
What is arthritis in your wrist?
Arthritis of the wrist is one of the main causes of chronic
wrist pain
. It can also cause swelling and stiffness in your
wrist
. Your wrist is the
joint
that allows you to bend, straighten and rotate your hand. You use it to accomplish countless tasks throughout the day.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Arthritis
is a chronic and progressive (ongoing and worsening) disease that wears away the
cartilage
in your joints. It especially affects joints that take a lot of stress from weight and/or frequent use. Your wrist doesn’t bear much weight, but you do use it a lot.
What are the different types of wrist arthritis?
Arthritis in your wrist may occur in different places where different bones connect. Your wrist is the most complex joint in your body, with more bones and connection points than any other joint.
Types of wrist arthritis by location include:
Distal radioulnar joint arthritis
. This is arthritis at the base of your wrist, where your two forearm bones, your
radius
and your
ulna
, meet. This joint allows you to turn your palm up.
Midcarpal joint arthritis
. This is arthritis between the eight small carpal bones that connect your hand to your arm bones. These bones move together with your finger bones when they move.
Radiocarpal joint arthritis
. This is arthritis at the point where your two forearm bones and your carpal bones meet. This joint allows you to rotate your wrist and flex and extend your hand.
In addition, different types of arthritis can affect your wrist. The most common type is osteoarthritis, which is from simple wear and tear. Inflammatory types of arthritis come from inflammatory diseases.
Advertisement
Noninflammatory types of arthritis in your wrist may include:
Osteoarthritis
. Osteoarthritis is when the cartilage in your joint gradually wears away from everyday use. It’s common with advancing age and with occupations that use your wrist more.
Post-traumatic arthritis
. Post-traumatic arthritis follows an injury that damages the cartilage in your joint. It’s often temporary, but sometimes it contributes to the onset of osteoarthritis.
Types of inflammatory arthritis in your wrist might include:
Rheumatoid arthritis
. RA is the most common type of inflammatory arthritis. It causes your
immune system
to attack your cartilage with
inflammation
. It can affect any joint in your body.
Psoriatic arthritis
. Psoriatic arthritis affects some people with
psoriasis
, an inflammatory disease of the
skin
. It can cause inflammation and swelling in the small joints of your hands and feet.
Septic arthritis
. You may get septic arthritis if you have a systemic infection — a whole-body
bacterial
or viral infection. Your immune system sends inflammation to fight the infection.
Gout
. Gout occurs when your body has too much uric acid. The excess acid causes tiny, painful crystals to form in your joints. It often affects your feet first, but it can also affect your hands.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of wrist arthritis?
Different types can cause different symptoms, but the most common symptom is all-over wrist pain. Osteoarthritis may feel like a dull, constant ache. Inflammatory arthritis might feel intense and burning.
You might feel it more when you use your wrist to:
Open jars
Turn doorknobs
Type
You may also experience:
Discolored, warm or
swollen joints
Reduced range of motion
Stiffness that’s worse in the morning and improves throughout the day
Wrist and hand weakness
Clicking or crackling sounds when your wrist moves
Numbness or tingling
in your wrist (
carpal tunnel syndrome
)
Osteoarthritis or post-traumatic arthritis may only affect one wrist. Inflammatory types (like rheumatoid arthritis) often affect both wrists and may also affect other joints. With inflammatory types, you may also have:
Fever
Fatigue
Rash
Nail discoloration and pitting (
nail psoriasis
)
With all types, severe swelling in your joints can force bones out of their normal positions, causing disfigurement.
What causes arthritis in your wrist?
Arthritis is gradual, ongoing damage to the cartilage in your joints. That’s the padding between the bones that helps them move smoothly against each other. Inflammatory diseases or common wear and tear can erode this padding, leaving bones to rub against bones. This causes pain, swelling and stiffness. Inflammation itself can also cause these symptoms, even before it starts to wear down the cartilage.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is wrist arthritis diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will perform a physical exam to assess your range of motion and check for signs of inflammation or disfigurement. Tests to diagnose the type of arthritis in your wrist include:
X-rays
to look for damage to your cartilage
Blood tests
to check for inflammation or other indicators
Management and Treatment
How do they fix arthritis of the wrist?
Treatment for wrist arthritis focuses on relieving your symptoms and slowing or stopping the damage, if possible. Healthcare providers usually start by recommending conservative treatments to relieve pain and reduce stress on your wrist. Depending on your need, they might prescribe medications for pain relief or to reduce inflammation. If these don’t do enough to help, they might recommend surgery.
Conservative recommendations include:
Hot/cold therapy
. Both
heat and cold can reduce arthritis pain
in different ways. Ice packs or gel packs are helpful for reducing inflammation. Heat pads or baths can help relax a stiff joint.
Over-the-counter
pain relievers
,
especially
NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), which reduce both inflammation and pain.
Topical pain relief
products can also be helpful.
Physical therapy
. A
physical therapist
can recommend specific hand and wrist exercises to practice. Regular, gentle exercise helps nourish your tissues and prevent them from stiffening.
Activity modifications
. While some exercise is helpful, too much repetitive stress on your joint worsens arthritis. An
occupational therapist
can recommend new ways to accomplish tasks.
Advertisement
Prescription treatments may include:
Cortisone shots
. Steroid injections provide powerful, temporary pain relief and inflammation control directly to your wrist. They’re a standard treatment for all types of arthritis.
Platelet-rich plasma injections
. PRP is an alternative pain relief option and a standard treatment for osteoarthritis. Studies suggest it may help stimulate your cartilage to repair itself.
Oral
corticosteroids
. Steroids are anti-inflammatory drugs that work by suppressing your immune system. They’re a standard treatment for inflammatory types of arthritis.
DMARDS
. Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs are another group of medications that treat auto-inflammatory arthritis. They reduce inflammation and symptoms throughout your body.
Surgical treatments for wrist arthritis include:
Proximal row carpectomy.
This procedure removes a few of the carpal bones in your wrist to make more room for the others. This frees up the other bones to move again without friction.
Joint fusion surgery
.
This procedure uses pins and screws to fuse together the bones that cause pain when they move. When they heal, they won’t move anymore, so they won’t cause pain.
Joint replacement surgery
(
wrist arthroplasty
).
This procedure replaces damaged parts of your wrist with artificial parts. It relieves arthritis symptoms and preserves movement in the joint.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Wrist and Elbow Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook with wrist arthritis?
Most people with wrist arthritis can manage their pain with conservative treatments. Steroid injections can also help, if needed. If your arthritis is very advanced and you’ve lost a lot of cartilage, it might be harder to manage conservatively. When wrist arthritis begins to seriously affect your life, talk to your healthcare provider. They’ll discuss your surgery options and recommend the best procedure for you.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might not realize how often you use your wrist throughout the day until using it becomes painful and difficult. If you’ve developed wrist arthritis, you’re not alone — it affects up to 1 in 7 people in the U.S. A healthcare provider can help pinpoint the type of arthritis you have to determine the best treatment plan for you. For many people, self-care and activity adjustments can make a real difference.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
We diagnose and treat conditions that cause wrist pain and elbow pain. Learn how Cleveland Clinic experts use minimally invasive treatments to relieve your discomfort.
Wrist and Elbow Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/16/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment