Post-Vasectomy Pain Syndrome: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Post-Vasectomy Pain Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Post-Vasectomy Pain Syndrome
Post-vasectomy pain syndrome is a rare condition that can happen after a vasectomy. Long-lasting testicular pain may cause a dull, aching feeling or sharp, stabbing pain. The pain may be constant, or it may come and go. There are nonsurgical and surgical treatments for it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Post-Vasectomy Pain Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Post-Vasectomy Pain Syndrome?
Post-vasectomy pain syndrome (PVPS) is when you develop long-term (chronic) pain in your
testicles
after a
vasectomy
. A vasectomy is a procedure that cuts or blocks off your
vas deferens
. It prevents
sperm
from mixing with your
semen
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A healthcare provider may diagnose post-vasectomy pain syndrome (PVPS) if you have lasting pain after the procedure. It can affect one or both of your testicles.
The odds of having PVPS after a vasectomy are low. A
2020 study
shows that it affects about 5% of
males
after getting the procedure.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of post-vasectomy pain syndrome
The main symptom is long-lasting
testicular pain
or soreness. It may last for at least three months. The pain may occur:
During exercise
When you have an erection
During ejaculation
At other moments during sexual activity, including arousal, orgasm or when you feel a desire for sexual intercourse (sexual response cycle)
The pain can range. You may only have pain occasionally, or it may be constant. It may feel like a dull, constant aching or a sharp, stabbing pain that comes and goes. It can develop quickly after a vasectomy. But it may also develop months or years later.
Post-vasectomy pain syndrome causes
Medical experts aren’t sure why some males develop post-vasectomy pain syndrome. But possible causes include:
Congestive
epididymitis
Damage to a vas deferens
Hard lumps that form at the end of a cut vas deferens (sperm granuloma)
Inflammation
Nerve compression or nerve damage (neuropathy)
Scar tissue
Complications
Any type of pain can affect your quality of life. But pain in sensitive areas of your body can affect your sexual and emotional health. This may cause complications like:
Advertisement
Anxiety
Depression
Sexual dysfunction
Stress
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose post-vasectomy pain syndrome
There isn’t a specific test that healthcare providers use to diagnose post-vasectomy pain syndrome. Healthcare providers will:
Review your medical history
Ask about your symptoms
Perform a physical exam
They may also recommend tests to rule out other conditions that cause achy testicles.
Testing
Healthcare providers may recommend the following tests to help confirm a post-vasectomy pain syndrome diagnosis:
Imaging tests, like an ultrasound
Pee tests, including a
pee culture
Semen culture
Spermatic cord block (
nerve block
)
Management and Treatment
How do you treat post-vasectomy pain syndrome?
There are nonsurgical and surgical treatments for post-vasectomy pain syndrome.
Nonsurgical treatments
Healthcare providers may first recommend techniques to help relax your muscles and ease symptoms. You may need to work with a physical therapist to make sure you’re doing them correctly.
Other nonsurgical treatments may include:
Complementary medicine like
acupuncture
or
biofeedback
Pain relievers like
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs)
Neuropathic pain relievers like
gabapentin
Providers may also recommend
tricyclic antidepressants
. This is an off-label use. “Off-label” means a medication can treat a condition, even if the medication doesn’t have official approval for it.
Surgical treatments
Healthcare providers may recommend surgery if nonsurgical PVPS treatments don’t provide relief.
About
8 out of 10
males who get a
vasectomy reversal
report less pain after the procedure. But a vasectomy reversal also restores your ability to have biological children. If you don’t wish to have biological children after a vasectomy reversal, you should use condoms or another type of birth control whenever you have sexual intercourse.
Other surgical options vary. They depend on the underlying cause of your pain. They include:
Epididymectomy to remove one or both tubes behind your testicles that carry sperm (epididymides)
Removing (excising) a sperm granuloma
Removing nerves in your spermatic cord that cause pain (microdenervation of the spermatic cord)
In rare cases, a provider may also recommend an
orchiectomy
. This procedure removes one or both of your testicles.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
It’s normal to have pain for several weeks after a vasectomy while you heal. See your healthcare provider if the pain doesn’t go away or if pain develops after you recover. It’s also a good idea to see a provider if you have:
Sexual dysfunction, like pain when you get an erection or
erectile dysfunction
Swollen testicles
or scrotum
Pus or foul-smelling drainage from your incision(s)
Advertisement
During your appointment, you may wish to ask:
What’s causing my PVPS symptoms?
What treatment do you recommend?
If I need surgery, what type do I need?
Should I look for signs of complications?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does post-vasectomy pain syndrome last?
It depends on what causes post-vasectomy pain syndrome and how you respond to treatment. Surgical and nonsurgical treatments may help you feel better within a few weeks. But it could take longer. A healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect.
Prevention
How do you prevent post-vasectomy pain syndrome?
The only way to prevent post-vasectomy pain syndrome is to avoid getting a vasectomy. But a vasectomy is a generally safe and effective type of birth control. Healthcare providers aren’t sure why some males develop pain after the procedure, so there isn’t anything you can do to prevent it.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
For males who don’t want to have more biological children or biological children at all, a vasectomy is a safe, permanent form of birth control. The risk of developing post-vasectomy pain syndrome is low. But if you develop long-term pain, treatments can help.
It’s not always easy talking about the sensitive areas of your body. But you shouldn’t ignore pain or discomfort in your testicles, especially after a vasectomy. It’s your body’s way of telling you that something is wrong. Don’t let the idea of talking about testicular pain prevent you from talking to a healthcare provider. Their job is to help find the cause of your PVPS and treat it, not to judge.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your urinary system, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment