Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Return (TAPVR)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
TAPVR
Advertisement
Advertisement
TAPVR
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) is an issue where veins from your baby’s lungs connect to the right side of their heart instead of the left. Blood with and without oxygen mixes, which keeps their body from getting enough oxygen. This is a rare, life-threatening congenital heart issue that affects newborns.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
TAPVR Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is TAPVR?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is TAPVR?
In babies with total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), blood can reach the wrong atrium in several different ways.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) happens when veins that bring blood from your baby’s lungs connect to the wrong place in their heart. As a result, their heart can’t put enough oxygen into the blood it sends to the rest of their body. TAPVR is a life-threatening heart condition. It’s
congenital
, which means it’s present at birth.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Typically, your lungs send oxygen-rich blood to your heart’s left atrium (the chamber in your heart’s upper left side). In babies with TAPVR, the oxygen-rich blood flows through
pulmonary veins
to their heart’s right atrium instead.
In the right atrium, the oxygen-rich blood mixes with blood that doesn’t have as much oxygen. This low-oxygen blood travels out of the heart to the rest of your baby’s body.
Babies with total anomalous pulmonary venous return may have trouble breathing soon after birth. Their skin may appear blue (or gray on darker skin).
All children with TAPVR also have an
atrial septal defect
. This is a hole between the heart’s right and left atria.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return is a rare condition. It affects
1 in about 7,800
newborns in the U.S. each year. You may hear a provider call this condition total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC).
Types of TAPVR
TAPVR types differ by how blood reaches the wrong place — your baby’s right atrium.
The TAPVR types are:
Supracardiac TAPVR
: Blood flows via an ascending vertical vein into the
brachiocephalic vein
. Then, it flows through their superior
vena cava
(a large vein in their body).
Cardiac TAPVR
:
Blood moves through their coronary sinus. This vein normally drains blood that contains low levels of oxygen.
Infracardiac TAPVR
:
The connecting vertical vein comes from their liver and inferior vena cava.
Mixed TAPVR
:
A combination of veins from your baby’s lungs drain to more than one of the types mentioned above. This is the rarest and most difficult form to repair successfully.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of TAPVR
Symptoms of total anomalous pulmonary venous return may include:
Cyanosis
(bluish or grayish skin, nails and lips)
Difficulty feeding
Fatigue and lethargy (lack of energy)
Heart murmur
Shortness of breath (dyspnea) and trouble breathing
Lack of growth or weight gain
Symptoms of TAPVR usually appear very soon after birth. Babies have symptoms at birth if they have any narrowing where their lung veins connect to their hearts. But some babies don’t have symptoms for several weeks.
TAPVR causes
Healthcare providers aren’t sure what causes total anomalous pulmonary venous return. It happens when your baby’s heart and blood vessels are forming in the uterus during
fetal development
.
This doesn’t seem to be an inherited condition (passed down through families). But there have been similar cases among siblings. TAPVR has an association with certain syndromes and exposure to paint removers, pesticides and lead.
Complications of this condition
A baby with TAPVR can have heart failure and
pulmonary hypertension
. Even after the initial repair, TAPVR can sometimes lead to
abnormal heart rhythms
or blockages in your child’s pulmonary veins.
Children with TAPVR may have trouble with typical development, like
fine motor function
. You can help your child by getting screenings for developmental milestones. If a screening shows a
developmental delay
, you can arrange for someone to work with them to improve their skills.
Talk to your child’s healthcare provider about their ability to take part in sports and physical activities. Your child may need to limit vigorous exercise.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose TAPVR
Cardiologists can sometimes diagnose this condition with an
echocardiogram
before birth. Some babies don’t get a diagnosis until they’re several weeks or months old.
After your baby is born, their provider will do a physical exam and listen to your baby’s heart. A pulse oximeter (pulse ox) can measure the amount of oxygen in your baby’s blood. It fits over your baby’s big toe and sends information through a wire.
To diagnose total anomalous pulmonary venous return, a provider may use:
Chest X-ray
CT (computed tomography) scan
Heart MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)
Echocardiogram
Electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG)
Some of these tests (MRI) may require anesthesia, but they’re all noninvasive. They allow your baby’s healthcare provider to see images of your baby’s heart and veins. They also help them evaluate blood flow and look for abnormalities.
A provider can use
cardiac catheterization
to make a diagnosis. But they can usually get the information they need from imaging. This spares your baby from an invasive procedure.
Management and Treatment
How is TAPVR treated?
Healthcare providers treat TAPVR with
open-heart surgery
. Most often, providers perform this TAPVR repair as soon as they can after diagnosing the condition. Nearly every baby with total anomalous pulmonary venous return needs surgery to survive.
Advertisement
Though it’s extremely rare, some people don’t have surgery as babies and get a TAPVR diagnosis as adults. But they usually have high pressures within their lungs (pulmonary hypertension). This can make surgical repair very challenging.
While waiting for surgery, your child may receive extra oxygen or a ventilator to help them breathe. They may receive an
inotrope
, which is a medicine that helps their heart beat more forcefully.
While your baby is asleep under general anesthesia, a surgeon:
Makes cuts (incisions) in your baby’s chest and heart
Connects the pulmonary veins to the correct place (the left atrium) in your baby’s heart
Closes abnormal connections
Removes any blockage in your child’s pulmonary vein
Most often, closes the hole between their left and right atria (atrial septal defect)
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
After TAPVR surgery, your baby will have checkups every six to 12 months. They’ll need regular follow-up visits through adulthood. Your child’s provider may want to order tests like an electrocardiogram,
exercise stress test
or echocardiogram.
Get medical help right away if your baby:
Has bluish or grayish skin, nails or lips
Has trouble breathing or difficulty eating
Seems lethargic
Questions to consider asking your child’s healthcare provider may include:
Advertisement
What type of TAPVR does my child have?
Do you think my child will need a second operation?
How many times have you performed surgery to repair TAPVR?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
TAPVR Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has this condition?
Babies who have TAPVR need an operation. With early surgery, most children with TAPVR survive into adulthood. But some will need repeat surgery or procedures to treat narrowing in their veins later in life. Because of this, people with TAPVR need to see a cardiologist (a heart expert) regularly to monitor their health following surgery.
Without surgery, some forms of total anomalous pulmonary venous return are typically fatal a few weeks after birth. With early diagnosis and surgical treatment, the outlook for babies with TAPVR is very good. The
survival rate
after surgery is around 97%.
Your child will need regular visits with their cardiologist as they grow into adulthood. Lifelong follow-up visits can help cardiologists find problems like an irregular heartbeat or blockages (obstructions) in their blood vessels. An obstruction requires another surgery and may be hard to treat.
Your child may need to take medicine or have a procedure like a cardiac catheterization.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
There’s nothing you could’ve done to prevent this congenital heart condition. But if you’re thinking of starting a family and have TAPVR or a family history of congenital heart conditions, you might want to speak with a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You’ve carefully followed your provider’s instructions for a healthy pregnancy. But somehow, your newborn has a heart issue. Today’s medical advances give your baby a better outlook than previous generations. Surgical treatments for TAPVR are extremely effective. The outlook for people with this condition is very good. Following surgery, be sure to take your child to see their healthcare provider for regular follow-up visits. These visits help your child’s provider treat problems and monitor their health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your child is diagnosed with total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), Cleveland Clinic Children’s can provide personalized treatment.
TAPVR Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/26/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment