Palliative Care: Purpose & What To Expect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Palliative Care
Advertisement
Advertisement
Palliative Care
Palliative care provides symptom relief and support to people living with chronic conditions. Its benefits extend to caretakers, too. Palliative care isn’t the same as hospice care, and it’s not just for people with terminal illnesses. If you’re living with a life-altering condition, palliative care can improve your health and overall well-being.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Palliative Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is palliative care?
Palliative care is a specialized form of care that provides symptom relief, comfort and support to people living with serious or
chronic illnesses
. It also provides support to caregivers and those impacted by a loved one’s condition. Simply stated, it’s about improving your quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Palliative care is an extra layer of support on top of the care you already receive. It focuses on your own unique care goals in a way that aligns with your values. Unlike
hospice
— which people often associate with end-of-life care — palliative care can benefit people of any age and at any stage of a serious illness.
Palliative comes from the Latin word,
palliare
, which means “to cloak.” The word’s origins provide clues about the role of palliative care. Imagine an extra layer of comfort and protection shielding you from the harms associated with illness. This support is what palliative care is all about.
Who is palliative care for?
You can receive palliative care no matter your age, prognosis or whether you’re receiving
curative
treatments.
People with various conditions receive palliative care. Among many others, these conditions include:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Alzheimer’s disease
Cancer
COVID-19
Heart disease
HIV and AIDS
Kidney disease
Liver disease
Lung diseases like
COPD
and
emphysema
Multiple sclerosis (MS)
Parkinson’s disease
Stroke
Types of palliative care
Depending on the resources available in your area, you can receive palliative care in a variety of locations, including:
Palliative care in a clinic
. You can see a palliative care provider in the office, just like your primary care physician.
Palliative care in a hospital
. Palliative care physicians can see you while you’re in the hospital, where they often help treat pain or other symptoms.
Palliative care at home
. Receive one-on-one support from a healthcare provider in the comfort of your own home.
Residential care in an assisted living facility
. Many nursing homes and assisted living facilities have healthcare providers who can offer palliative care.
Advertisement
Who provides palliative care?
Palliative care teams include medical providers and other specialists who can help you manage symptoms. They can also help you navigate the added stress and responsibilities that often accompany serious illnesses.
Your care team may include:
Doctors
Nurses
Nurse practitioners
Physician assistants
Social workers
Spiritual advisors (chaplains)
What kind of support does palliative care provide?
Palliative care supplements your medical care in a variety of ways that can involve:
Symptom relief
Education and advocacy
Social support
Spiritual support
Symptom relief
Palliative care can help improve symptoms affecting your physical, mental and emotional well-being. Your palliative care team may deliver care directly. Your care team may also teach you strategies you can use every day to feel better.
Palliative care can help with symptoms like:
Anxiety
Constipation
Depression
Fatigue
Loss of appetite
Nausea
Pain or discomfort
Shortness of breath
Stress
Trouble sleeping
Your palliative care team may provide symptom relief through:
Breathing exercises
Cognitive exercises
Exercise guidance
Prescribing medication
Relaxation exercises
Tips for improving sleep
Palliative care providers can also refer you to specialists if you need additional care.
Education and advocacy
Your palliative care team can:
Help you better understand your condition
Help you decide what kind of treatment you’d like to pursue
Tell you how your condition may impact you in the future
The more informed you are, the more you can make care decisions that are right for you.
Your palliative care team can help communicate your values, goals and preferences to your other providers so you receive care on your terms.
Social support
Palliative care specialists recognize that your illness can impact the people you’re closest to. They provide support not just for you, but also for you those around you.
Your palliative care team can:
Connect you with support groups and community resources
Help you communicate with family members or refer you for family counseling
Support your friends and family as they navigate the stress they may feel over your illness
Spiritual support
Palliative care may include spiritual care, depending on your beliefs and preferences. Regular visits with a chaplain, religious leader or other spiritual advisor can be a helpful part of processing your illness’s impact on your life.
When is it time for palliative care?
There isn’t one set time for when someone should be offered palliative care. Many people opt for palliative care once they receive a serious diagnosis. Seeking care early on can help you plan for what’s to come.
Speak to your provider about whether they’d recommend palliative care for you.
How long can palliative care last?
You can see a palliative care specialist for as long as you feel it’s helpful. There are no limits to the number of visits you can make.
Advertisement
What are the benefits of palliative care?
Palliative care empowers you to make better care decisions that positively impact your life. It can improve healthcare-related outcomes, too. Research has shown that palliative care is associated with:
Improved patient and caregiver satisfaction
Improved quality of life
Less anxiety and depression
Longer life expectancy
What are the disadvantages of palliative care?
The biggest downside of palliative care is that many people don’t fully understand its purpose. Some people may be hesitant to begin this type of care because they think it’s only for people near the end of life. But palliative care doesn’t mean you’re dying. It’s for anyone who has a chronic condition that interferes with their quality of life.
How can I get palliative care?
You’ll need a referral from your provider to receive palliative care. In some instances, your provider may recommend it. If not, don’t be afraid to bring up the topic. Mention that you’re interested in learning more about palliative care, including whether you’re a good candidate and what resources are available.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with a serious illness can take a toll on your mind, body, relationships — and many other aspects of life. The demands can be overwhelming. Palliative care exists to ease multiple burdens associated with having a serious disease. Speak with your provider if you’d like to learn more about palliative care available to you or a loved one. Resources may be available that can help provide you with the comfort and support needed to live your life more fully.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Living with a serious illness can be challenging. Cleveland Clinic palliative care providers are here to offer you physical, social and emotional support.
Get Palliative Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials