Vision Therapy: What It Is & How It Works
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Vision Therapy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vision Therapy
Vision therapy is like physical therapy for your eyes. But research only supports using it for a convergence insufficiency. While you might be tempted to try it for other eye issues, research doesn’t support using it for other conditions. That means it might not help, and it could even make things worse if used for the wrong conditions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Vision therapy trains and exercises your eyes to improve how well you see.
What is vision therapy?
Vision therapy is a term some
optometrists
and
occupational therapists
use to refer to treatments that improve your
vision
through training. This treatment generally includes monitored in-office and at-home eye exercises that you do over the course of weeks to months.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In addition to eye exercises, your vision therapy treatment might also involve other tools. Some examples include training glasses, light-bending prisms, eye patches, electronic devices and much more.
The pediatric eye community doesn’t universally agree on what constitutes vision therapy. But some treatments that might fall under this umbrella include:
Orthoptic vision therapy
. This type of vision therapy typically happens at an optometrist’s or pediatric
ophthalmologist’s
office if you’re working with an orthoptist. During these visits, which usually take place weekly, an eye specialist will guide you through a series of eye movement exercises.
Vision therapy for myopia
. This type helps you avoid — or at least delay — the onset or worsening of
myopia (nearsightedness)
.
Amblyopia therapy
. This type involves some sort of occlusion or blurring of one eye in people who have poor vision on one side. The goal of the treatment is to try to strengthen the weaker eye. Many — but not all — types of
amblyopia
treatment are rooted in strong scientific evidence.
Light exposure therapy
. This type of vision therapy, called syntonics, is widely regarded as pseudoscience.
Behavioral vision therapy
. This type involves eye exercises that are meant to improve visual processing and understanding. Occupational therapists and some types of optometrists are more likely to recommend behavioral vision therapy.
Advertisement
What is done in vision therapy?
Vision therapy starts with an in-office evaluation and tests. Those tests help an
eye specialist
determine if you or your child has an issue with how your eyes align and work together. Based on the test results, your eye specialist may recommend vision therapy. If they do, they may also recommend certain treatments. Your treatment plan can take place over the span of weeks or months.
Vision therapy for convergence insufficiency
Orthoptic eye exercises (also known as orthoptics) can treat convergence insufficiency and a related condition called accommodative dysfunction. Those conditions are forms of
binocular vision dysfunction
. Convergence insufficiency is when your eyes struggle to point inward so you can see objects that are closer to you. Accommodative dysfunction is when your eyes struggle to focus, which can sometimes go hand-in-hand with convergence problems.
Eye specialists, like pediatric ophthalmologists, optometrists or orthoptists, prescribe and oversee these sessions. Your eye specialist will teach you which eye exercises to do, how to do them and tell you how often you need to do them. You can then do the exercises at home. Vision therapy for convergence insufficiency and accommodative dysfunction can reduce symptoms of
blur
,
eye strain
or
diplopia
and improve the way your eyes work together.
Additional Common Questions
Is vision therapy recommended?
Most vision therapy is controversial among eye care specialists. Research doesn’t support its use for conditions other than convergence insufficiency and accommodative dysfunction. And in some cases, trying certain forms of vision therapy can delay other treatments that will work, which can lead to permanent vision issues.
Multiple expert organizations recommend against the use of behavioral visual therapy for conditions other than convergence insufficiency. The organizations that recommend against using it for other conditions are:
The American Academy of Pediatrics
The American Academy of Ophthalmology
The American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus
The American Association of Certified Orthoptists
What can I do if my child is having problems learning in school?
There are several factors that could contribute to learning difficulties for children. And in many cases, it’s more than one factor. Some of the most common include:
Eye or vision issues
. Your child might have difficulty learning simply because they can’t see well. This can happen with conditions like amblyopia (lazy eye) and
strabismus (eye misalignment)
. It can also happen with refractive errors like nearsightedness (myopia),
farsightedness (hyperopia)
, or
astigmatism
. A pediatric eye doctor can diagnose these conditions with a full
eye exam
that includes pupil dilation. And there are many potential treatments that can help improve your child’s sight.
Dyslexia
. This isn’t an eye condition. Instead, it happens because your brain incorrectly processes what your eyes see. Behavioral vision therapy and eye exercises aren’t effective for treating it.
Other
learning disabilities and disorders
. Learning disabilities aren’t something that an eye care specialist can treat. Your pediatrician can recommend specialists who can diagnose and treat these conditions. Vision therapy also isn’t effective for treating these.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be difficult, frustrating or even scary to have trouble seeing the world or watch your child have this issue. While vision therapy might seem like a good option, it’s important to know that it only treats convergence insufficiency and accommodative dysfunction. There isn’t any strong scientific evidence to show that vision therapy can treat any other eye conditions. That’s the main reason why vision and medical insurance plans don’t usually cover it, leaving you to pay for it out of your own pocket.
If you have questions about potential vision issues and how they affect your child, talk to their pediatrician. They can recommend specialists who can properly diagnose what’s happening and offer effective, science-based treatment options.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Getting an annual eye exam at Cleveland Clinic can help you catch vision problems early and keep your eyes healthy for years to come.
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment