Renal Tubular Acidosis (RTA)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Renal Tubular Acidosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Renal Tubular Acidosis
Renal tubular acidosis is when you have too much acid in your blood because of a problem with your kidneys. There are three main types of RTA. Causes may include genetic conditions, autoimmune diseases and certain medications. Treatment includes medications that help balance your pH levels.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Renal Tubular Acidosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Renal Tubular Acidosis?
In renal tubular acidosis (REEN-uhl TOO-byuh-ler as-i-DOH-sis), your
kidneys
can’t remove excess acid and acid waste products from your blood.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your kidneys have many jobs. One of them is to regulate your body pH. Your body pH measures the levels of acids and bases (alkaline) in your body. It’s very important to the way your body system functions. Typically, the pH range is between 7.35 and 7.45. A body pH below this range means it’s acidic. A body pH above this range means it’s basic (alkaline).
For example, if you eat a meal that has a lot of protein, your body will produce a lot of acids. Your kidneys must get rid of these excess acids to keep your pH at a normal range. If you eat a meal that has a lot of fruits and vegetables, your body will have a lot of bases. Your kidneys must get rid of the excess bases to maintain your body pH.
Too much acid in your blood and other body fluids and tissues will change your normal body pH. This can affect many body system functions, like breathing. It may be life-threatening without treatment.
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is rare. Healthcare providers may misdiagnose or underdiagnose it because they don’t know much about it. This makes it difficult to estimate how many people have RTA.
Types of renal tubular acidosis
Healthcare providers classify renal tubular acidosis into three main types. These types depend on what part of the renal tubule has a problem:
Advertisement
Type 1 RTA (distal RTA or dRTA)
: This is when damage prevents the far (distal) parts of the kidney tubules from being able to get rid of acid.
Type 2 RTA (proximal RTA or pRTA)
: This is when damage prevents the closer (proximal) parts of the kidney tubules from being able to get rid of acid. Type 2 RTA is rarer than type 1 RTA. It’s most likely to occur during infancy. But it may also relate to alcohol use disorder, multiple myeloma and genetic causes.
Type 4 RTA (
hyperkalemic
RTA)
: This is when a problem occurs at the end part of the tubules. Your kidney tubules can’t get rid of enough potassium (hyperkalemia) and acid. Hyperkalemia also affects your kidneys’ ability to filter acid from your blood. Type 4 RTA is the most common type. It may occur if you have diabetes or if you take some medications.
Type 3 RTA is a combination of distal and proximal RTA. It’s very rare. Healthcare providers don’t typically use it to classify RTA.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of renal tubular acidosis
Renal tubular acidosis symptoms develop due to high acid levels. They affect how many of your organ systems work. Symptoms may include:
Bone pain
Breathing quickly (tachypnea)
Confusion
Dehydration
Feeling very tired (fatigue)
Increased heartbeat (tachycardia) or irregular heartbeat (atrial arrhythmia)
Muscle weakness
Pain, especially in your abdomen, back and flank
Peeing less than usual (oliguria)
Softening and weakening of bones (osteomalacia)
What is the most common cause of RTA?
Renal tubular acidosis causes depend on the type you have.
Type 1 RTA
You may inherit distal RTA from a biological parent (
genetic disorder
). You may also develop it from an
autoimmune disease
or certain medications.
Autoimmune diseases
: Examples include rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjögren’s syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus (lupus).
Genetic disorder
: Your
SLC4A1
,
ATP6V0A4
and
AT6V1B1
genes help balance the acids and bases in your body.
Genetic variations
in these genes can cause type 1 RTA.
Medications
: The antifungal medication amphotericin B, the psychiatric medication lithium and antibiotics such as pentamidine may cause type 1 RTA.
The most common cause of type 1 RTA in adults is autoimmune diseases.
Type 2 RTA
Proximal renal tubular acidosis causes vary. You may inherit type 2 RTA from a biological parent. Or another inherited condition may cause it. These include:
Amyloidosis
Cystinosis
Fanconi syndrome
Hereditary fructose (fruit sugar) intolerance
Light chain monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance
Multiple myeloma
Wilson disease
Certain medications may also cause RTA type 2. These medications treat the following conditions:
Glaucoma
HIV
Migraine headaches
Seizures
Viral hepatitis
Exposure to heavy metals, including lead and cadmium, can also cause type 2 RTA.
Advertisement
Some of the most common causes of type 2 RTA in adults include amyloidosis, light chain monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance and multiple myeloma.
Type 4 RTA
Hyperkalemic RTA can occur when inherited or acquired conditions affect your kidneys. These may include:
Addison’s disease
Amyloidosis
Diabetes-related nephropathy
A genetic variation that helps regulate your blood pressure (Gordon’s syndrome)
HIV/AIDS
Kidney transplant rejection
Lupus
Sickle cell disease
Urinary system obstruction, like an enlarged prostate gland (
benign prostatic hyperplasia
), kidney stone or tumor
It can also occur when there are low levels of aldosterone in your blood. Aldosterone is a hormone that helps your kidneys regulate your sodium (salt) levels. This can also affect your blood potassium levels.
Drugs that may cause type 4 RTA include:
Blood thinners (anticoagulants)
Certain antibiotics
Certain blood pressure medications, including ACE inhibitors and ARBs
Certain immunosuppressants that help prevent transplanted organ rejection
Diuretics
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
The most common cause of type 4 RTA in adults is diabetes-related nephropathy.
Risk factors
Renal tubular acidosis is rare. But your chances of developing RTA increase if you:
Advertisement
Have a blockage (obstruction) in your urinary system
Have certain autoimmune diseases, including Fanconi syndrome, lupus or Sjögren’s syndrome
Have exposure to cadmium or lead
Inherit certain genes from your biological parents
Receive a kidney transplant
Take certain medications
Complications of renal tubular acidosis
Complications may vary according to the type of renal tubular acidosis you have.
Type 1 RTA complications may include:
Calcium buildup in your kidneys, which may cause kidney stones
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Growth delays in children (growth faltering)
Hearing loss (renal tubular acidosis with deafness)
Metabolic bone disease
Sickle cell anemia
UTIs
Weak connective tissues (Ehlers-Danlos syndrome)
Type 2 RTA complications may include:
Growth delays in children
Problems with your teeth
Soft bones, which make them more likely to bend or break (rickets)
Type 4 RTA complications may include:
Electrical issues with your heart (cardiac arrest) due to high potassium levels
Irregular heartbeat
Muscle weakness
Without treatment, each type of RTA can be fatal.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose renal tubular acidosis
A healthcare provider will likely:
Review your medical history
Ask questions about your symptoms
Perform a physical exam
If they think you have RTA, they may recommend blood tests and urine tests (urinalyses). They use these tests to measure your pH and potassium levels. They may recommend other tests depending on the possible cause.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
It depends on what type you have. It also depends on whether the cause is inherited or acquired. Providers will give you a better idea of what to expect according to your specific diagnosis.
For each type of RTA, treatment usually involves oral alkali therapy (
sodium bicarbonate
or
sodium citrate
). This therapy can:
Increase your blood pH (make it more basic)
Relieve symptoms
Help prevent bone diseases, kidney stones or kidney failure
The most common forms of oral alkali therapy are tablets. But they may also include a solution that you drink.
Other medications a provider may recommend include:
Calcium and vitamin D supplements to help prevent bone diseases
Potassium citrate replacement tablets to treat low potassium blood levels (hypokalemia)
Thiazide diuretics (like
hydrochlorothiazide
or
chlorthalidone
) to help keep bicarbonate in your body and lower your risk of getting a calcium kidney stone
Providers may also recommend adjusting your eating patterns. This may include eating lots of fruits and veggies and cutting back on eating high-protein meats. They may recommend talking to a renal dietitian. Renal dietitians make meal plans for people who have kidney problems.
What kind of doctor treats this condition?
You may need a specialized team of healthcare providers to help treat renal tubular acidosis. Your care team may include a:
Hearing specialist (audiologist)
Kidney specialist (nephrologist)
Musculoskeletal specialist (orthopaedist)
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider right away if you have signs of renal tubular acidosis. Reach out again if your symptoms don’t start to improve after starting treatment.
You may wish to ask a provider the following questions:
What caused renal tubular acidosis?
What treatment do you recommend?
What tests do you recommend?
What can I do to feel better?
What things do I need to avoid, and what lifestyle modifications do I need to follow?
Are there any current medications I’m taking that may affect my RTA?
When should I start feeling better?
Do I need treatment for the rest of my life?
Will my child have growth delays?
Are there any RTA clinical studies I can participate in?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for renal tubular acidosis?
It depends on the type of renal tubular acidosis you have and its cause. Alkali therapy typically helps treat your symptoms. But you may need it for the rest of your life, even if the underlying cause of RTA goes away. RTA also increases your chances of developing other serious medical conditions. These include bone diseases, heart problems, kidney failure and death. You may need regular testing to check your blood pH.
Healthcare providers will give you a better idea of what to expect.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s normal to feel overwhelmed or anxious when you have a rare condition such as renal tubular acidosis. It can be even more frustrating because providers sometimes have difficulty diagnosing it. And you may need lifelong treatment. These feelings are normal. Be open with your healthcare providers about any concerns or questions you have. They’re available to answer your questions, give advice and provide support.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your kidneys, you want experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work with you to craft a personalized treatment plan.
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment