Synovial Chondromatosis: What It Is, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Synovial Chondromatosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Synovial Chondromatosis
Synovial chondromatosis occurs in one of your synovial joints — large joints enclosed within a synovial membrane. Chondromatosis means that cartilage grows abnormally out of the synovial membrane. These growths can irritate and damage your joint. Surgery can remove them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Synovial Chondromatosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Synovial Chondromatosis?
Synovial chondromatosis is when cartilage grows abnormally from the synovial membrane that lines your joint capsule. The cartilage growths are not cancerous, but they can damage your joint.
Synovial chondromatosis is a condition in which small,
noncancerous tumors
grow in the space around a joint (the joint capsule). The tumors are made of
cartilage
. (Chondromatosis means abnormal cartilage growth.) They grow out of the thin membrane that lines your joint capsule (the
synovial membrane
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Normally, your synovial membrane lubricates your joint and helps reduce friction when it moves. But when there are tumors growing out of it, friction does occur. The tumors can also break off and become loose bodies inside the joint capsule. They can irritate and damage the tissues or get stuck in the joint.
Types of synovial chondromatosis
Synovial chondromatosis can be primary or secondary.
Primary synovial chondromatosis
occurs unexpectedly in otherwise normal joints, for unknown reasons. This type is relatively rare. It tends to occur earlier in life, usually in your 30s or 40s.
Secondary synovial chondromatosis
occurs in joints that are already damaged by degenerative or inflammatory disease. This is more common. It tends to occur later in life, in your 50s or 60s.
Sometimes, the cartilage tumors harden into bone (ossification). Healthcare providers call this synovial osteochondromatosis (osteo- means bone). Other names for this condition include synovial chondrometaplasia and synovial osteochondroma. (
Osteochondroma
is a
noncancerous bone tumor
.)
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of synovial chondromatosis
Synovial chondromatosis causes symptoms similar to
arthritis
. It’s usually in just one joint, but sometimes it’s in the same joint on both sides (like both your knees).
Joint pain
and
swelling
are the most common complaints. Most people have pain when they’re at rest that gets worse when they move the joint.
Advertisement
You may also have:
Bumps (nodules) that you can feel under your skin
A grinding, creaking or popping sensation or noise when you move your joint (crepitus)
Stiffness or trouble moving your joint as much or as far as you used to
Instability or difficulty putting weight on your joint
Synovial chondromatosis usually occurs in larger joints that take a lot of daily stress, like your:
Knees
Hips
Shoulders
Elbows
Symptoms of synovial chondromatosis can be debilitating — like arthritis. But unlike arthritis, this condition is curable. Surgery can remove the tumors and stop them from damaging your joint. If you have worsening pain in a joint — even one that’s troubled you for a while — check in with your provider.
Synovial chondromatosis causes
Most of the time, synovial chondromatosis occurs in joints that have already taken a lot of wear and tear or damage from a chronic disease. In this case (secondary chondromatosis), the cartilage growing in your synovial membrane almost resembles a type of scarring process, similar to bone spurs on bones.
Some conditions that can set the stage for secondary synovial chondromatosis include:
Osteoarthritis
Inflammatory arthritis
Osteonecrosis
Osteochondritis dissecans
Primary synovial chondromatosis occurs for unknown reasons. Whereas the secondary type may develop from osteoarthritis, primary synovial chondromatosis can be the cause of osteoarthritis. Loose cartilage and bone pieces in your joint can irritate and wear down the soft tissues in your joint.
Risk factors
Besides preexisting joint disease, your sex is the most important risk factor. Synovial chondromatosis affects
males
four times more than females.
Complications of synovial chondromatosis
Synovial chondromatosis can cause permanent damage to your joint. The effect is like an accelerated form of osteoarthritis. The constant friction and inflammation in your joint wear down the cartilage and harden the synovial membrane. If this continues, you might eventually need joint replacement surgery.
Very rarely, a benign cartilage tumor can turn into a
cancerous one
. This is called
chondrosarcoma
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose synovial chondromatosis
A healthcare provider will examine your affected joint, then order imaging tests. Cartilage tumors in the joint will usually show up on
X-rays
. Occasionally, it may take a
CT scan
or MRI to see the smaller ones. Imaging tests may also show
inflammation
in your joint and evidence of tissue damage.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for synovial chondromatosis?
Treatment for synovial chondromatosis depends on how much the condition affects your joint. If tumors don’t cause too much discomfort or damage, your provider might suggest watching to see if this happens.
You can treat your symptoms at home with:
NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Cold therapy
(ice packs or ice baths)
But if loose tumors are getting stuck in your joint and seriously limiting your range of motion or damaging the cartilage in your joint, your orthopedist may recommend surgically removing them. Surgeons can often do it by
minimally invasive surgery
methods, like
arthroscopy
. But you may need open surgery if you have tumors in your hip or the back of your knee.
Advertisement
Additional procedures might include:
Synovectomy
: If you have a lot of tumors or they keep coming back after removal, your surgeon might suggest removing the synovial membrane from your joint to stop tumors from forming.
Joint replacement
: If your joint is badly damaged (often by other conditions in addition to synovial chondromatosis), your surgeon might recommend replacing it with a
prosthetic
one.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have synovial chondromatosis?
Synovial chondromatosis can be damaging, but it’s treatable. Your outlook depends on how soon you get treatment, how much damage your joint has and whether the tumors come back after treatment. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about what to expect based on your unique condition.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s easy to take your joints for granted until they start causing you pain — especially the large joints you rely on to get around every day. When these joints stop working properly, you might be tempted to ignore your symptoms and hope they go away, or to despair and think they’ll never be the same again.
Instead, check in with your healthcare provider. Synovial chondromatosis can be very harmful to your joints, but it’s also very treatable. The sooner you have a diagnosis and treatment, the more likely it is your joint will recover without too much permanent damage — and go on to serve you another decade.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment