Shoulder Arthritis: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Shoulder Arthritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Shoulder Arthritis
Shoulder arthritis is inflammation in your shoulder joint. Over time, arthritis leads to cartilage loss. Symptoms include pain, stiffness, decreased range of motion and popping, clicking and grinding noises in your shoulder joint. Treatments range from pain-relieving home remedies — like ice, heat and exercises — to surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Shoulder Arthritis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Shoulder Arthritis?
Shoulder arthritis is inflammation in your shoulder joint that causes pain and stiffness.
Shoulder arthritis is
inflammation
in your
shoulder joint
that causes pain and stiffness. It makes lifting your arm uncomfortable and performing daily tasks extremely difficult.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Arthritis
in the shoulder most commonly affects the “ball and socket” joint of your shoulder (glenohumeral joint). This joint is where the “ball” of your upper arm bone (
humerus
) rests against the “socket,” or cup, on the edge of your shoulder blade (
scapula
).
Over time, shoulder arthritis leads to cartilage loss.
Cartilage
is the tissue that covers the humeral head and the “socket” of your shoulder joint. Cartilage allows your bone surfaces to glide within your
joints
. It also cushions your
bones
against impact.
In the end stage of shoulder arthritis, without protective cartilage, bones in your shoulder joints rub directly against each other.
Bone spurs
can form, which block normal motion and can break off and become loose bodies within your joint.
What are the stages of shoulder arthritis?
There are four main stages of arthritis in the shoulder:
Stage 1
. In the early stage, your cartilage starts to soften, but you don’t have any serious symptoms. It’s sometimes called the doubtful stage.
Stage 2
. In the mild stage, your cartilage develops cracks.
Pain
and stiffness start to develop with movement of your joint.
Stage 3
. In the moderate stage, your cartilage starts to weaken and flake off. Pain becomes more frequent with movement, and stiffness occurs during long periods of rest.
Stage 4
. In the end stage, your cartilage wears away completely and exposes the surface of your bone. Pain, swelling and stiffness may be severe with or without movement.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of shoulder arthritis
Shoulder arthritis symptoms vary from person to person. Symptom severity doesn’t always align with the level of cartilage damage.
Signs and symptoms may include:
Shoulder pain
.
This is the most common symptom. At first, you may feel pain only during activity. As time goes on, you may feel pain at any time, with or without arm movement.
Stiffness and loss of range of motion
. You may feel stiffness in your shoulder and lose range of motion. These symptoms may make
everyday tasks
— like bathing or dressing — difficult.
Grinding, clicking, popping or cracking in your shoulder joint
.
Loss of cartilage, which leaves an unsmooth surface, causes these noises. The noises occur with or without pain.
Loss of
sleep
. It’s difficult to find a comfortable sleeping position. Any shoulder movement may hurt.
What does arthritis in the shoulder feel like?
If you have shoulder arthritis, you’ll feel mild-to-severe pain and stiffness in your shoulder. The pain is commonly located at the side of your shoulder, and the ache feels like it’s deep in your joint. Over time, you’ll notice a loss in your range of motion in your shoulder joint.
Shoulder arthritis causes
Shoulder arthritis has many possible causes. They include:
Osteoarthritis
. The most common type of arthritis, this is the “wear and tear,” age-related type of joint disease. Cartilage gets soft, cracks, flakes or becomes frayed and eventually wears away.
Rotator cuff tear
arthropathy
. This type of arthritis in the shoulder develops after a large rotator cuff tear causes the humeral head to rub up against your other bones.
Rheumatoid arthritis
and other inflammatory arthritis
. These are
autoimmune diseases
, which means your body’s defense system attacks its own healthy tissues.
Trauma to your shoulder
. Any type of injury to the bones of your shoulder — including
dislocation
,
fracture
or severe impact — can damage the cartilage surface.
Avascular necrosis
. This condition, also called osteonecrosis, is the death of part of the “ball” of your shoulder. It happens when trauma or disease cut off
blood flow
to the bone.
Risk factors for shoulder arthritis
Shoulder arthritis is more likely to affect people:
Over age 50
Who have
obesity
With a biological family history of the condition
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose arthritis in the shoulder
Your healthcare provider will perform a
physical exam
of your shoulder, including checking your range of motion and strength. Your provider will also ask about your medical history and current symptoms.
Your provider may order imaging tests, including
Shoulder X-ray
. X-rays show the condition of your shoulder bones. They can’t directly show cartilage, but your provider can see the amount of space between your shoulder bones.
CT scan
. This test provides more detail of the bones of your shoulder joint than X-rays. Providers order it frequently for surgical planning.
MRI scan
. This test shows the surrounding soft tissues of your shoulder joint. Your provider may order it to look at the condition of your rotator cuff tendons.
Management and Treatment
How is shoulder arthritis treated?
Arthritis in the shoulder treatment options include home-based and lifestyle care, medications and surgery.
Home-based and lifestyle care for shoulder arthritis
Treatment for shoulder arthritis usually begins with nonoperative, home-based and lifestyle care. These methods keep your shoulder mobile and reduce pain. These treatments include:
Activity and lifestyle adjustments
.
Let pain be your guide. Cut back or avoid everyday activities (for example, lifting heavy objects) or athletic activities that cause shoulder pain.
Ice and heat
.
Apply ice or moist heat — whichever feels better — to reduce
inflammation
and ease your pain.
Shoulder exercises
. Stretching exercises help improve or retain your range of motion. Your provider may have you work with a
physical therapist
.
Advertisement
Shoulder arthritis medications
Medications relieve pain and reduce inflammation. Common options are:
Over-the-counter medications
.
For short-term pain relief, common choices are
acetaminophen
(Tylenol®) or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (
NSAIDs
) like ibuprofen (Advil®, Motrin®).
Corticosteroid injections
. Cortisone relieves pain by reducing inflammation in your joint. Your provider injects the medication into the joint space in your shoulder.
Shoulder arthritis surgery
If other treatment methods don’t relieve your pain and your arthritis is getting worse, surgery may be an option. Common surgical options include:
Shoulder replacement
. Your surgeon uses plastic and metal to replace the diseased sections of bones in your shoulder joint.
Arthroscopic
shoulder debridement
.
Your surgeon inserts small tools and a camera through small cuts (incisions) in your shoulder to remove loose fragments of damaged cartilage.
Your surgeon may consider variations of these main types of surgeries based on the type, location and severity of your arthritis. Your lifestyle, health history and personal preferences may also play a role.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can shoulder arthritis be cured?
Although there’s no cure for shoulder arthritis, there are many ways to ease your pain. You can use ice, heat and exercises to keep your shoulder loose and comfortable. Also, limit or avoid activities that are causing you pain. If these simple methods don’t relieve your pain, ask your healthcare provider about surgical options.
Advertisement
What outcome can I expect if I have arthritis in the shoulder?
Your outcome depends on your age, activity level and the types and range of movements you make with your arm and shoulder. It also depends on the location, size and severity of your shoulder arthritis.
Because each person and shoulder situation is unique, ask your provider what outcome you can expect as you explore all treatment options.
Prevention
Can shoulder arthritis be prevented?
You can lower your chances of developing arthritis in the shoulder by:
Avoiding nicotine products, including vaping
Focusing on a healthy eating plan, like the
Mediterranean diet
Reaching and maintaining a healthy weight for you
Performing low-impact, non-weight-bearing physical activity
Reducing your risk of joint injuries by avoiding or limiting certain activities
See your healthcare provider at the first sign of symptoms. If your shoulder problem is found early, you can learn ways to reduce pain, change or avoid certain activities, and reduce further cartilage damage.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Shoulder arthritis can hurt and affect the quality of your life. But just because there’s not a cure doesn’t mean you should live with the pain. Reaching out to your provider is the first step toward confirming the cause of your shoulder pain and developing a treatment plan that can best ease your symptoms. Your provider can help you find ways to spend more time doing the things you love and less time feeling stiff and uncomfortable.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/06/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment