Monoplegia: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Monoplegia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Monoplegia
Monoplegia is a kind of paralysis in which only one limb, an arm or a leg, has lost complete voluntary muscle movement. The condition can be temporary or permanent. Cerebral palsy is the most common cause of monoplegia. Treatment typically involves managing your symptoms to improve your quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is monoplegia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What is monoplegia?
Monoplegia occurs when something, like a stroke or an injury, disrupts the
nerve
signals to the
muscles
in your arm or leg. It’s a type of
paralysis
that affects one arm or leg. Paralysis means you can’t move a part of your body. Monoplegia is sometimes temporary, but it’s often permanent.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A problem with your
nervous system
causes monoplegia. Your nervous system is your body’s command and communication system. It sends signals from your
brain
throughout your body, telling it what to do. If something damages your nervous system, messages can’t get through to the muscles in your arm or leg. The message has to go from your brain to your spinal cord, nerve roots, nerves and then your muscles. So, there are a lot of places that monoplegia could come from.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of monoplegia?
The inability to move one of your arms or legs is the most common symptom of monoplegia. Other symptoms that happen with monoplegia that may affect your arm or leg include:
Curling of your fingers or toes
Loss of muscle tone
Increased muscle tone
Muscle spasms
or
stiffness
Symptoms may come on suddenly if you had an injury or experienced a stroke. Symptoms come on gradually if you have a disease like cerebral palsy.
What causes monoplegia?
The most common cause of monoplegia is cerebral palsy.
Cerebral palsy
is a
neurological condition
that occurs when the areas of your brain that control muscle movement don’t develop properly or receive damage. This is a condition you’re born with.
Other monoplegia causes may include:
Traumatic brain injury
Spinal cord injury
Injury to the affected limb
Infections such as
polio
Strokes
and ruptured
aneurysms
Spinal cord or brain infections
Spinal cord or
brain tumors
Advertisement
What are the complications of monoplegia?
Monoplegia can lead to
blood clots
and other circulatory disorders like
deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
in the affected limb. The condition can cause disability. This may affect your mental health, possibly leading to conditions like
depression
and
anxiety
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose monoplegia
A healthcare provider will perform a
physical exam
and ask you if you’ve had any recent injuries. They’ll talk to you about when you first started to notice the problem. Your provider may request certain tests, including:
X-rays
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
Electromyogram (EMG)
Management and Treatment
How is monoplegia treated?
There isn’t a cure for monoplegia, but your provider will do what they can to treat the underlying cause. Treatment mainly focuses on relieving your symptoms and improving your quality of life.
Treatment options may include different kinds of therapy, like:
Physical therapy
. Physical therapy helps improve your strength, flexibility and mobility.
Occupational therapy
. Occupational therapy helps improve your functioning with daily tasks.
Psychotherapy
. Psychotherapy, or talk therapy, can help you deal with the challenges of living with a disability by identifying and changing unhealthy emotions and behaviors.
In addition to therapy, your provider may recommend assistive devices, like a wheelchair,
crutches
or a scooter to help you get around.
Depending on your condition, medications like
pain relievers
and
muscle relaxants
may help relieve some of your symptoms. If you have spasms or curling up of your limb,
botulinum toxin
injections can help.
In some cases, your provider may recommend surgery to correct anatomical abnormalities.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have signs of a stroke or a possible head, neck or spine injury, you should call 911 or your local emergency number. Otherwise, call your provider if you have:
Numbness or tingling in your arms or legs
Muscle weakness that persists or comes and goes
A sudden inability to move your muscles
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
Is monoplegia temporary or permanent?
How long will it take to get movement back?
What treatment do you recommend for me?
What type of therapy or assistive devices can help?
What signs of complications should I look out for?
Do you recommend physical therapy or occupational therapy?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook (prognosis) for someone with monoplegia?
The outlook for monoplegia depends on the cause and severity. The condition can sometimes improve over time, but many people will have permanent paralysis. Treatment can help reduce your symptoms and improve your quality of life.
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between monoplegia and monoparesis?
Monoplegia and monoparesis are similar, but they refer to different types of paralysis. Monoplegia means you have a complete loss of voluntary motor function in your arm or leg. Monoparesis means you’ve only partially lost function in your arm or leg.
Advertisement
What’s the difference between monoplegia and hemiplegia?
Monoplegia refers to paralysis that affects a single limb — one arm or one leg.
Hemiplegia
is paralysis that affects one entire side of your body (the entire right side of your body or the entire left side of your body). It affects the muscles in your arms, legs and sometimes face.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Monoplegia can be life-changing. You’ll need to adjust the way you do things — even if your paralysis is temporary. And it’s OK to have a lot of feelings about that. But know that there are treatments that can help relieve some of your symptoms and improve your quality of life. Talk to your healthcare provider about what options are available to you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment