Lung Disease: Types, Causes, Symptoms & Treatments
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Lung Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Lung Disease
Lung disease is a general term for health conditions that affect your airways or lung tissue. Examples include asthma, COPD, pulmonary fibrosis, pneumonia and lung cancer. Lung disease can cause symptoms like shortness of breath and chronic cough. Treatment depends on the type of lung disease you have.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Lung Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
What Is Lung Disease?
Lung disease is a general term for health conditions that affect your
airways
(tubes leading into your lungs) or tissue that makes up your
lungs
. Common lung diseases include
asthma
and
COPD
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). Cardiovascular diseases that affect your lungs — like
pulmonary hypertension
and
pulmonary embolism
— are also sometimes considered lung diseases.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most lung diseases are long-term (chronic). You may be born with one (like cystic fibrosis) or you might develop one later in life (like COPD). A few lung diseases, like infections, are short-term and can be cured.
Types of lung disease
Examples of lung diseases include:
Asthma, a condition that causes
inflammation
and narrows your airways
Bronchiectasis
, a condition where your airways widen and form pouches
COPD (including
emphysema
), airway damage that makes it hard to breathe
Cystic fibrosis
, a pancreatic disease that affects your lungs
Infections, like
pneumonia
and
tuberculosis
Pulmonary fibrosis
and other types of
interstitial lung disease
, conditions that damage your lung tissue and can get worse over time
Lung cancers
, like non-small cell lung cancer, small cell lung cancer and mesothelioma
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
(LAM), a disease that causes cysts in your lungs
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of lung disease
Symptoms of lung diseases can include:
Cough
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
)
Wheezing
or whistling noises from your chest
Tiredness (
fatigue
)
Chest pain
Coughing up blood
Frequent respiratory infections
Clubbed fingers
Bluish or grayish skin, lips or nails (
cyanosis
)
Symptoms might come on quickly or get worse over time. Most symptoms of lung disease are caused by narrowing of or blockages in your airways or air sacs (alveoli).
Advertisement
Lung disease causes
Some causes of lung disease include:
Smoking
Germs
, like
viruses
,
bacteria
and
fungi
Connective tissue and inflammatory diseases, like
rheumatoid arthritis
(RA),
lupus
,
scleroderma
and
sarcoidosis
Inhaling harmful substances, like
asbestos
and
radon
Allergic reactions to something you inhale (
hypersensitivity pneumonitis
)
Certain medications or treatments
Genetic changes
— either that you’re born with or that you acquire as you get older
Complications of lung disease
Swelling and blockages of your
respiratory tract
from lung diseases can lead to life-threatening complications. These include:
Collapsed lung (
pneumothorax
)
Fluid around your lungs (
pleural effusion
)
High levels of carbon dioxide in your blood (
hypercapnia
)
Low levels of oxygen in your blood (
hypoxemia
) or tissues (
hypoxia
)
Pneumonia
Pulmonary hypertension
Respiratory failure
Right-sided heart failure (
cor pulmonale
)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose lung disease
Depending on your symptoms and health history, your provider might use some of these tests to diagnose lung disease:
Pulmonary function tests
: Providers can use
spirometry
and other tests to see how well your lungs are working.
Pulse oximetry
: This test uses a device on your finger to measure
oxygen levels
in your blood.
Imaging tests
:
Chest X-rays
and
CT scans
can look for lung changes and damage.
Blood tests
: Blood tests can check your overall health. Your provider might also order special types of blood tests, like an
arterial blood gas test
or
genetic testing
.
Bronchoscopy
: Your provider can use this procedure to look inside your airways and take tissue and fluid samples for biopsy.
Electrocardiogram
(ECG or EKG)
: This test checks heart function and rules out heart disease as the cause of your symptoms.
Exercise testing
: Your provider uses this to determine if the oxygen level in your blood drops when you exercise.
Biopsy
: Your provider might test a small amount of tissue to diagnose certain lung diseases, like cancer or pulmonary fibrosis.
Management and Treatment
Treatments for lung disease
Treatment depends on what type of lung disease you have. Some options could include:
Corticosteroids
: Drugs like prednisone can help reduce inflammation in your airways.
Inhaled medications
:
Bronchodilators
and inhaled steroids can reduce inflammation and open your airways.
Oxygen therapy
: Your provider will prescribe extra oxygen if you don’t have enough getting to your blood or tissues.
Smoking cessation programs
: If you smoke, quitting can sometimes slow down the progression of some lung diseases.
Anti-fibrotic and cytotoxic drugs
: Medications that can slow down lung scarring caused by certain types of lung disease.
Biologic drugs
: Medications like
rituximab
are sometimes used to treat autoimmune diseases and other causes of lung disease.
Clinical trials
: Clinical trials are tests of new treatments to see if they’re safe and effective. Your provider might recommend one if a new treatment could be a good fit.
Positive airway pressure
: Your provider might have you use a
BiPAP machine
to help you breathe.
Pulmonary rehabilitation
: An exercise and education program can strengthen your lungs and help you manage certain lung diseases.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your provider if you have symptoms like shortness of breath or a nagging cough, especially if it’s gotten worse over time. Early detection and treatment reduce your risk of complications and help you feel better sooner. Go to the emergency room if you have severe symptoms, like chest pain or difficulty breathing.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can you prevent lung disease?
There aren’t many ways to directly prevent lung disease. But you might be able to reduce your risk by taking steps to protect your lung health:
Don’t smoke or
vape
. Smoking causes or makes worse many lung and airway diseases. Vaping liquids often have many of the same ingredients as cigarettes.
Avoid pollutants that can damage your airways
. Wear a mask, ventilate the area and take other precautions if you must be exposed to fumes, dust, allergens or other inhaled substances during your job or hobbies.
Prevent infections
. Washing your hands often and getting
vaccinated
against respiratory illnesses can help prevent you from getting infections in your lungs.
Manage ongoing health conditions
. Talk to your provider about how to prevent lung damage if you have a condition that puts you at risk.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Most lung diseases don’t have a quick fix. But there are often ways to improve your symptoms and your quality of life by working closely with your healthcare provider. It can help to ask them what to expect and what symptoms to look out for. Don’t hesitate to talk to them about any concerns you have.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment