HDL: Why It’s “Good” Cholesterol
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
HDL Cholesterol
Advertisement
Advertisement
HDL Cholesterol
HDL cholesterol is the “good” cholesterol because a healthy level lowers your risk of heart disease. The normal range is 40 to 80 mg/dL in males and 50 to 80 mg/dL in females. Your provider can check your levels with a simple blood test. HDL stands for high-density lipoprotein. It’s the name of the particle that carries cholesterol in your blood.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
A blood test can tell you how much HDL (the “good” cholesterol) you have.
What is HDL cholesterol?
HDL
cholesterol
is a substance in your blood that helps your healthcare provider understand your risk for
cardiovascular disease
. It’s a type of
lipid
. You’ll see HDL cholesterol (also called HDL-C) on your
lipid panel
results along with things like
LDL
cholesterol,
VLDL
cholesterol and
triglycerides
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In general, an HDL cholesterol level on the higher end of normal suggests your risk for heart disease is lower. This makes HDL cholesterol
different from LDL cholesterol
, which you should keep low.
But you don’t want your HDL cholesterol to be
too
high.
Abnormally high levels
may suggest that there’s an underlying dyslipidemia (abnormal balance between good and bad cholesterol). Your provider will help you keep your HDL cholesterol in the normal range to support your heart and overall health.
What is HDL?
HDL stands for high-density lipoprotein. A
lipoprotein
is a particle made of lipids and proteins.
Lipoproteins circulate in your
blood
. They’re a bit like buses. Their main job is to transport cholesterol throughout your body to cells that need them. Cholesterol needs a ride because its chemical structure keeps it from traveling solo through your blood.
HDL is just one type of “bus” that travels in your blood. LDL and VLDL are other types. Your lipid panel shows the amount of cholesterol traveling on each type of bus at the moment your blood is drawn.
That means HDL cholesterol and HDL aren’t really the same thing. HDL refers to the particle or “bus,” and HDL cholesterol refers to some of the passengers on that bus. But most people use both terms to refer to the
cholesterol level
in your blood.
Advertisement
Why is HDL called “good” cholesterol?
HDL particles are “good” because experts have linked levels on the higher end of normal with a lower risk of heart disease. HDL particles pick up extra cholesterol in your blood and deliver it to your
liver
. Your liver then breaks down this cholesterol and sends it out of your body through your poop. That’s a good thing because too much cholesterol in your blood raises your risk of
plaque buildup
in your artery walls.
You need enough HDL particles in your blood to pick up excess cholesterol and carry it to your liver. HDLs are also helpful because they combat
inflammation
and play a role in preventing
blood clots
.
What is the normal range for HDL cholesterol?
Here are the normal and abnormal HDL cholesterol ranges for adults, which vary by
sex
:
Low HDL
: Below 40 mg/dL (
males
) or below 50 mg/dL (females)
Normal HDL
: 40 to 80 mg/dL (males) or 50 to 80 mg/dL (females)
High HDL
: Above 80 mg/dL (everyone)
For kids and teens, a normal HDL level is 45 to 80 mg/dL.
Causes of low HDL
There are many reasons why your HDL cholesterol may be low, including:
Metabolic syndrome
: This is a combination of cardiovascular disease risk factors, including lower-than-normal HDL levels.
A
BMI
greater than 25
: Having
overweight
or
obesity
can lower your HDL level.
Smoking
or tobacco use
: Tobacco contains nicotine, which lowers your HDL level. All tobacco products, including
e-cigarettes
, have this harmful effect.
Insulin resistance
: Excess fat can make it difficult for insulin in your body to manage your blood sugar well. This can cause a low level of HDL.
Familial combined
hyperlipidemia
: This genetic condition causes your HDL cholesterol to be too low and your LDL cholesterol to be too high.
ApoA1 deficiency
: People with this
genetic condition
don’t have enough Apolipoprotein A1. This is a key component of HDL.
Tangier disease
: This genetic condition causes your HDL cholesterol to be too low.
Medicines you take
: Some drugs, like
beta-blockers
, certain hormones or some
diuretics
, can lower your HDL cholesterol level temporarily. But this doesn’t mean you should stop taking your other medications, as this could further increase your risk for heart disease.
Causes of high HDL
Your HDL cholesterol level may be above 80 mg/dL due to:
Alcohol use disorder
Hyperthyroidism
Primary biliary cholangitis
Gene changes
Side effects from medications
Can I influence my HDL level?
Yes. If your HDL cholesterol is too low, your provider may suggest ways to
raise it
. These include eating
heart-healthy foods
, adding more
physical activity
to your routine and maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you.
If your HDL cholesterol is too high, your provider will look into the cause and tell you if you need treatment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Making sense of your cholesterol test results can be confusing. There are many terms to learn, and some look very similar to each other. When you see HDL, think of “h” for “helpful.” HDLs help your body get rid of extra cholesterol. This supports the health of your heart and blood vessels.
If your HDL cholesterol is outside the normal range, your provider will find the cause. They’ll treat that cause and may also prescribe medicines to help support healthy cholesterol levels in your body. Remember that your provider is your partner in managing your cholesterol. They’ll help answer any questions you have.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment