Seborrheic Dermatitis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Seborrheic Dermatitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Seborrheic Dermatitis
Seborrheic dermatitis is a common skin condition that makes your skin itchy, flaky and scaly, especially on your scalp and face. It isn’t contagious and can come and go throughout your life. Treatments like medicated creams and shampoos can help you keep it well managed.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Seborrheic Dermatitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Seborrheic Dermatitis?
Seborrheic dermatitis causes itchy, scaly and greasy patches of skin, often on your scalp.
Seborrheic dermatitis (pronounced seb-o-REE-ik dur-muh-TAI-tuhs) causes scaly, flaky and itchy patches on your skin. It often shows up on parts of your body with a lot of oil glands, like your face and scalp. It’s a common skin problem.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When it happens on a teen’s or adult’s scalp, it’s usually called dandruff. In babies, it’s called
cradle cap
.
Seborrheic dermatitis is a lifelong condition. It can come and go over time with flare-ups. There’s no cure, but there are over-the-counter (OTC) and medicated treatment options that can help you manage it.
Symptoms and Causes
Seborrheic dermatitis symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Dry or greasy scalp scaling (dandruff)
White to yellow flaking
Itchy skin
Thick, scaly patches of skin (plaques)
Small, dark or yellow to red raised bumps
Hair shedding from scratching in affected areas (but not permanent hair loss)
Babies may have a thick, yellow, crusted scalp rash (cradle cap) and/or a
diaper rash
.
Where does seborrheic dermatitis affect my skin?
This condition usually shows up in areas of your body that have more oil (
sebaceous
) glands. It can affect your:
Belly button
Ears (behind them)
Eyebrows
Face and forehead
Head and scalp
Nose (creases on the sides)
Upper back and chest
Skin folds in your arms, legs and groin area
Skin under your breasts
Seborrheic dermatitis causes
Researchers aren’t sure of the exact cause. But studies show that too much yeast on your skin could cause it. There’s a type of yeast called
Malassezia
that lives on everyone’s skin. It’s usually harmless. But when there’s too much of it, a skin reaction happens.
Advertisement
The yeast grows well in oily areas of your body. It makes a substance that turns oil into a fatty acid. Your skin doesn’t like this fatty acid and reacts to it, causing discoloration, itching and flakes. Over time, this weakens your skin’s outer barrier. It makes it easier for the yeast to keep growing and for moisture to escape.
What can trigger seborrheic dermatitis?
You might notice symptoms get worse if you’re:
Around harsh chemicals (paint or cleaning products)
Developing an infection
In the sun for too long
In cold, dry weather
Stressed out
Using alcohol-based skincare products
Is seborrheic dermatitis contagious?
No, it isn’t contagious. It doesn’t spread from person to person.
Risk factors of seborrheic dermatitis
You may be more at risk of developing this condition if you have:
A biological family history of
dermatitis
A history of other skin disorders, including
rosacea
,
psoriasis
and acne
A medication side effect (dopamine antagonists, immunosuppressants, PUVA, lithium)
HIV, AIDS or a compromised immune system
Naturally oily skin
Neurological disorders like Parkinson’s disease
It’s also more common among:
Males
Infants (2 to 12 months)
Adolescents
Adults (after age 30)
Complications of seborrheic dermatitis
Scratching your skin can break it open, which may lead to bleeding and infections.
Living with a long-term skin condition can be hard, especially if the patches show up on visible parts of your body. This can affect your self-esteem. If you need help coping, consider talking to a mental health provider for support.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose seborrheic dermatitis
Your provider will look at your skin to make a diagnosis. The patches (plaques) are usually easy to recognize, so they don’t need to do any testing.
But if you don’t get better with treatment, your provider may order a
skin biopsy
. This is to make sure it isn’t another condition.
What can be mistaken for seborrheic dermatitis?
It’s important to see a healthcare provider if you notice changes to your skin. They can make a clear diagnosis. The following may look like seborrheic dermatitis:
Candidiasis
Impetigo
Lupus erythematosus
Psoriasis
Rosacea
Management and Treatment
Learn three effective ways to manage dandruff.
Seborrheic dermatitis treatment
Seborrheic dermatitis usually doesn’t go away on its own. Treatment depends on where it is on your body and how serious it is. The goal is to reduce flakes and itching. You may need to keep using treatments to prevent flare-ups.
Scalp treatment for teens and adults
If you have a mild case of dandruff on your scalp, you can try an OTC dandruff shampoo. Look for ones with:
Selenium
Zinc
Coal tar
For long-term management, your healthcare provider might prescribe stronger antifungal shampoos. These include:
Ciclopirox
Ketoconazole
If your case is moderate to severe, your provider may suggest shampoos with steroids like:
Betamethasone valerate
Clobetasol
Fluocinolone
Your provider will give you instructions on how often to use these. You should also talk to your provider about side effects and what to look out for while using these shampoos.
Advertisement
Face and body treatments
If you have seborrheic dermatitis on your face or body, there are different treatment options:
Topical
antifungal
products
: These help fight fungus. Common options include clotrimazole and ketoconazole.
Topical corticosteroids
: These reduce swelling and discoloration. Hydrocortisone is a common option.
Topical calcineurin inhibitors
: This is another treatment if corticosteroids aren’t right for you. You might try pimecrolimus cream or tacrolimus ointment.
Antifungal medicines
: You can take these pills by mouth to reduce symptoms. Examples include itraconazole, fluconazole and terbinafine.
Phototherapy
: A special ultraviolet light directed at your skin may lessen symptoms (but only when prescribed by your healthcare provider).
Your provider will tell you how often to use your medicine and exactly how to apply it. Some medicines come as a cream or ointment that you put on your skin. Others are pills that you take by mouth. Your provider will also explain what side effects to watch for.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your provider if your symptoms get worse or you have a flare-up. They may need to change your dose, add another medicine or try a different treatment.
You should also see a provider if:
Your skin becomes painful, swollen or starts to drain fluid (a sign of infection)
Over-the-counter treatments aren’t helping
The condition affects your daily life or mental health
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
Do my symptoms indicate seborrheic dermatitis, eczema, atopic dermatitis or psoriasis?
What over-the-counter treatment or combination of treatments would work best for me?
Is there a specific brand of dandruff shampoo, cream or lotion that you recommend?
Is there a prescription shampoo, cream or lotion you can prescribe?
How often should I see a dermatologist regarding this condition?
What should I do if I have an allergic reaction to a shampoo/cream/lotion?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have seborrheic dermatitis?
Seborrheic dermatitis usually comes and goes. It isn’t dangerous and doesn’t harm your overall health. It’s manageable. Once you start treatment, symptoms usually improve quickly.
But if itching and scaling don’t go away with OTC options, see your provider. They may prescribe stronger medications to help.
How do I take care of myself?
If you have seborrheic dermatitis on your scalp, you can try some of the over-the-counter dandruff shampoos. If one shampoo doesn’t work, look at the active ingredient and try another product with a different active ingredient. Shampoos should stay on your scalp for at least five minutes before rinsing off.
If you think you have seborrheic dermatitis on your face or body, see your healthcare provider or
dermatologist
. They’ll offer an exam to determine the extent and severity of your condition. You’ll work together to develop the best treatment approach to manage flare-ups.
Advertisement
Follow all instructions and never hesitate to call your healthcare provider if you have questions or concerns.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk of seborrheic dermatitis?
There isn’t much you can do to completely prevent seborrheic dermatitis. Some healthy things you can do to lower your risk include:
Get plenty of rest
Try to manage your stress
Get a little bit of sunshine each day (just a few minutes, but not during midday when the sun is strongest)
Follow a good skincare routine
Always stick to your healthcare provider’s instructions when using medicated shampoos and skin products. This can make managing your condition easier to prevent flare-ups.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Nothing’s more frustrating than picking out the perfect shirt, feeling an itch on your scalp and realizing your outfit is now covered in flakes. That’s the reality of living with seborrheic dermatitis. It can flare up without warning. It’s a common condition and nothing to feel embarrassed about.
The good news is that treatment can make your symptoms go away fairly quickly. A healthcare provider can help you find a plan that works best for your skin, so you don’t have to worry about itching, scaling or flaking ruining your day.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment