Early-Onset Alzheimer’s: What It Is, Causes & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Early-Onset Alzheimer’s Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Early-Onset Alzheimer’s Disease
Early-onset Alzheimer’s disease is a type of Alzheimer’s that causes symptoms in people younger than 65. Just like typical Alzheimer’s, there’s currently no cure. But your healthcare provider will recommend treatments to slow down how fast it progresses.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Alzheimer's Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is early-onset Alzheimer’s disease?
Early-onset Alzheimer’s disease (EOAD) is a type of
Alzheimer’s disease
that affects people younger than 65. Healthcare providers sometimes call it young-onset or younger-onset Alzheimer’s disease. It happens when you develop Alzheimer’s symptoms before turning 65. Most people with EOAD first notice symptoms between ages 45 and 64.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Alzheimer’s disease (pronounced “alz-HAI-mers”) is a
neurodegenerative disease
. This means it damages and destroys cells in your brain over time. It’s the most common cause of
dementia
. EOAD is less than 1% of all cases of Alzheimer’s disease.
It might be hard for you to notice symptoms in yourself, especially at first. Your loved ones might point out subtle changes you can’t see. Visit a healthcare provider as soon as you notice any changes in your ability to remember, think or do daily activities.
Symptoms and Causes
What are early-onset Alzheimer’s symptoms?
Early-onset Alzheimer’s shares symptoms with typical Alzheimer’s disease. Usually, the only difference is when you first experience them. The condition causes a progressive cognitive decline. That means symptoms will become more severe over time as it damages your brain.
It might be hard for you to notice symptoms in yourself, especially at first. Your loved ones might point out subtle changes you can’t see. Talk to a healthcare provider if you or people you trust notice any dementia symptoms.
Early-onset Alzheimer’s causes a progressive cognitive decline. That means symptoms will become more severe over time as it damages your brain.
Everyone experiences EOAD differently. But in general, it affects your:
Advertisement
Memory
Language skills
Reasoning ability
Behavior and personality
Spatial awareness
EOAD symptoms usually start mild and become more severe over time. At first, you might notice subtle changes, including:
Changes in your behavior or personality (especially feeling more aggressive or impulsive)
Having a hard time choosing the right word when you’re speaking or writing
Memory loss
(like not remembering people’s names, faces or events that just happened)
Trouble solving problems that are usually easy for you
Trouble concentrating or deciding what to do next, even if you have instructions (like following a recipe)
Vision
, balance or coordination issues (you might notice bumping into furniture or stumbling more often)
Later on, you might notice more severe symptoms, like:
Forgetting where you are or how you got there
More severe memory loss (including forgetting parts of your
long-term memory
)
Not trusting loved ones, or feeling more suspicious (even of people you know)
Losing some (or all) of your ability to speak and communicate
What causes early-onset Alzheimer’s disease?
An abnormal build-up of proteins in your brain causes early-onset Alzheimer’s. Specifically, two proteins called amyloid and tau.
Your brain has billions of
nerve cells
called neurons. Your neurons let you think, learn, remember and plan. Amyloid protein sticks together in your brain cells, forming clumps called plaques. Tau proteins twist together in fiber-like strands called tangles. The plaques and tangles prevent neurons from working as they should. They block neurons’ ability to send electrical and chemical signals back and forth.
When amyloid and tau proteins build up in your brain, they slowly kill neurons. This causes permanent damage that leads to Alzheimer’s symptoms. Nerve cell death starts in one area of your brain and then spreads to other areas. It’s most common for EOAD to begin in the area of your brain that controls memory — your
hippocampus
.
Experts are still learning more about what exactly causes these proteins to build up. Researchers think the protein build-up happens a long time before it causes issues. It might happen up to 10 years before you notice any symptoms.
Is early-onset Alzheimer’s genetic?
Yes, early-onset Alzheimer’s can be a
genetic condition
. Most cases of early-onset Alzheimer's disease appear linked with a
genetic change
on chromosomes 1, 14 or 21. Having the
APOE
ε4 gene
also increases your risk. But not everyone who has the
APOE
ε4 gene will get Alzheimer’s. It’s just one factor that can increase your risk.
Alzheimer’s also runs in families.
Your risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease is higher if you have a biological parent or sibling with it. Your risk is even higher if two or more of your biological siblings or parents have it.
What are the risk factors?
Researchers are still studying what causes early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Some risk factors may include:
Advertisement
Having a family history of first-degree relatives with Alzheimer’s disease
Environmental factors (something about where you live, work or spend a lot of time)
Having a
traumatic brain injury
Smoking
Your overall health
Some health conditions may increase your Alzheimer’s risk, including:
Cardiovascular disease
Diabetes
Down syndrome
caused by trisomy 21
High blood pressure
High cholesterol
Obesity
What are early-onset Alzheimer’s complications?
The biggest complication of early-onset Alzheimer’s is the damage it does to your brain. That can cause permanent changes to your ability to think and use your body, and to your personality. As the condition progresses, you’ll probably experience complications, some of which can be fatal.
Complications can include:
An overall decline in physical health
Infections (like
pneumonia
or skin infections)
Seizures
Trouble breathing
Trouble swallowing
Losing control of your body can increase your risk of:
Bedsores
Dehydration
or
malnutrition
Falls,
bone fractures
and other traumatic injuries
Losing control of your pee (
urinary incontinence
) and poop (
bowel incontinence
)
Tooth decay,
cavities
and other dental issues
Diagnosis and Tests
How do you diagnose early-onset Alzheimer’s?
Healthcare providers diagnose EOAD the same way they do typical Alzheimer’s disease. They’ll do a complete
physical exam
and
neurological exam
. Next, they’ll rule out other conditions that cause similar memory issues and other symptoms.
Advertisement
Your provider will ask you questions to understand your health and daily routine. They may also talk to a loved one to learn if they’ve noticed any changes you might not be able to see in yourself. Your provider may ask about your:
Overall health
Medical history
Current medications or supplements you’re taking
Changes in your mood, behavior and personality
Ability to do your usual activities
Your provider will also use a few tests, including:
Cognitive tests
CT scan
Brain MRI
PET scan
Blood tests
Urine tests
There’s no single test that can confirm or diagnose early-onset Alzheimer’s. But together, these tests will help your provider rule out other conditions that cause similar symptoms.
Management and Treatment
What are early-onset Alzheimer’s disease treatments?
Your provider will suggest treatments to slow down how fast you develop dementia. There’s no cure for any type of Alzheimer’s disease. But treatments may manage symptoms as they happen and delay the condition’s progression.
Starting treatment as soon as possible is the best way to maintain your brain health throughout your life. But there’s currently no treatment available that stops or reverses the brain damage or cognitive decline.
Your provider will probably
suggest typical Alzheimer’s treatments
for EOAD. You may need medications, including:
Advertisement
Cholinesterase inhibitors
Donanemab
Lecanemab
NMDA antagonists
Aducanumab
is a relatively new treatment for EOAD. Experts are still studying it. It reduces amyloid protein deposits in your brain.
Medications to manage specific symptoms
Your provider may suggest medications to manage specific symptoms as they develop. You may need:
Antidepressants
. These drugs can treat
anxiety
, restlessness, mood swings and
depression
.
Antipsychotics (neuroleptics)
. These can treat paranoia, hallucinations and
agitation
.
Antiseizure medications
. These medications can also sometimes treat mood changes.
Clinical trials
Scientists are always researching EOAD and possible treatments. Ask your provider if there are any clinical trials that could help you. These are tests or research studies done using human volunteers who have early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. They might help you try new treatments that aren’t widely available yet.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Alzheimer's Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy for someone with early-onset Alzheimer’s disease?
Early-onset Alzheimer’s disease affects everyone differently. Some people live for decades. Others die within 10 years of diagnosis. How long you can expect to live depends on factors like:
How quickly you experience cognitive decline
Your age at diagnosis
Your overall health and any other conditions you may have
Early-onset Alzheimer’s usually progresses faster than typical Alzheimer’s. This can mean you’ll develop more severe symptoms sooner than someone who was diagnosed after age 65. Talk to your provider about living with EOAD. They can help you set realistic goals and expectations.
Living With
How do I get used to living with early-onset Alzheimer’s?
It can be hard to adjust to living with early-onset Alzheimer’s. People young enough to have EOAD are usually still working and might have young families. This can create challenges that people who develop typical Alzheimer’s may not have.
In the U.S., the
Americans with Disabilities Act
covers your right to accommodations at work. Your healthcare provider can suggest other resources, too. You can start planning for the future before you experience more severe symptoms. You might want to think about things like
advanced directives
and legal and financial plans.
Talk to a mental health professional if you need support. It’s extremely common for people with early-onset Alzheimer’s and their loved ones to feel extra
stress
, anxiety and grief, especially right after diagnosis. Those feelings are real and valid, but they don’t have to control your life. A mental healthcare provider can help you process your thoughts and emotions.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider right away if you’re experiencing issues with memory or thinking.
You’ll need regular check-ups with your provider. They’ll monitor the condition’s progression and adjust your treatments as needed.
You might want to ask your provider questions like:
What symptoms or changes should I and my loved ones watch out for?
Is there any way to estimate how quickly the condition will progress?
Which treatments are best for me?
Can you suggest any community resources to help my family adjust?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Everyone has the occasional brain fart or forgets what they were talking about in the middle of a thought. That’s not a cause for concern. You know your mind and body better than anyone. But visit a healthcare provider if you’re worried your memory or thinking skills are noticeably changing — especially if it’s sudden.
There’s no cure for early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. But your healthcare provider will help you find treatments that might slow its progression. They’ll also help you and your loved ones make a plan for today, tomorrow and whatever comes next.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Getting an Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis can be overwhelming. Cleveland Clinic offers the latest treatments, education and caring support for you and your family.
Alzheimer's Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/17/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment