Radiation Cystitis: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Radiation Cystitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Radiation Cystitis
Radiation cystitis is inflammation in your bladder that develops because of radiation therapy. Symptoms typically affect your bathroom habits, including peeing more than usual, a burning sensation when you pee and urinary incontinence. You can help treat mild cases with anti-inflammatory medications. Severe cases may require numbing medications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is radiation cystitis?
Radiation cystitis is
inflammation
that occurs in your
urinary bladder
after
radiation therapy
to treat
cancer
in your pelvic area. This may include:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Bladder cancer
Colorectal (colon) cancer
Prostate cancer
Uterine cancer
Ovarian cancer
Radiation cystitis can be an uncomfortable side effect of radiation therapy. If you have symptoms like difficulty peeing or peeing more frequently, let your provider know so they can recommend ways to help.
What are the types of radiation cystitis?
Acute radiation cystitis
: This type develops suddenly. It may develop in the time between radiation therapy sessions or shortly after completely finishing radiation therapy.
Delayed (late) radiation cystitis
: This type takes longer to develop. It can occur six months or even longer after completing radiation therapy. Sometimes symptoms develop years later.
What is another name for radiation cystitis?
Another name for radiation cystitis is radiation-induced cystitis.
How common is radiation cystitis?
Anywhere between 23% and 80% of people who receive radiation treatment in their pelvic area develop radiation cystitis. There’s such a big range because there are different types of radiation therapy, and you may need more or less radiation therapy depending on your
cancer stage
and where the cancer is in your body. A healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect according to your unique situation.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of radiation cystitis?
Radiation cystitis symptoms may range from mild to severe. The severity usually depends on how much radiation therapy you need — that is, the amount or duration.
Advertisement
Mild radiation cystitis symptoms may include:
Peeing more than usual (
frequent urination
)
Waking up more than once to pee (
nocturia
)
Urgent, uncontrollable need to pee (
urge incontinence
)
Pain or burning when you pee (
dysuria
)
Bladder
muscle spasms
Over time, these symptoms may improve on their own without treatment.
Severe radiation cystitis symptoms may include:
Long-term loss of bladder control (
urinary incontinence
)
Bladder can’t hold as much pee (reduced bladder capacity)
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
)
A sore (ulcer or lesion) in your bladder wall (Hunner’s ulcer)
An opening or tunnel between two body parts that don’t usually connect (
fistula
)
Bladder tissue deteriorates (
necrosis
)
Is radiation cystitis progressive?
For some people, radiation cystitis can be progressive. You may not have any radiation cystitis symptoms while going through radiation therapy. But they develop months or even years after you complete radiation therapy.
What causes radiation cystitis?
Radiation therapy causes radiation cystitis. Before you start treatment, a healthcare provider will review the benefits of radiation therapy and weigh them against the potential risks so you can make an informed decision.
What causes late radiation cystitis?
Late radiation cystitis develops because radiation therapy causes
scar
-like tissue to build up in your bladder (fibrosis).
How long after radiation can you get radiation cystitis?
Late radiation cystitis may develop anywhere between six months and 20 years after completing radiation therapy.
Who does radiation cystitis affect?
Radiation cystitis can affect anyone who gets radiation therapy to treat cancer in their pelvic area. But
males
are more likely to develop it because radiation therapy is a common treatment option for prostate cancer. Prostate cancer is the second-most common cancer that affects men.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is radiation cystitis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will review your medical history, ask questions about your symptoms and perform a
physical exam
. Radiation cystitis shares many of the same symptoms as other common conditions that can affect your bladder, including
urinary tract infections
(UTIs) and
bladder stones
. So, to help make an accurate diagnosis and rule out other conditions, they may recommend testing.
What tests will be done to diagnose radiation cystitis?
Radiation cystitis testing may include:
Urinalysis
(pee test)
: A provider examines a sample of your pee for the presence of blood or
bacteria
.
Blood tests
: A provider takes a blood sample to look for signs of
infection
.
Cystoscopy
: A provider inserts a thin, lighted device with a camera at the end (cystoscope) into your
urethra
and up to your bladder to visually examine your bladder.
Management and Treatment
How do you treat radiation cystitis?
It depends on the severity of your radiation cystitis. Mild radiation cystitis may eventually improve on its own without treatment. You can help alleviate some of your discomfort with the following:
Advertisement
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) to help reduce inflammation
Analgesics
(painkillers) to help reduce pain
Antispasmodics
to help relieve bladder spasms
For more severe symptoms, a healthcare provider may recommend:
Bladder irrigation (bladder wash)
: A healthcare provider inserts a urinary catheter through your urethra and up to your bladder to deliver numbing medications.
Sodium hyaluronate injection
: A provider injects sodium hyaluronate directly into your bladder, usually through a urinary catheter. It coats your bladder walls to help relieve pain.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
(HBOT)
: During HBOT, you enter a pressurized chamber that fills with 100% oxygen. The oxygen helps your damaged bladder tissue heal. The extra air pressure helps your body absorb more oxygen.
Urinary reconstruction and diversion
: A surgeon creates a new way for your body to store and remove pee from your body.
Cystectomy
: A surgeon removes your bladder. They’ll also create a new way for your body to store pee and remove it from your body. A cystectomy to treat radiation cystitis is rare. A provider will only recommend it if your symptoms are severe and don’t respond to other treatments.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
It depends on how much radiation therapy you require, the severity of your symptoms and your body’s response to treatment. Your healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect according to your unique situation.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have radiation cystitis?
For many people, radiation cystitis is a long-term condition. Your symptoms may be mild or severe, and they may go away and come back or last a long time. Talk to your healthcare provider about your outlook and the best treatment options.
How long can radiation cystitis last?
It varies. For some people, radiation cystitis symptoms may last a few weeks or months and then go away and never come back. For others, symptoms may last a long time. Or they may show up months or even years after you complete radiation therapy.
Prevention
Can radiation cystitis be prevented?
Experts aren’t sure if there is any way to prevent radiation cystitis. The medication pentosan polysulfate may help prevent bladder irritation. But more research is necessary.
Living With
What foods are good for radiation cystitis?
You can help reduce discomfort or pain by drinking plenty of water. It’s a good idea to drink between eight and 10 glasses each day.
The following foods may be less likely to cause discomfort or pain if you have radiation cystitis:
Fruits, like bananas, pears, raisins and blueberries
Vegetables, like broccoli, spinach, avocados and beets
Whole grains, like rice and oats
Nuts, including peanuts, cashews and almonds
What drinks should I avoid if I have radiation cystitis?
Avoid drinks that irritate your bladder. These include:
Acidic juices, including cranberry juice, tomato juice and orange juice
Caffeine, including coffee and tea
Alcohol
Carbonated beverages, including seltzer water and soda pop
Advertisement
It’s also a good idea to avoid spicy or acidic foods.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Call a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of radiation cystitis. You should also reach out to your provider if they diagnose you with radiation cystitis and your symptoms don’t go away after treatment.
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
What are the chances that I will develop radiation cystitis?
What kind of radiation cystitis do I have?
Why does late radiation cystitis take so long to develop?
Is my case mild or severe?
What treatment do you recommend?
Will treatment cure my radiation cystitis, or will symptoms come back?
What foods or drinks should I avoid?
Should I see a dietitian?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Cancer treatment is a stressful journey. It can be even more challenging when it causes pain or problems that affect your bathroom habits. You may anticipate radiation cystitis during treatment. But it can develop months or even years after completing treatment. If you notice any changes when you go to the bathroom, make sure you let your healthcare providers know. They can diagnose radiation cystitis and recommend the best treatment for you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/14/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment