Breast Milk Storage: How To Store Breastmilk Safely
Search
Advertisement
Advertisement
September 21, 2023
/
Living Healthy
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
How To Store Your Breast Milk Safely
Typically, you’ll want to store 2 to 4 ounces at a time
The old adage says there’s no use crying over spilled milk. But when it’s milk for your little one, it’s sad to see any go to waste.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
With proper planning, you can prevent wasting any breast milk you’ve pumped to nourish your baby or toddler. And if you’re getting your supply from a
breast milk donor bank
, knowing how to store milk is key to making sure your little one is fed.
So, how long will it keep in the fridge or freezer? What containers should you store it in? And what’s the best way to thaw it? Pediatrician and breastfeeding medicine specialist
Heidi Szugye, DO, IBCLC
, explains all the reasons you may want to store breast milk, along with tips for making sure it’s good enough for your child.
What are the benefits of storing breast milk?
If you’re
hand-expressing your breast milk
or pumping, it’s good to know how to store the milk you produce. Storing your milk allows you to have some ready for whenever your child has their next feeding. Plus, it’s important to know how to store your milk so it stays fresh and maintains its nutritional properties and immune-system boosters.
Even after you’ve used up
your colostrum
during your earliest feedings, breast milk is as beneficial as formula when it comes to nutritional value, especially during your infant’s first six months of life. And if you’re unable to produce breast milk on your own,
breast milk banks
are a helpful resource that collects, screens, stores, processes and distributes milk for parents in need.
Advertisement
How can you store breast milk safely?
Breast milk can be kept at room temperature, in a refrigerator or in a freezer — and how long you can store your milk safely depends on its location and the containers you use.
In most cases, you’ll want to store 2 to 4 ounces of breast milk at a time. On average, this is the amount of milk that your baby consumes in a single feeding. Storing a smaller amount of 1 to 2 ounces can also be helpful for when you need to provide a smaller snack or for babies fewer than 6 weeks old.
Containers you can use to store milk include:
Glass
is the first choice for breast milk storage. It preserves the components of milk the best. But glass breaks, so keep in mind that some daycare centers won’t allow it.
Hard-sided plastic containers
are the second-choice alternative for breast milk storage.
Look for BPA-free and opaque or clear plastic options
. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) states
you should never use bottles with BPA
because of its microplastic and chemical content. You’ll know if it contains BPA if it’s labeled with the recycle symbol number 7.
Breast milk freezer bags or nursing bags
are best for storage in the freezer. While freezer bags are convenient and space-saving, they have the most opportunity to leak. To avoid damage, place your bags in firm plastic containers or double bag it if it’s a thinner storage bag.
When storing milk, it’s important to label each container with a smudge-proof marker with the date expressed and the amount of milk in each container. Don't mix room temperature milk with previously cooled or frozen milk. It's best to chill new or room temperature milk before mixing, so you're mixing milk of the same temperature. Use the oldest milk first to keep your supplies fresh and avoid expired or sour milk. If you’re delivering stored milk to childcare, you should also label the container with your child’s name to avoid mix-ups.
How long will breast milk keep fresh?
Storing smaller amounts can be useful, as they can be warmed quickly and may help cut down in the amount you throw away. This is particularly important when it comes to milk that you’ve frozen and then thawed: Thawed or warmed milk has a much shorter shelf life than when it’s refrigerated. So, once you remove it from a cool environment, the clock starts ticking.
Milk can be stored:
Up to four days in a standard refrigerator.
Up to three to four months inside a standard refrigerator freezer.
Up to six to 12 months in a separate deep freezer.
In an insulated cooler bag with frozen ice packs for up to 24 hours while traveling.
You want to avoid storing milk in the door of your refrigerator or freezer and store it at the back instead to avoid frequent temperature changes. The other thing to consider while freezing is that sometimes your milk may look differently than you expect.
Advertisement
It’s normal for stored milk to separate into a cream and milk layer. It’s also normal for breast milk to appear in a range of colors from slightly yellow to yellow-orange and even green. The color of your breast milk can change based on what you eat, drink and the
medications you take while breastfeeding
. If you’re ever concerned about the color of your stored milk, a
lactation consultant
can offer some direction on what’s safe to use.
The amount of time you can keep breast milk out at room temperature depends on how warm the surrounding environment is and whether or not the milk is freshly expressed or if it’s been previously frozen and then thawed and/or warmed for feeding.
At room temperature (77 degrees Fahrenheit, 25 degrees Celsius), breast milk should be used:
Within four hours if it’s been freshly expressed or pumped.
Within two hours if it’s been refrigerated or frozen and then thawed.
You never want to keep milk at temperatures higher than 77 F (25 C) because of the risk of bacteria growth. Once your milk has been frozen and thawed, you also never want to refreeze your milk.
“To be safe, discard any previously frozen milk that’s been heated and served to your baby after one to two hours,” advises Dr. Szugye. “Refreezing milk can lead to contamination, so you never want to refreeze milk that’s been thawed.”
Advertisement
How to thaw frozen breast milk
A child can drink cold or room-temperature milk, but they may like it better if it’s warm. When warming milk, you never want to use a microwave or directly use a stovetop or oven. A microwave doesn’t heat breast milk evenly, and if the milk is too hot, it can scald your baby. Heating milk too quickly or at higher temperatures can also destroy important proteins and vitamins in the milk. In some cases, it can also cause the bottle to explode if it’s heated for too long. Also, never bring your milk to a high heat or boiling point.
To thaw and warm frozen breast milk, start by holding the container of frozen milk under warm, running water for a few minutes. You can also heat a pan of water on the stove over low-to-medium heat,
remove it from the stove after a minute or two
, and then soak your freezer bag in the pan of warm water for several minutes.
When soaking, you’ll want to make sure the water doesn’t go over the top of the bag or make contact with the seal in order to avoid contamination. If your milk looks cloudy while warming, there’s been a leak and the milk is no longer good.
You can also use a bottle warmer if you have one.
Once the milk has been warmed, swirl the separated cream and milk layers together. Test the milk’s temperature by putting a few drops of milk on your wrist — if it feels slightly warm but
not
hot, it’s safe to use for feeding.
Advertisement
If your child doesn’t finish the entire container, you can use the leftover milk within two hours of warming. After two hours, you should discard any leftover, previously thawed milk.
“
Breast milk has many nutrients tailored to your baby’s growing needs,” says Dr. Szugye. “With a little planning, you can continue providing for your baby throughout their infancy.”
Learn more about our
editorial process
.
Health Library
Breastfeeding
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Health Library
Breastfeeding
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Advertisement
Related Articles
July 22, 2025
/
Children's Health
6 Signs Your Baby Isn’t Getting Enough Breast Milk
Look at weight gain, wet diapers, signs of dehydration and more
November 8, 2024
/
Nutrition
Intermittent Fasting While Breastfeeding: Is It Safe?
Intermittent fasting could impact your milk supply and energy levels, so it’s best to wait until you’ve weaned your baby from nursing
October 18, 2024
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
How To Lose Weight While Breastfeeding
Ease into exercising, focus on sleep and follow a balanced diet — and be patient with yourself
September 16, 2024
/
Children's Health
4 Myths About Nipple Confusion, How To Avoid It and When To Get Help
If your baby has problems switching between breast and bottle, talk to your provider to get to the bottom of the confusion
August 26, 2024
/
Children's Health
Can Your Baby Be Allergic to Your Breast Milk?
It’s highly unlikely your baby will have an allergic reaction to food you eat while you’re breastfeeding
August 15, 2024
/
Women's Health
Yes, You Can Get Pregnant While Breastfeeding
You may have a lower chance of getting pregnant while nursing — but it’s still possible
August 6, 2024
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Pumping at Work: Schedule and Tips
Staying on a pumping schedule, setting up a comfortable pumping space and having the right equipment can help
July 23, 2024
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Do Lactation Cookies Work To Improve Milk Production?
If you’re not getting enough calories, these cookies may help — but a balanced diet is a better way to increase milk supply
Trending Topics
Sleep
Breathing Problems? Try These Sleep Positions
If you’re feeling short of breath, sleep can be tough — propping yourself up or sleeping on your side may help
Mental Health
What Is Anxious Attachment Style — and Do You Have It?
If you fear the unknown or find yourself needing reassurance often, you may identify with this attachment style
Nutrition
Are Prebiotic Sodas Good for You?
If you’re looking to boost your gut health, it’s better to get fiber from whole foods
Health Categories to Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Ad
Rendered:
Fri Oct 31 2025 11:36:11 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)