Anticholinergic Drugs Uses & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Anticholinergic Drugs
Advertisement
Advertisement
Anticholinergic Drugs
Anticholinergic drugs are a class of medication that interfere with how your body uses a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine. Neurotransmitters are like signals or messengers your cells and body systems use to communicate. Anticholinergic drugs essentially jam, limit or block that communication.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What are anticholinergic drugs?
Anticholinergic drugs are medications that block
acetylcholine
(pronounced ah-set-ul-KO-leen). This
neurotransmitter
is a key part of how your parasympathetic nervous system works. Blocking it reduces certain kinds of nervous system activity.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
autonomic nervous system
has divisions to handle different jobs. Your
sympathetic nervous system
handles your “fight-or-flight” response. But that system needs another to balance it out, and that’s where your
parasympathetic nervous system
comes in. Experts sometimes call it the “rest-and-digest” or “feed-and-breed” system. That’s because it handles signals for resting, digesting food and sexual arousal.
What do anticholinergic drugs treat?
Over 600 medications have anticholinergic (pronounced ant-ee-KO-lin-er-jic) effects. For many of those drugs, that’s their main effect. Examples of anticholinergic drugs and some conditions they treat include:
Atropine
: treats
slow heartbeat (bradycardia)
and certain types of poisoning, like from industrial chemicals and chemical weapons (nerve gas)
Benztropine
: treats
Parkinson’s disease
and
parkinsonism
Diphenhydramine
: the active ingredient in many over-the-counter sleep aids and allergy medications
Glycopyrrolate
: treats severe, chronic drooling and is useful for reducing
salivation
during medical procedures like surgeries
Ipratropium
: can help symptoms of
asthma
and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Oxybutynin
: treats muscle spasms and related issues for people with conditions like
benign prostatic hyperplasia
and
urge incontinence
, and comes in topical forms for excessive sweating (
hyperhidrosis
)
Scopolamine
: eases
nausea
and
vomiting
that happen with
motion sickness
Solifenacin
: can reduce the need to pee frequently that happens with urge incontinence
Tiotropium
: also treats asthma and COPD
Tolterodine
: can reduce bladder spasms that happen with urge incontinence
Trihexyphenidyl
: reduces muscle tremors that can happen with Parkinson’s disease and parkinsonism
Vecuronium
: paralyzes muscles to keep you from moving during surgeries and other medical procedures
Advertisement
But many medications only have anticholinergic properties as a side effect. Examples include:
Tricyclic antidepressants
for conditions like
depression
or
chronic pain
Antipsychotic medications
for conditions like
bipolar disorder
or
schizophrenia
Antihistamines
for
allergies
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of anticholinergic drugs?
Anticholinergic drugs have many important uses. Some are lifesaving and treat dangerous conditions. Others can improve your quality of life, making parts of your life a little better or easier.
What are the side effects of anticholinergic drugs?
It’s common for drugs to have anticholinergic effects, regardless of whether that’s their main purpose. Some of the most common side effects of anticholinergic drugs include:
Being unable to pee (
urinary retention
)
Blurred vision
Confusion
(altered mental status)
Dry eyes
Dry mouth
Fast heart rate (
tachycardia
)
High body temperature (
hyperthermia
)
Pupils that are very dilated
Skin that’s flushed and
dry
Slowed digestion
Vomiting
Weakened muscle strength (asthenia)
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see your healthcare provider if you notice any of the following:
Your medications aren’t helping.
It’s difficult to take your medications as prescribed.
The side effects of a medication are disrupting your usual routine or activities.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe you have asthma and want to breathe easier. Or you might be going on a cruise and don’t want to spend the trip nauseated and miserable. There are hundreds of drugs out there with anticholinergic effects, and they treat a huge range of conditions and symptoms. If you have questions about whether an anticholinergic drug can help you, talk to your primary care provider or a pharmacist. They can tell you more about your options and help you understand the potential side effects and what to do about them.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/12/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider