Splenic Artery Aneurysm: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Splenic Artery Aneurysm
Advertisement
Advertisement
Splenic Artery Aneurysm
A splenic artery aneurysm is a bulging, weakened section of the vessel that supplies blood to your spleen. Pregnancy, portal hypertension and other conditions raise your risk. Most aneurysms don’t rupture, but those that do cause severe belly pain and internal bleeding. If you’re at risk of rupture, your provider can do a procedure to repair it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Splenic Artery Aneurysm?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Splenic Artery Aneurysm?
A splenic artery aneurysm is a bulge in the
artery
that supplies blood to your
spleen
. It may cause no symptoms and go unnoticed for a long time. Or it may cause symptoms like upper abdominal pain and nausea. A splenic artery aneurysm that breaks open (ruptures) is a surgical emergency.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Splenic artery aneurysms affect between 1 in 1,000 and 1 in 2,500 people. They’re the most common type of
visceral artery aneurysm
. Splenic artery aneurysms affect
females
four times as often as males.
Types of this condition
There are two types of splenic artery aneurysms:
True aneurysm
: This affects all three layers of the splenic artery wall.
Pseudoaneurysm
: This affects just one or two of the layers. It’s more likely to rupture than a true aneurysm. It also grows fast. This means it’s not always easy to predict when it might rupture based on its size.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of splenic artery aneurysm
Only about 2 in 10 people with a splenic artery aneurysm have symptoms. The most common symptom is pain in the upper left part of your belly. The pain may spread toward your left shoulder. You may also have nausea, vomiting and
GI bleeding
.
If the splenic artery aneurysm ruptures, you may have:
Upper belly pain
: This is sudden and grabs your attention.
Internal bleeding
: This can make your belly look swollen or feel tender to the touch.
Shock
: This causes fast breathing, confusion, sweating, cool skin and fainting.
Seek emergency care immediately if you have these symptoms.
Symptoms of a rupture may occur all at once or in stages. If it’s in stages, your symptoms may come on suddenly but then briefly ease. This stable period is brief. Your body soon goes into shock.
Advertisement
Causes of splenic artery aneurysm
Weakness in the wall of your splenic artery leads to an aneurysm. The cause of this weakness isn’t always clear. But we know there are many risk factors.
Risk factors
Pregnancy is one of the top risk factors for a splenic artery aneurysm. This may be due to increased blood flow or hormonal changes during pregnancy. Your risk is higher if you’ve been pregnant before.
Other medical conditions that raise your risk include:
Atherosclerosis
Connective tissue diseases
Endocarditis
Fibromuscular dysplasia
High blood pressure
Pancreatitis
Portal hypertension
Receiving a liver transplant
Vasculitis
Complications of this condition
Like other aneurysms, a splenic artery aneurysm is dangerous because it can rupture. This means the weak part of the artery breaks open and bleeds into surrounding areas. This is a surgical emergency that requires immediate care and can be life-threatening.
You face a higher risk of rupture if you:
Are pregnant, particularly in the last trimester
Have symptoms
Have portal hypertension
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
You need a physical exam and imaging tests to diagnose a splenic artery aneurysm. Your provider will likely use a noninvasive test like a
CT angiogram
or
magnetic resonance angiogram
(MRA). These show your splenic artery’s size and blood flow in detail. You may need a more invasive test, like a catheter-based
angiogram
, if your provider is planning treatment.
By definition, a splenic artery aneurysm means your artery is 1 centimeter or more in diameter. Your provider will discuss test results with you and let you know if you need treatment.
Management and Treatment
How is a splenic artery aneurysm treated?
Vascular surgeons repair splenic artery aneurysms using procedures and surgeries like:
Endovascular
procedure
: This is usually the best option to manage an aneurysm before it ruptures. Your provider uses metal coils or stents to block off the aneurysm so blood can’t flow through it. This eases pressure on the artery walls.
Laparoscopic
surgery
: This option is less invasive than open surgery. It has an easier recovery.
Open surgery
: You may need surgery if you had an unsuccessful endovascular procedure or endovascular methods aren’t an option for you. Your provider removes the damaged part of your artery by opening your abdomen. They may also need to
remove your spleen
.
When is a splenic artery aneurysm treated?
Aneurysms greater than 2 centimeters in diameter typically need repair. That’s because they’re at risk of rupture. If your aneurysm is smaller than this, you may still need treatment if you’re pregnant or could become pregnant. Providers also treat pseudoaneurysms of any size because it’s harder to predict when they might rupture.
Other factors influence the need for treatment. For example, your provider may suggest a repair if you have portal hypertension or need a liver transplant. An aneurysm that grows quickly — at least half a centimeter per year — may also need treatment. Your provider considers how dangerous the aneurysm is for you when deciding to treat it.
Advertisement
If your aneurysm isn’t at risk of rupturing, your provider will likely monitor it. They’ll start treatment if your risk for a rupture goes up at any point.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you how often to come in for follow-up visits and imaging tests. These are important even after successful treatment. Your provider will check for any signs of complications. They’ll also make sure you receive any further treatment you might need.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Your outlook depends on many things, including:
Aneurysm size and location
How quickly it grows
Whether or not it ruptures
Your overall health and health history
Many splenic artery aneurysms grow slowly. One
study
found that smaller aneurysms that providers monitored grew at a rate of 0.2 millimeters per year. That same study found that nearly 9 in 10 people with a splenic artery aneurysm were still alive 10 years after diagnosis.
Up to 1 in 4 people with a ruptured splenic artery aneurysm don’t survive. Survival is worse during pregnancy. Rupture is fatal to the mother 80% of the time and to the fetus 90% of the time.
These stats can sound scary, but early diagnosis and treatment can save your life. Talk to your provider if you have any concerns about your risk for this condition or your treatment plan.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with a splenic artery aneurysm can come with a lot of uncertainty. You may worry about what’s happening behind the scenes. This can take a toll on your mental health from day to day.
Take some comfort in knowing that your provider will keep a close eye on the situation. They’ll talk to you about your treatment options. Many people only need long-term monitoring. But if you do need a procedure or surgery, your provider will be there to support you. It may also help to manage any worries or anxieties you’re feeling by talking to a counselor.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular disease may affect your life in big and small ways. Cleveland Clinic’s specialists treat the many types of vascular disease so you can focus on living.
Vascular Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment