Nickel Allergy: Rash, Symptoms, Testing, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nickel Allergy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nickel Allergy
A nickel allergy results in skin rash, itching and dry skin after exposure to nickel. You can commonly find nickel in jewelry, clothing fasteners, household items and foods. Symptoms don’t often appear right away. Treatments include avoiding nickel, medications or light therapy. Nickel allergy usually isn’t life-threatening, but it’s a lifelong condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Testing
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make An Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is nickel allergy?
Nickel allergy is a skin rash or irritation that occurs when you come into contact with nickel. This condition is a form of allergic
contact dermatitis
. Allergic contact dermatitis happens when your skin touches or comes near an ordinarily harmless substance. Nickel allergy is the most common type of contact dermatitis related to metal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The skin rash from nickel allergy may be itchy or painful. Allergic contact dermatitis causes delayed reactions, so your symptoms may not appear for up to 72 hours after nickel exposure.
Nickel allergy can develop at any time. Once you have a nickel allergy, it never goes away. But you can treat it by avoiding nickel or using medications.
What items contain nickel?
Nickel is a metal commonly found in jewelry, like:
Bracelets
Clasps for jewelry, including earring backs
Earrings
Necklaces
Rings
Watchbands
Nickel can also be in other items you wear, like:
Clothing fasteners like belt buckles, bra hooks, buttons, snaps and zippers
Dental braces
Eyeglasses
Nickel may also be inside items you use every day, such as:
Chalk
Coins
Cooking equipment and eating utensils
Keys
Paper clips
Razors
Tech and accessories, like laptops, tablets, cell phones and batteries
Nickel also makes up parts of items inside:
Bathroom fixtures
Furniture
Machinery
Medical devices
Metal tools
Musical instruments
High levels of nickel can also be present in foods, including:
Beans and legumes
Chocolate and cocoa
Fruits, including figs, prunes and raspberries
Grains, including buckwheat, multigrain breads and cereals, oats and whole wheat
Licorice
Nuts
Shellfish and seafood, including clams, crawfish, mussels and shrimp
Soy products
Tea
Vegetables, including cabbage, kale, lettuce, leeks, peas and spinach
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of nickel allergy?
Symptoms of nickel allergy range from mild to severe. They usually appear within 12 to 72 hours of coming into contact with nickel. Most people with nickel allergy only have a reaction on the part of their skin exposed to nickel. Common nickel allergy symptoms include:
Bumpy skin (
hives
)
Cracked skin
Itching
or burning sensations
Patches of
dry skin
Rash
Red or discolored skin
More serious nickel allergy symptoms (systemic nickel allergy syndrome) may occur if you eat foods that contain nickel or have a metal device implanted in your body. This can cause symptoms that affect your entire body. These symptoms may include:
Blisters
Diarrhea
Fatigue
Headaches
Swelling
What causes nickel allergy?
Researchers don’t know the exact cause of nickel allergy. It happens when your
immune system
sees nickel as harmful.
A nickel
allergy
may develop the first time you’re exposed to nickel or after many times. Once your body has a first allergic reaction to nickel, you’ll likely continue to be allergic every time you’re in contact with it.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is nickel allergy diagnosed?
To diagnose nickel allergy, a healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms, along with:
Your family history of allergies
Your medical history, including allergies,
autoimmune diseases
and skin issues
The medications you take
New foods or supplements you’ve tried recently
If your provider suspects a nickel allergy, they’ll do an
allergy test
(patch test). During the patch test:
Your provider places tiny amounts of substances that may cause an allergic reaction, including nickel, on patches.
They place the patches on the skin on your back. The patches stay on your skin for 48 hours.
After 48 hours, your provider removes the patches. They then look to see if your skin has reacted to any of the patches, which shows an allergy to that substance.
Management and Treatment
How is nickel allergy treated?
There’s no cure for nickel allergy. The best treatment is to avoid substances containing nickel. But as that can’t always happen, your provider may suggest medications, including:
Corticosteroid
creams to reduce skin irritation
Nonsteroidal creams to lessen itching or burning
Oral
antihistamines
to help ease itching
Oral corticosteroids for serious allergic reactions or rashes covering a large area
If medications don’t help relieve your symptoms, your provider may recommend
light therapy (phototherapy)
. This therapy uses ultraviolet (UV) light on your skin. It can take months of phototherapy treatment to show improvement.
How do I treat myself at home with nickel allergy?
You can do many things at home to help relieve nickel allergy symptoms. You can try treatments like:
Advertisement
Moisturizing creams or lotions to treat dry, cracked skin
Oatmeal baths to reduce itching
Over-the-counter steroid cream, but talk to your healthcare provider if you feel like you need it for more than a few days
Don’t use over-the-counter antibiotic treatments at home. These may make your symptoms worse.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Testing
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make An Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have nickel allergy?
If you get a rash from a nickel allergy, it may last from two to four weeks. Your skin is more likely to react if it’s:
Broken
Raw
Wet
Without treatment, your skin may become:
Cracked
Darkened
Leathery
What is the outlook if I have nickel allergy?
Nickel allergy usually isn’t life-threatening. Because there’s no cure, avoiding symptoms can be a lifelong challenge. But you can manage the allergy by staying away from items and food containing nickel and/or with proper treatment.
Prevention
How can I prevent nickel allergy?
Steps you can take to prevent nickel allergy include:
Carefully check products you use.
Avoid foods rich in nickel if you’re highly sensitive.
Choose jewelry that doesn’t contain nickel. Wear jewelry made from copper, platinum, sterling silver, surgical-grade stainless steel, titanium or 14-, 18- or 24-karat yellow gold. White gold may include nickel.
Opt for household items like kitchen tools, keys, pots and pans, and razors that don’t contain nickel. Brass, silicone, stainless steel and titanium are good alternatives.
Place protective covers on cell phones, laptops and tablets.
Select watchbands made from cloth, leather or plastic.
Use plastic belt buckles, bra hooks, buttons, snaps and zippers.
Advertisement
You also can take steps to prevent nickel allergy by talking with service providers:
Ask your
orthodontist
if your braces may contain nickel before getting them.
Ensure that piercing or tattoo providers use surgical-grade stainless-steel instruments that don’t contain nickel.
Make sure your eyeglasses don’t contain nickel before you buy them. Purchase glasses made from plastic or titanium instead.
Living With
How do I take care of myself with nickel allergy?
If you have a nickel allergy, you may want to keep a list of items with nickel so you can avoid them. You can also buy testing kits to test objects for nickel.
If you come in contact with nickel, avoid scratching the area of contact, as this can increase infection risk. You can also try washing and moisturizing any areas of contact.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your provider if the treatments you use aren’t helping or worsen your symptoms. Contact your provider immediately if you see signs of infection (
cellulitis
) such as:
Fever
Increasing redness or skin discoloration
Pain
Pus around the rash
Rapidly spreading rash
Rash around your eyes
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may not realize just how many everyday things contain nickel until you’re faced with a nickel allergy. It may feel like a part-time job scanning your environment for possible nickel contact. But know that over time, you’ll get more familiar with what to avoid and which materials to opt for. Your healthcare provider is available to help as well.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Itching. Sneezing. Stuffy Head. If you think you’re allergic to something but aren’t sure what, Cleveland Clinic experts can help with personalized allergy testing.
Allergy Testing
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make An Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/06/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment