G6PD Deficiency: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
G6PD Deficiency
Advertisement
Advertisement
G6PD Deficiency
G6PD deficiency is a genetic disorder that affects your red blood cells. It happens when your body doesn’t have enough G6PD enzyme. G6PD prevents harmful substances from damaging your red blood cells. While most people with this condition don’t have symptoms, it does increase your risk of hemolytic anemia (low red blood cells).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is G6PD deficiency?
G6PD deficiency is a
genetic disorder
that causes your G6PD levels to be too low. G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase) is an enzyme that protects your
red blood cells
from injury. A deficiency happens when you’re born with a variant (
mutation
) in the gene your body needs to make G6PD. As a result, your red blood cells don’t have enough G6PD.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most people with G6PD deficiency don’t have symptoms. But sometimes, triggers like certain medicines can cause serious problems, like
hemolytic anemia
. With this condition, too many red blood cells break down and die. Sometimes, newborns with G6PD deficiency have severe
jaundice
.
G6PD deficiency is common, affecting between
400 million to 500 million people
worldwide. If you’re one of the people with this condition, your healthcare provider will help keep your red blood cells at a safe level.
Symptoms and Causes
What are G6PD deficiency symptoms?
G6PD deficiency doesn’t typically cause symptoms unless a trigger stresses your red blood cells and causes them to break down (
hemolysis
). This causes symptoms like:
Fatigue
Rapid heart rate (
tachycardia
)
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
)
Yellowing in your skin or the whites of your eyes (signs of
jaundice
)
Skin that’s paler than usual (also pale lips and tongue)
Dark, yellow-orange or tea-colored pee
An
enlarged spleen
When these symptoms develop fast and are severe, it’s called a hemolytic crisis.
Seek emergency care if you’re experiencing signs of a hemolytic crisis
.
Signs of a G6PD deficiency in newborns
Infants rarely develop obvious G6PD deficiency symptoms. The most common sign is jaundice, which appears within the first few days of birth. Left untreated, infants with severe jaundice can develop brain damage (
kernicterus
). This is why your healthcare provider will test your newborn for G6PD deficiency if they suspect they have it.
Advertisement
What causes G6PD deficiency?
G6PD deficiency happens when your
G6PD
gene has a variant that keeps it from doing its job: Telling your body to make the G6PD enzyme. You inherit the variant on your X
chromosome
from a biological parent.
Having the variant means that your red blood cells are low on G6PD. G6PD is important because it prevents too many “free radicals” from building up in your red blood cells. Free radicals are usually harmless substances found in all kinds of places, like the environment, fava beans and medicines.
But if you don’t have enough G6PD, triggers (like eating fava beans) can cause too many free radicals to build up in your cells. This leads to
oxidative stress
that strains your red blood cells. Eventually, the cells break apart and die. If this leaves you with a low red blood cell count, you develop hemolytic anemia.
What factors trigger hemolytic anemia related to this condition?
According to some researchers, eating fava beans is the most common trigger. When someone with a G6PD deficiency eats fava beans and experiences hemolytic anemia, it’s called favism. Other common triggers include:
Infections, including
hepatitis A
and
hepatitis B,
typhoid fever
and
pneumonia
Certain drugs that treat
malaria
, including
primaquine
Some
antibiotics
, including
nitrofurantoin
,
dapsone
and sulfa drugs
NSAIDs
, like aspirin and ibuprofen
Smoking
and drinking too much alcohol
Emotional
stress
Strenuous exercise
Risk factors
Things that increase your chances of inheriting G6PD deficiency include your:
Sex
.
Males
are more likely to have G6PD deficiency. This is because they only have one X chromosome (where the variant is).
Geographic location
. It’s more common in people living in sub-Saharan Africa, the Mediterranean and Southeast Asia.
Race
. Researchers estimate that in the United States, G6PD deficiency affects more than
10%
of Black males.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is G6PD deficiency diagnosed?
Healthcare providers usually start by taking a complete medical history and doing a
physical exam
. They might ask if you’ve recently changed medications or had an infection. They may also look for signs of a G6PD deficiency in your family history.
Tests to diagnose G6PD deficiency include:
A
complete blood count (CBC)
to check your red blood cell levels
A
peripheral blood smear
to check for signs of hemolytic anemia, like red blood cells that are abnormal shapes or sizes
A
bilirubin test
to check your levels of bilirubin, a waste product of destroyed red blood cells
A
G6PD test
to check your G6PD enzyme levels
Management and Treatment
How is G6PD deficiency treated?
Healthcare providers use different treatments based on the situation. For example, if you have mild jaundice and your provider knows you have G6PD deficiency, they’ll treat your jaundice symptoms first. Then, they’ll tell you what triggers you need to avoid going forward.
Advertisement
More severe symptoms require different treatments. If you have severe hemolytic anemia, you may need a
blood transfusion
. If your newborn has jaundice, their provider may treat it with
phototherapy
(a natural or artificial light treatment). In more serious cases, your baby may need an exchange transfusion. For this procedure, the provider removes your baby’s unhealthy blood and replaces it with healthy, donated blood.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
There’s no
cure
for G6PD deficiency, but most people don’t experience issues if they avoid triggers. And it doesn’t impact life expectancy.
Still, not everyone with this condition experiences it the same way. Many people with G6PD deficiency likely never know because they don’t have symptoms. For most people, symptoms are mild. But others experience life-threatening events like a hemolytic crisis when they encounter a trigger.
Your healthcare provider can best explain what to expect based on your diagnosis.
Prevention
Can I prevent G6PD deficiency?
This is a genetic disorder that you can’t prevent. But there are ways to get diagnosed before major health issues arise. This includes:
Screening newborns
. Many regions that are high risk for this condition have screening programs in place to detect G6PD deficiency in newborns.
Genetic testing
. Your healthcare provider may recommend you get a
DNA test
if there’s a chance that G6PD deficiency runs in your family.
Advertisement
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Ask your healthcare provider about the foods and medicines you should avoid. Here are some other suggestions:
Limit how much alcohol you drink
. Drinking too much alcohol can stress your red blood cells.
Quit smoking
. Smoking can cause free radicals to build up in your red blood cells.
Exercise in moderation
. Pushing yourself too hard during a workout may increase oxidative stress.
Try to get enough rest
. Sleep supports your
immune system
, which helps you fight off infections that can trigger hemolytic anemia.
Manage stress
. If you’re feeling overwhelmed, ask your healthcare provider for help
managing stress
.
You should also avoid eating fava beans while
breastfeeding
if your newborn has a G6PD deficiency. The compounds that can trigger hemolytic anemia can travel through breast milk.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your healthcare provider any time you develop G6PD deficiency symptoms. Seek immediate medical help if your symptoms are severe and come on quickly (signs of a hemolytic crisis).
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask if you have G6PD deficiency include:
How serious is my condition?
What foods and medications should I avoid?
Are there triggers in my environment I should avoid?
What are the chances that I’ll pass G6PD deficiency on to a child?
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A G6PD deficiency diagnosis means different things for different people. It’s not curable, but it’s usually manageable. You can take care of yourself by recognizing the triggers that increase your risk of hemolytic anemia and avoiding them. This may mean steering clear of fava beans and other triggers. It may mean developing healthy habits, like getting enough rest and not smoking. Ask your healthcare provider for information to help you manage the impact G6PD deficiency has on your life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Living with a noncancerous blood disorder can be exhausting. But there’s hope. Cleveland Clinic’s benign hematology experts provide personalized care and support.
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials