Breast Reduction Scars: Healing, Appearance & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Breast Reduction Scars
Advertisement
Advertisement
Breast Reduction Scars
Breast reduction scars are common after breast reduction surgery. Your surgeon will take care to hide incision lines during your procedure. Treatment options could include creams or ointments, injections and massages.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What are breast reduction scars?
Breast reduction scars are visible marks of your body’s healing process after
breast reduction surgery
. Scars develop after a surgeon makes an incision in your skin, and then closes up the incision to let your body create scar tissue. Scar tissue is new skin tissue that fills the gap caused by the incision. Most scars from breast reduction surgery are thin lines that vary in color from your natural skin tone.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What do breast reduction scars look and feel like?
Breast reduction scars vary in shape and size but usually look like a line that’s a lighter or darker shade than your natural skin tone.
Scars
can also be pink, red, purple, gray or dark brown. Some people are more at risk of developing raised scars. Scars can itch or feel tender after your surgery.
What are the different types of breast reduction scars?
The type of breast reduction scar you have varies based on the type of incision that your surgeon makes during breast reduction surgery. There are two main types of incisions to complete a breast reduction procedure:
Vertical (lollipop) procedure
: For a vertical or lollipop surgery, a surgeon will make two incisions — one around your areola (the darker circle surrounding your nipple) and one running vertically from the bottom of your areola to the crease of the bottom of your breast.
Inverted (anchor) procedure
: For an inverted or anchor breast reduction surgery, a surgeon will make three incisions: One around the edge of your areola, one from the bottom of your areola to the crease in your breast and one along your breast crease.
Your surgeon will use caution during your procedure to minimize the appearance of scars, but they can’t prevent all scars.
What are the complications of breast reduction scars?
There are two types of complications that cause raised scars after breast reduction surgery:
Advertisement
Keloid scars
are raised scars that grow larger than your incision site. They develop slowly over months to years. This type of scar doesn’t fade over time. These scars are more common if you have a darker skin tone due to your
genetic
code.
Hypertrophic scars
are raised scars that appear one to two months after surgery. Unlike keloid scars, these scars won’t extend beyond the incision site. Hypertrophic scars fade over time.
How do I know what type of breast reduction scars I will have?
The size and pattern of your breast reduction scars depend on the technique your surgeon uses. Your provider will recommend the technique that’s right for you based on your:
Specific breast procedure.
Breast size and
breast anatomy
.
Breast shape and symmetry (whether one breast is larger or smaller than the other).
Desired outcome of the procedure.
Do breast reduction scars look different or change over time?
Yes, breast reduction scars change with time as your body heals after surgery. Most scars fade or blend in with your natural skin tone and you can cover them with clothing. Your breast reduction scars may change:
After six weeks
: You’ll likely have a bandage on your scar for several weeks to protect your surgical site, so you may not notice how your skin is healing. When you remove your bandages as directed, your scar may have a red tone to it (usually red to purple). That area of your skin may be slightly elevated from the skin around it.
After six months
: Your scar tissue is still new, so your scar will stand out on your skin. You won’t need a bandage over your surgical site, as your skin has healed over the incision site, but your scar may look lighter or darker than your natural skin tone. Red tones may still be present but they’re not as vibrant. You may have some elevation over your incision site or your scar will be flat against your skin.
After one year
: This is the remodeling stage of healing. Your scar will start to blend in with your natural skin tone. It may still stand out on your skin for several months to years. Your scar looks lighter or darker than your natural skin tone but is close in shade.
Treatment Details
How do I reduce the appearance of breast reduction scars?
The best way to minimize breast reduction scars is to follow your provider’s post-surgical instructions. Talk to your provider about what you can do during the healing process to make scars less noticeable. You may need to wait until the scars are healed to do certain treatments. Your provider may recommend:
Creams or ointments
: An ointment that contains silicone can make a scar less noticeable. These also come in the form of a silicone gel sheet that you place on your skin. Talk to your provider before using any cream, ointment or oil, including vitamin E oil. Although many people believe vitamin E oil reduces the appearance of scars, there’s not enough evidence to prove that it’s effective.
Cryosurgery (cryotherapy)
: Healthcare providers use a special tool to freeze scar tissue.
Cryotherapy
treatment destroys scar tissue and leaves a smaller, less noticeable scar.
Injections
: If you develop keloid scars following surgery,
corticosteroid
injections can reduce their size.
Laser treatments
: Ask your provider about
laser skin resurfacing
, which can make scars less noticeable by removing layers of skin.
Massage
: A scar massage can promote healing and reduce itching. Your provider will show you how to carefully massage the scar using lotion or cream. Don’t start massaging the scars until your surgeon says it’s safe (usually a few weeks after surgery).
Advertisement
How do I care for my breast reduction scars?
Caring for breast reduction scars begins with caring for your incisions as they heal. Follow your provider’s instructions carefully after surgery. You should wear a surgical bra or bandages, and keep the area clean. Tell your provider right away if you notice any problems like pain or swelling. Be careful to avoid:
Scratching
: Scars can itch while your skin is healing. But scratching or scrubbing them can interfere with your body’s healing process and make scars more noticeable.
Smoking
: Talk to your provider about
quitting smoking
before surgery. Smoking can make it more difficult for your body to heal and can make scarring worse.
Sun exposure
: Always wear sunscreen with SPF 30 or higher or cover your scars with clothing. Scars can darken with repeated sun exposure, which also increases your risk of developing
skin cancer
.
Is there a procedure to remove breast reduction scars?
If you’re unhappy with breast reduction scars following surgery, talk to your provider. There are several
surgical procedures that can reduce the appearance of a scar
, but they’re not for everyone. Keep in mind that no matter what type of procedure you have, breast reduction scars never fully go away.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the potential benefits of treating breast reduction scars?
The main benefit of treating breast reduction scars is to minimize their appearance on your skin. This can make you feel more confident about your appearance.
Advertisement
Does treatment to remove breast reduction scars work?
There isn’t one type of treatment that works to minimize the appearance of everyone’s scar after breast reduction surgery. Each person should work with their
dermatologist
or healthcare provider to find a treatment option that’s right for their skin. It may take several different types of treatment to find one that works for you.
What are the risks or complications of treating breast reduction scars?
Each type of treatment for breast reduction scars comes with potential risks. Some of the most common complications of treatment to reduce the appearance of breast reduction scars include:
Skin discoloration.
Scar regrowth.
Itching.
Peeling skin.
Injection site pain.
Numbness.
Before you begin treatment, discuss the risks and complications with your healthcare provider.
Recovery and Outlook
Are breast reduction scars permanent?
Breast reduction scars don’t completely disappear. They may change in size and blend in with your natural skin tone over time. While your scar won’t go away completely, it can fade enough to where you don’t even notice it on your skin. Surgeons will hide incisions to minimize the appearance of scars. If you do have scars, you can hide them underneath clothing, even a bikini.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your provider if your breast reduction scars are:
Bleeding, oozing, swollen or red.
Numb or if they lose sensation.
Opening up or splitting.
Painful, itchy or sensitive.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What are other types of breast surgery scars?
There are different types of breast procedures that can leave scars. Each one has a different type of incision pattern that will leave a mark on your skin, including:
Breast augmentation surgery
: Your surgeon will try to hide the location of breast augmentation incisions, usually at the crease underneath your breast (inframammary incision). They may also make an incision around the lower half of your areola (periareolar incision).
Breast lift
: The incisions for a breast lift vary but are usually around your areola, with additional incisions down to your breast crease or outward from your areola.
Biopsies
: A breast biopsy incision can leave a small, round scar or a small scar in a line on the affected area of your breast.
Gynecomastia
: The location of the incision for a
gynecomastia
procedure can be several small lines around the bottom of the breast (
liposuction
) or one large incision along your breast and around your areola. The second type of incision only occurs if your surgeon plans on repositioning your nipple and areola.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Breast reduction surgery can leave a scar on your skin. Most scars fade over time. Follow your provider’s instructions carefully after breast reduction surgery. Keep your bandages clean, and tell your provider right away if you have any problems with your incisions. You can reduce the appearance of breast reduction scars by protecting them from the sun. If you’re unhappy with the way the scars look, talk to your provider about treatment options.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need cosmetic or reconstructive plastic surgery, you’ll need skilled, detailed and compassionate providers. At Cleveland Clinic, we’re here to help.
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/02/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment