Dental Trauma: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Dental Trauma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dental Trauma
Dental trauma is any injury to your teeth, gums, jawbone or soft tissues of your mouth. Accidents, such as falls, car wrecks and sports-related injuries are the main cause of traumatic dental injuries. Early treatment gives you the best chance for full recovery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is dental trauma?
Dental trauma refers to any
mouth
injury. This includes injury to your
teeth
,
gums
, jaws,
tongue
, lips or surrounding structures.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Traumatic dental injuries range from mild to severe. Some are
dental emergencies
and require immediate treatment.
If you have a severe dental injury, call your dentist right away for further instructions. If your dentist isn’t available — or if you have severe pain, broken facial bones or bleeding that won’t stop — head to your nearest emergency room.
Dental trauma types
There are many types of dental injuries, including:
Chipped teeth
.
Cracked teeth
.
Dislodged teeth (
luxation
).
Knocked-out teeth (
avulsed tooth
).
Tooth jammed into a socket (intrusion).
Cuts (lacerations) in your soft tissue.
Broken
or
dislocated jaw
.
What to do if you have dental trauma
The first thing you should do is call a
dentist
. They can give you specific instructions for your situation. If you don’t have a dentist, or if it’s after your dentist’s business hours, you should visit an urgent care clinic.
Some dental injuries, like a slightly chipped tooth, can wait until you can schedule an appointment with a dentist. Other injuries, like a knocked-out tooth or broken jaw, need immediate treatment.
While you’re waiting to see a dentist, here are some things you can do in the meantime:
If you have a fractured tooth, try to locate any broken pieces and bring them to your appointment with you. If jagged edges irritate your tongue, cover the rough spots with orthodontic wax. You can buy wax at most pharmacies.
For a knocked-out tooth, rinse the tooth off in clean water and try to gently place it back in its socket. (Don’t touch the tooth root.) If you can’t place your tooth back in its socket, put it in a container and bring it to your appointment with you. Sometimes dentists can replant knocked-out teeth. But you only have a short window of time to do this — usually within 30 to 40 minutes.
If you have mouth pain, take over-the-counter
pain relievers
like
acetaminophen
or
ibuprofen
.
Use an ice pack to soothe any swelling.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of dental trauma?
Dental trauma symptoms depend on the type of injury you have. They may include:
Toothache
.
Discolored tooth
.
Mouth pain.
Swelling.
Bleeding from your mouth.
A change in the way your teeth fit together when you bite down.
Slightly
loose tooth
.
Difficulty moving your jaw or opening your mouth.
What causes dental trauma?
The most common causes of dental injuries include:
Falls.
Vehicle accidents.
Sports-related injuries.
Other causes include physical altercations, like fighting or domestic abuse.
Risk factors of dental trauma
A dental trauma risk factor is something that increases your chances of getting a mouth injury. These risk factors include:
Playing contact sports.
Having an
overjet
(when your upper teeth “stick out” over your lower teeth).
Having extensive tooth decay (
cavities
).
Having lip and tongue piercings.
Being younger than 20 years old. (Dental injuries are most common among children and adolescents.)
What are the consequences of dental trauma?
A dental injury can make you more vulnerable to oral health issues. Many people also experience emotional and psychological effects.
Possible consequences of dental trauma include:
Cavities.
Abscessed tooth
.
Tooth loss
.
Pain.
Difficulty chewing.
Speech issues.
Changes in appearance.
Lower self-esteem.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are dental injuries diagnosed?
A dentist will examine your mouth. They’ll also ask how you got your injury and what kind of symptoms you have.
They may also take
dental X-rays
or a
CT (computed tomography) scan
. These imaging tests allow your dentist to see the extent of your injuries.
Management and Treatment
How is dental trauma treated?
There are several procedures dentists use to treat traumatic dental injuries. The type of treatment that’s right for you depends on the type of injury you have.
Common dental trauma treatments include:
Dental fillings and dental bonding.
Root canal therapy.
Restabilization or replantation.
Tooth extraction.
Tooth replacement.
We’ll explore each of these in more detail below.
Dental fillings and dental bonding
Dentists use
dental fillings
or
dental bonding
to camouflage chips and cracks and rebuild mildly damaged teeth. Providers typically reserve this treatment for minor dental injuries.
Root canal therapy
If a crack or fracture reaches your tooth pulp, you’ll need
root canal therapy
. This treatment removes the
nerves
,
blood vessels
and connective tissues inside your tooth. You may also need a
dental crown
to protect your tooth.
Restabilization or replantation
For a dislodged or knocked-out tooth, a dentist may try to restabilize or replant your tooth in its socket. For restabilization, they’ll make a custom splint to place over your teeth. This will keep the affected tooth from moving until the surrounding ligaments reattach.
Advertisement
If your tooth came completely out of its socket, a dentist may try to replant it before giving you a custom splint to wear.
Tooth extraction
In some cases, damaged teeth are beyond repair. If you have severe tooth trauma, a dentist may recommend
tooth extraction
(removal).
After extracting your tooth, your dentist may place a
dental bone graft
in the socket to preserve your jawbone and prevent bone loss in the future.
Tooth replacement
If dental trauma results in tooth loss, ask your dentist about replacement options. It’s important to replace lost teeth. If you don’t, the gaps in your smile can have a negative impact on speaking and chewing function.
Common teeth replacement options include
dental bridges
and
dental implants
. Your dentist can help determine which option is right for you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have dental trauma?
Every injury — and every person — is unique. If you sustain a dental injury, you should contact a dentist right away. They can give you further instructions and schedule any necessary office visits.
In general, the sooner you get treatment, the better your outlook.
How long does it take for dental trauma to heal?
It depends on the type of injury you had. Minor traumas, like soft tissue injuries, may heal in less than one week. Tooth trauma typically heals in about four to six weeks unless damage reaches your
tooth pulp
. In these instances, it could take several months for a full recovery.
Advertisement
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk for dental trauma?
You can’t always prevent dental trauma altogether, but there are steps you can take to reduce your risk:
Wear a protective
mouth guard
when playing contact sports.
Wear your seatbelt when driving or riding in a vehicle.
Don’t chew on ice
.
Don’t use your teeth as tools (like tearing tags off clothing).
Don’t bite your fingernails.
Living With
When should I call my dentist?
Call your dentist right away if you have a dental injury. They can give you instructions on what to do next.
Even if you’re not in pain, it’s important to get treatment as soon as possible. Left untreated, dental trauma can lead to other serious oral health issues, like cavities and infection.
When should I go to the ER?
You should go to your nearest emergency room if dental trauma results in:
Excessive bleeding that won’t stop.
Severe pain that doesn’t get better with medication.
Broken jaw or other broken facial bones.
What questions should I ask my dentist?
If you’ve experienced dental trauma, here are some questions you might want to ask your dentist:
How serious is my injury?
What treatment do I need?
How long will treatment take?
What’s the success rate?
Will you be able to save my tooth?
Additional Common Questions
What is the most common dental trauma?
The three most common dental injuries include:
Tooth crown fractures.
Knocked-out teeth.
Dislodged teeth.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Dental trauma can be mild or severe and may affect your teeth, gums, tongue, lips, jaws or other areas of your mouth. Even if you don’t have pain, you should call a dentist any time you sustain a dental injury. Prompt treatment gives you the best chance of saving natural teeth and restoring oral health.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Dentistry plays an important role in oral health. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can design a personalized plan that will keep you smiling for the long haul.
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/04/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment