Labial Adhesion: Causes, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Labial Adhesions
Advertisement
Advertisement
Labial Adhesions
Labial adhesions occur when the inner lips of the vulva stick together. This generally occurs when estrogen levels are low, and can affect infants, toddlers and adults. The condition may go away without treatment when estrogen levels increase. Estrogen creams and manual or surgical separation can treat more severe cases.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What are labial adhesions?
In most
women
, the inner lips (labia minora) of their
vulva
are on both sides of their
vaginal
opening and only come together around their
clitoris
. But if you have labial adhesions, your inner lips partially or completely stick together, like a zipper, and cover your vaginal opening. It can cover your
urethra
sometimes, too, making it hard to pee.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Labial adhesions are relatively common and typically don’t cause any harm. They most commonly affect young children. If your child has a labial adhesion but doesn’t have any symptoms, they may not need treatment — it may go away as they get older. But if they have symptoms, they may need treatment.
Labial adhesions have other names, which may be more informal or medical. These names include:
Labial fusion.
Fused labia.
Vaginal adhesion.
Vaginal fusing.
Synechia vulvae.
Labial agglutination.
What are the types of labial adhesions?
There are two types of labial adhesions:
Primary labial adhesions
. This type affects children from the ages of 3 months to 6 years. It most commonly affects toddlers aged 1 to 2.
Secondary labial adhesions
. This type may affect women who recently gave birth or who’ve gone through
menopause
.
How common are labial adhesions?
Labial adhesions occur in less than 2% of
girls
before they reach
puberty
. They’re rarer in adults. But healthcare providers and medical researchers don’t know exactly how often they occur.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of labial adhesions?
Labial adhesions might not cause any symptoms in infants or young girls. But if symptoms occur, they may include:
Pain in their vaginal area, especially while straddling an object or toy (like an adult’s leg, bicycle, see-saw, rocking horse, swing or jumper).
Difficulty peeing, including pee only coming out in dribbles.
Getting a lot of
urinary tract infections
(UTIs).
Vaginal discharge
.
Pooling of pee in the vagina behind the adhesions.
Advertisement
Labial adhesion symptoms in adults are similar but may also include:
Itching or
inflammation
in your vulva (
vulvitis
).
Pain or other difficulties during sexual intercourse (
dyspareunia
).
What does a labial adhesion look like?
A labial adhesion may look like a thin line or a bridge of tissue that covers the opening to the vagina and/or urethra.
What causes labial adhesions?
Healthcare experts don’t know the exact cause of labial adhesions. But labial adhesions may relate to
low estrogen
levels.
Estrogen
is a sex
hormone
that rises during puberty. It’s key to the development of many aspects of sexual and reproductive health, including:
Secondary sex characteristics, like
breasts
, wider hips and body hair.
Menstruation
.
Pregnancy
.
Girls have low estrogen levels before they start puberty. Once they start puberty and their estrogen levels increase, primary labial adhesions often go away on their own.
In adults, labial adhesions may develop shortly after childbirth or after menopause. After childbirth, estrogen levels decrease. After menopause, the
ovaries
stop releasing
eggs
(ova) and estrogen levels drop.
Why do babies get labial adhesions?
In babies and young toddlers, frequent skin irritations may cause the labia to stick together. This may include:
Vulvar dermatitis
.
Diaper rash
(diaper dermatitis).
Lichen sclerosus
.
Who do labial adhesions affect?
They most commonly affect girls under 6 and may also affect women who’ve completed menopause. They rarely affect women of reproductive age — beginning as early as 11 up to 49.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are labial adhesions diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can diagnose a labial adhesion during a
physical exam
. They may also order a pee test (
urinalysis
) to check for a UTI.
Management and Treatment
How do you treat labial adhesions?
If your child has a labial adhesion, a healthcare provider may suggest a “wait and see” approach if they don’t have any symptoms or problems peeing. Once they reach puberty and starts producing estrogen, their labial adhesions may go away without treatment.
If you or your child has symptoms, labial adhesion treatment may include:
Topical treatments
If a labial adhesion covers a large area, a provider may prescribe a
conjugated estrogens vaginal cream
or
corticosteroid
cream (
betamethasone
0.5%). They’ll instruct you on how much and how often you should apply a topical treatment.
If topical treatments work to separate the lips, the provider may recommend applying petroleum jelly (Vaseline®) for a period of time. Petroleum jelly helps prevent the raw areas of the separated labia from sticking together again (re-adhering).
Manual or surgical separation
Topical treatments may not effectively treat large or thick labial adhesions. In rare cases, a provider may separate the adhesion by hand. This requires local
anesthesia
and possibly sedation to relax your child. Unlike a stuck zipper, which you may be able to pry open on your own, keep your hands off. Only experienced healthcare providers should perform a manual separation.
Advertisement
Providers only surgically separate a labial adhesion if you can’t pee and other treatments don’t work. Surgical separation may also be necessary in the rare cases in which a labial adhesion develops after childbirth.
What kind of home treatment is available for labial adhesions?
It’s important to keep the area clean. Wipe the area from front to back whenever you change your child’s diaper to help prevent UTIs. It’s a good idea to verbally explain why you wipe from front to back, so your child will understand what to do when they’re potty-trained.
Also, thoroughly clean all the folds and cracks around your child’s labia and keep the area dry. During bath time, wash their vulva with a mild soap and clean, warm water. A healthcare provider may also recommend gently massaging petroleum jelly to the area.
Don’t try to separate the skin folds yourself. Only an experienced healthcare provider should separate the labia by hand.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have labial adhesions?
The outlook for labial adhesions is good. They often go away without treatment once your child begins menstruating. If treatment is necessary, the success rate is good.
There’s a chance that a labial adhesion will return. Keep the area clean and, if necessary, regularly apply ointments like petroleum jelly.
How long does a labial adhesion last?
Labial adhesions often go away on their own when your child reaches puberty and starts producing estrogen.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can labial adhesions be prevented?
Because medical experts don’t fully understand what causes labial adhesions, they don’t know how to prevent them. But you may be able to help lower the risk by keeping the area clean and watching out for signs of irritation, like discoloration,
skin rashes
and pain.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Schedule an appointment with your child’s healthcare provider if you notice your child’s labia cover their vaginal opening or you notice a labial adhesion affects how your child pees or causes pain or UTIs.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the nearest emergency room if your child can’t pee.
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
How severe is my child’s labial adhesion?
Do you recommend treatment?
Will the labial adhesion come back?
How can I help take care of my child?
Do we need to see a specialist, like a
pediatric urologist
,
gynecologist
or
urologist
?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Many parents are keenly aware of typical conditions that affect their young children, like earaches, a cold or the flu. But raising kids always has its share of surprises that you never thought to prepare for. Fortunately, labial adhesions are typically harmless and often go away on their own without treatment. Keep an eye on the area during diaper changes and look for other signs of symptoms. Schedule an appointment with your child’s healthcare provider if they have pain in the area, difficulty peeing or a lot of UTIs. They can diagnose a labial adhesion and recommend the most appropriate treatment.
Advertisement
And remember, although rare, labial adhesions can also affect adults, especially during times in which their bodies don’t produce as much estrogen. Talk to a provider if you have any symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/21/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment