Dental Technicians: What They Do & Qualifications
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Dental Technician
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dental Technician
A dental technician creates custom dental restorations and appliances. Some of the prostheses they make include crowns, bridges and dentures. Dental techs work in laboratory settings rather than office settings. They work closely with your dentist to get the results you want.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is a dental technician?
A dental lab technician (or dental technologist) is a healthcare provider who makes and repairs artificial teeth (
prostheses
) and appliances that go inside your
mouth
. Dental techs work alongside
dentists
and dental specialists like
prosthodontists
and orthodontists.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You probably won’t see your dental technician during a visit to your dentist’s office. They typically work behind the scenes in private labs, commercial labs or private practices that have their own on-site labs.
Being a dental tech requires a unique mix of scientific knowledge and artistry. Dental technicians must create
restorations
that fit well and look natural. If you’ve ever had a
broken tooth
repaired or replaced a missing one, you’re wearing the work of a dental tech. Though their art may never fill a museum, it’s all around us every day.
What does a dental technician do?
A dental technician uses
dental impressions
to make models of a person’s mouth. Then, they use those models to create dental restorations and appliances like:
Bridges
Crowns
Dental implant
abutments and crowns
Dentures
and
implant-supported dentures
Mouth guards
Retainers
Veneers
Types of dental technicians
There are different types of dental lab technicians, depending on what kinds of prostheses they make most often. For example, some dental techs work in prosthodontic practices making crowns, bridges and dentures. Others work in
orthodontic
practices fabricating retainers and aligner trays. But most dental techs can make a wide range of prostheses.
You might hear these other names for dental technicians:
Advertisement
Ceramists
work with medical-grade porcelain to create artificial teeth. This includes restorations like crowns, bridges and dentures.
Crown and bridge technicians
use various materials, including metals, resins and ceramics. They create dental crowns and bridges to repair or replace
teeth
.
Denture lab technicians
fabricate and repair full and partial dentures, including implant-supported dentures.
Orthodontic technicians
create appliances used to straighten teeth. This includes clear aligner trays and retainers.
Do dental technicians work closely with dentists?
Dental technicians work very closely with your dentist. For example, if you need a dental crown, the process goes something like this:
Your dentist takes impressions of your teeth and sends them to a dental tech along with an order form. The order form contains measurements, clinical photos, tooth shades and other information. This tells your dental tech how your crown should look.
Your dental tech uses your impressions to create a life-size, 3D model of your teeth. This allows them to build your new crown so it’ll fit your unique oral anatomy.
Next, your dental tech creates your crown according to your dentist’s specifications. There are several ways they can do this. They might carve it from a solid block of ceramic. Or they might heat up the material until it’s molten (soft), then form it into the shape of a tooth.
Finally, your dental tech will polish your new crown to a lifelike shine and send it back to your dentist.
Your dentist will schedule an appointment to fit you for your new crown. Before cementing it into place, they’ll make sure it fits properly and blends in with your natural teeth.
Your dentist and dental technician stay in close contact during your crown fabrication process. If your crown doesn’t look or fit quite right, your dental tech can make adjustments until it does.
How does a dental tech differ from a dental assistant or dental hygienist?
A dental office needs an entire team to run efficiently. Dental techs, assistants and hygienists are all members of this team. They all have different responsibilities and various scopes of practice:
Dental lab technicians
create and repair dental prostheses.
Dental assistants
prepare exam rooms, take appointment notes and assist the dentist during procedures and surgeries.
Dental hygienists
clean your teeth and do preventive procedures like
fluoride
and
sealant
treatments.
How can I become a dental technician?
If you want to become a dental tech, you need a high school diploma or GED. You can either receive dental lab tech training on the job or complete a two-year program.
To specialize in a certain area — like ceramics or dentures — you’ll need to become a certified dental technician.
What is a certified dental technician?
To become a certified dental technician, candidates must pass two written exams and a hands-on exam. The National Board for Certification in Dental Laboratory Technology makes and oversees those exams. CDTs can choose to specialize in one of the following areas:
Advertisement
Ceramics
Crown and bridge
Dental implants
Orthodontics
Complete dentures
Full dentures
Digital dentistry
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Many of us have dental restorations. But we don’t always think about the steps required to make them. Dental lab technicians are the artists of the dental field. Their work can help us feel more confident about our smile, and the results can last for years to come.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Dentistry plays an important role in oral health. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can design a personalized plan that will keep you smiling for the long haul.
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/08/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment