Eating Disorders: What They Are, Symptoms, Treatment & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Eating Disorders
Advertisement
Advertisement
Eating Disorders
Eating disorders are mental health conditions that cause you to have an unhealthy relationship with food. Anyone can develop an eating disorder. Common eating disorders include anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and binge-eating disorder. Treatment is available to help you feel better.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is an eating disorder?
An eating disorder is a
mental health condition
that affects your relationship with food and how you see yourself (body image). Eating disorders affect your physical and emotional health and can be life-threatening.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The symptoms of eating disorders look and feel different for each person and vary based on the type. You may count calories or limit how much and what types of foods you eat. You may eat large amounts of food, eat non-food items or throw up after eating. Eating may make you feel guilty or shameful instead of satisfied.
Food is a necessity to survive. Everyone has their own connection with food — your favorite things to eat (or avoid) are unique to you. It may be difficult to see when an eating disorder is present because you’ve grown accustomed to it.
While you may feel trapped in a cycle of
disordered eating
, know that treatment is available to help you feel well again when you’re ready.
Types of eating disorders
There are several different types of eating disorders, including:
Anorexia nervosa
: Restricting food and/or caloric intake (self-starvation), fear of gaining weight and a distorted self-image.
Bulimia nervosa
: Eating large amounts of food in a short amount of time (binging) or believing that the food intake was large, followed by getting rid of the food (purging) by vomiting, using
laxatives
(medications that make you poop) or exercising excessively.
Binge eating disorder
: Eating or thinking that there was a large amount of food intake in a short amount of time (binging) followed by feeling shame, regret, guilt or depression.
Pica
: Compulsively swallowing non-food items (such as chalk, dirt and paint).
Rumination disorder
: Undigested food returns to a person’s mouth after swallowing it. It’s then rechewed, re-swallowed or spit out.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
(ARFID)
: Limiting the amount or type of food eaten for reasons unrelated to a distorted self-image or an attempt to lose weight.
Advertisement
It’s possible to have more than one type of eating disorder at the same time.
How common are eating disorders?
Eating disorders are common.
Studies
show that 28.8 million people in the United States will have an eating disorder in their lifetime.
Symptoms and Causes
Eating disorders cause symptoms that affect your physical and mental health.
What are the signs and symptoms of eating disorders?
Signs and symptoms of eating disorders vary based on the type but could include:
Mood swings
.
Fatigue
.
Fainting
or
dizziness
.
Thinning hair or
hair loss
.
Unexplained weight changes or drastic weight loss.
Unusual sweating or
hot flashes
.
Behavioral symptoms of eating disorders may include:
Restrictive eating.
Eating a lot in a short amount of time.
Avoiding food or certain foods.
Forced vomiting after meals or laxative misuse.
Compulsive exercising after meals.
Frequent bathroom breaks after eating.
Withdrawing from friends or social activities.
Hiding food or throwing it away.
Food rituals (chewing food longer than necessary, eating in secret).
It may be difficult to spot an eating disorder in a loved one, as it often mimics dietary or lifestyle changes (adjustments to the things you do to change your overall health). You also can’t tell by looking at someone to know if they have this condition.
What does an eating disorder feel like?
If you have an eating disorder, you may feel that:
Food is an enemy or it can harm you.
You did something wrong or shameful after eating food.
You aren’t at the correct weight or body size.
You’re “failing” if you don’t meet certain weight or food requirements.
Other people negatively perceive you.
What and how you eat is the only thing in your life that you can control.
You don’t want to spend time with others for fear of judgment.
These feelings aren’t a voluntary choice. Beyond physical health, an eating disorder severely impacts your ability to make decisions, your emotions and your ability to interact with others as expected.
What causes eating disorders?
The exact cause of eating disorders is unknown. But research suggests there are several possible factors that lead to eating disorders, including:
Genetics
: Studies found that anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder run in families. You can inherit
genetic traits
from your biological family that make you more likely to develop the condition.
Brain biology
:
Dopamine
and
serotonin
are chemicals in your brain. They make you feel things like pleasure and happiness. Research suggests that these chemicals activate during certain eating disorder behaviors.
Cultural and social ideals
: Pressure to “fit in” can affect your mental health and change your patterns of behavior to meet certain, often unrealistic, goals set by others. In the digital era, social media, television and movies may also influence your self-esteem if you feel you don’t look like the people you follow or admire.
Underlying mental health conditions
: You may use extreme measures around food when you feel like other aspects of your life are hard to manage. An obsession with food becomes an unhealthy way of coping with painful emotions or feelings. As a result, some eating disorders happen alongside other mental health conditions.
Advertisement
What are the risk factors for eating disorders?
Anyone at any age can develop an eating disorder. They’re most common among adolescents and teenagers. You may be more at risk if you:
Have a history of eating disorders or other mental health conditions in your biological family.
Experienced trauma (physical, emotional or sexual).
Have an underlying mental health condition like
anxiety
,
depression
or
obsessive-compulsive disorder
.
Participate in activities where your weight or body size is a factor (like gymnastics, wrestling or swimming).
Go through a major change like starting a new school or job, a divorce or a move.
Have
Type 1 diabetes
. Studies found that up to 25% of
women
with Type 1 diabetes develop an eating disorder.
Have a driven personality and strive for perfection (
perfectionism
).
What are the complications of eating disorders?
Greatly restricting calories, vomiting (throwing up) or extreme exercise can take a toll on your physical health. An untreated eating disorder causes serious complications such as:
Arrhythmia
,
heart failure
and other
heart
problems.
Acid reflux (
gastroesophageal reflux disease
or GERD).
Gastrointestinal problems.
Low blood pressure
(hypotension).
Organ failure and brain damage.
Osteoporosis
.
Severe
dehydration
and
constipation
.
Stopped menstrual cycles (
amenorrhea
) and
infertility
.
Stroke
.
Tooth damage.
Advertisement
As a mental health condition, your feelings about food or your body image may put you at risk of suicide or thoughts of suicide. If at any time you feel overwhelmed or need someone to talk to, call or text
988
to reach the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline (U.S.). Someone is available to help you 24/7.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are eating disorders diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will make an eating disorder diagnosis by:
Performing a
physical exam
.
Reviewing your symptoms.
Learning more about your eating and exercising habits.
Ordering imaging, blood or urine tests (
kidney function test
,
electrocardiogram
) to rule out other possible causes of your symptoms or to determine if you have any complications.
Providers use the American Psychiatric Association’s
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
Fifth Edition
(
DSM-5-TR
) to make a diagnosis. The
DSM-5-TR
outlines symptoms for each type of eating disorder. You don’t have to have every symptom to receive an eating disorder diagnosis. And even if you don’t have a specific DSM-listed eating disorder, you may still need help overcoming food-related issues.
Who diagnoses an eating disorder?
Healthcare providers, like physicians and mental health professionals, diagnose eating disorders. Your
primary care provider
may review symptoms, perform a physical examination and order blood tests. A mental health counselor, like a
psychologist
or
psychiatrist
, conducts a psychological evaluation to learn more about your eating behaviors and beliefs.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How are eating disorders treated?
Treatments for eating disorders vary by type but could include:
Psychotherapy
: A mental health professional can determine the best type of therapy for your situation. Options include individual, group and family therapy. Many people with eating disorders choose
cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT).
Medications
: You may have other conditions, like anxiety or depression, with an eating disorder. Taking
antidepressants
,
antipsychotics
or other medications may improve these conditions.
Nutrition counseling
: A
registered dietitian
with training in eating disorders can help improve eating habits and develop nutritious meal plans. This specialist can also offer tips for grocery shopping, meal planning and preparation.
The best approach is often a combination of treatment options. Your care team will work together to create a comprehensive treatment plan to address the physical, mental and behavioral aspects of the condition.
Even if you don’t have a diagnosed eating disorder, a medical expert can help you address and manage
food-related issues
or other conditions that affect your health.
What are the levels of care for eating disorders?
There are different levels of care for eating disorders, including:
Outpatient therapy (once-a-week counseling).
Intensive outpatient therapy (therapy several times a week).
Inpatient therapy (hospitalization).
Your primary care provider will work with you to determine what level of treatment would be best.
Eating disorder therapy
Therapy can be rewarding and challenging at the same time. You’ll meet regularly with a mental health professional to help you understand and change the thinking patterns that drive your behaviors and emotions.
It isn’t easy to open up and be honest with someone new. It can also be difficult to accept help when you feel in control of the situation. Therapy may make you experience feelings and emotions you may not want to think about.
It’s OK and encouraged to discuss these feelings with your provider. While undergoing treatment, know that your care team is available to help you whenever you need it.
Eating disorder recovery
The good news is that recovery is possible and there’s hope. Eating disorders don’t go away overnight. Treatment takes time. It depends on the severity and length of time you’ve had one. You may notice your symptoms improve after starting a medication or talking with a professional. You may also feel worse before you start to feel better. This is normal.
The best way to achieve recovery is to stick with your healthcare provider’s treatment plan. Discuss any side effects or roadblocks that you face with them. Remain honest and open about your feelings. Your providers can offer personalized guidance to help you get back to wellness sooner.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for eating disorders?
Treatment is available for all types of eating disorders. It’s helpful to detect an eating disorder early and start treatment right away for the best outlook. Recovery takes time and you may need lifelong support.
Untreated eating disorders can be life-threatening. If you or a loved one experiences symptoms of an eating disorder, seek treatment from a healthcare provider.
Prevention
Can eating disorders be prevented?
There’s no known way to entirely prevent eating disorders.
If eating disorders or mental health conditions run in your biological family, awareness helps you and your care team detect and treat them early. Prompt treatment can break unhealthy behavioral patterns before they become harder to overcome.
How can I lower my risk of eating disorders?
You may be able to reduce your risk of an eating disorder by getting treatment for general health conditions and mental health conditions (like depression, anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorder) at the first sign of symptoms.
If you’re a parent or caregiver and know that eating disorders run in your biological family, the following may reduce risk among children:
Be a positive role model.
Eat healthy foods and avoid talking about food as “good” or “bad.”
Avoid talking about “dieting” with children.
Avoid making negative comments about bodies.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you:
Find that your relationship with food is causing you distress.
Notice that your relationship with food is getting in the way of your everyday activities.
Have
chest pain
,
shortness of breath
or heart palpitations.
Experience frequent dizziness or fainting.
Have a severe
sore throat
or acid reflux.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you have an eating disorder, you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of eating disorder do I have?
What’s the best treatment for me?
What are the risks and side effects of treatment?
What type of follow-up care do I need after treatment?
Should I look out for signs of complications?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Eating disorders are serious medical conditions that can affect your mental and physical health. You may not notice that your behavior is harmful or dangerous because it feels so normal to you.
If you think you have an eating disorder, it’s important that you seek help. With proper medical care and mental health counseling, you can get better.
Even if “getting better” seems like a long shot, you can accomplish this goal. It always helps to have support. Reach out to a friend or loved one. Be open and honest. Their encouragement may be just what you need to take the first step toward recovery.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/23/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment