Prolapsed Hemorrhoids: Symptoms, Surgery & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Prolapsed Hemorrhoid
Advertisement
Advertisement
Prolapsed Hemorrhoid
A prolapsed hemorrhoid is when an internal hemorrhoid bulges outside of your anus. It can cause uncomfortable symptoms like itching and pain. You can usually feel a prolapsed hemorrhoid with your finger. At-home and over-the-counter treatments work well for most prolapsed hemorrhoids. Sometimes, a healthcare provider needs to remove a prolapsed hemorrhoid.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hemorrhoids Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
A prolapsed hemorrhoid is when a swollen vein (internal hemorrhoid) bulges outside of your rectum.
What is a prolapsed hemorrhoid?
A prolapsed hemorrhoid is when a
swollen vein inside your rectum
bulges outside of your butthole (
anus
). Before it prolapses, it’s inside your rectum, and you typically don’t even feel it. But then, increased pressure on your rectum forces the internal hemorrhoid to swell and eventually bulge out of your butthole.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Once it prolapses, you may notice symptoms like
bleeding
, itching or pain. You can usually feel a prolapsed hemorrhoid with your finger. If you use a mirror to look at your anus, you’ll see a soft lump around your butthole.
Prolapsed hemorrhoids don’t usually cause serious problems, but they can be uncomfortable. At-home and over-the-counter treatment can usually help relieve your symptoms. You may be able to gently push the prolapsed hemorrhoid back into your rectum. Surgery is sometimes necessary to completely get rid of the hemorrhoid.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a prolapsed hemorrhoid?
The biggest sign is a soft lump around your butthole. You can often see it or feel it. It can be the color of your skin or pinkish red.
Other symptoms of a prolapsed hemorrhoid include:
Itching around your anus
Feeling like you need to poop or that you have poop stuck after you wipe
Bleeding or leaking mucus (clear or white fluid) from your anus
Pain and discomfort, especially when you sit
What does a prolapsed hemorrhoid look like?
It looks like a small, fleshy bump that protrudes from your butthole. The exact size can vary. It’s typically soft. Sometimes, it can leak mucus.
What causes a prolapsed hemorrhoid?
A prolapsed hemorrhoid happens when a swollen vein inside your rectum bulges or sticks out of your anus. It’s usually due to your rectum being under increasing amounts of pressure. This pressure can happen when you strain to poop or bear down during activities like weightlifting.
Advertisement
Any internal hemorrhoid can prolapse. The following activities and conditions put you at risk for internal hemorrhoids:
Frequent
constipation
Straining to poop
Sitting on the toilet for long periods of time
Pregnancy
Obesity
Frequent
diarrhea
What are the complications of a prolapsed hemorrhoid?
They usually aren’t serious, but a prolapsed hemorrhoid can lead to complications. Some of those are:
Strangulation (when the blood supply to the hemorrhoid is cut off)
Thrombosed hemorrhoid
(when a blood clot forms in the hemorrhoid)
Bleeding (which can lead to anemia)
Difficulties pooping or having bowel movements
Because of these complications, it’s always a good idea to tell your healthcare provider about a prolapsed hemorrhoid.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a prolapsed hemorrhoid diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can often diagnose a prolapsed hemorrhoid just by looking at it. They’ll also ask you questions about your symptoms and pooping habits. They can also perform one of the following tests if they need more information about the cause of your hemorrhoids:
Rectal exam
Anoscopy
Rigid sigmoidoscopy
Grading scale for prolapsed hemorrhoids
Your provider uses a scale to grade how much the hemorrhoid bulges:
Grade 1
: No prolapse, but swollen blood vessels may be visible.
Grade 2
: The prolapsed hemorrhoid bulges when you strain, but will go back up into your anus on its own. For example, it protrudes when you poop but then goes back in after you’re done pooping.
Grade 3
: The prolapsed hemorrhoid bulges when you strain, but doesn’t go back up on its own. You need to push it back in yourself.
Grade 4
: The prolapsed hemorrhoid is always sticking out and can’t be pushed back in.
Management and Treatment
How is a prolapsed hemorrhoid treated?
Most prolapsed hemorrhoids get better with at-home care and being more mindful of your pooping habits. But this also depends on the severity of the prolapse and your symptoms.
Some at-home and over-the-counter treatments include:
Taking
sitz baths
Keeping your poop soft and formed by eating a lot of
fiber-rich foods
Drinking lots of water
Using topical ointments or creams containing
hydrocortisone
,
witch hazel
or
lidocaine
Using
stool softeners
or
laxatives
to make pooping less painful
While you’re trying these treatments, you should also evaluate your habits. For example, do you regularly sit on the toilet much longer than you need to? Do you need to eat more fiber or drink more water? All these things can go a long way in helping a hemorrhoid heal.
If at-home treatment isn’t working, your provider may recommend medical procedures to treat your hemorrhoid. This happens in
less than 10% of cases
. They may suggest:
Rubber band ligation
Sclerotherapy
Transanal hemorrhoidal dearterialization (THD)
Hemorrhoidectomy
Can prolapsed hemorrhoids go away on their own?
Yes. Sometimes, at-home care and changing your habits are all you need to do to help a prolapsed hemorrhoid go away.
But other times, the prolapse continues despite everything you’re doing at home to treat it. Your provider may need to perform a procedure or surgery to treat the hemorrhoid.
Advertisement
How long does it take for a prolapsed hemorrhoid to go away?
It depends on how severe the prolapse is. Mild prolapses can go away within a few days, especially if you’re using at-home treatments. More severe cases can take several weeks to go away, even when your provider uses a procedure to treat them.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hemorrhoids Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a prolapsed hemorrhoid?
A prolapsed hemorrhoid can be painful and uncomfortable. No one likes talking about it, and it can feel awkward to bring it up to your healthcare provider. But hemorrhoids are common, and you’re not the first person to have them.
The good news is that prolapsed hemorrhoids are treatable, often with at-home care. This doesn’t mean you shouldn’t let your provider know about it, though. Hemorrhoids can come back, so it’s a good idea to talk to your provider about ways to prevent hemorrhoids in the future. If you continue to get hemorrhoids or have hemorrhoids that affect your quality of life, your provider may suggest a procedure or surgery to help you.
Prevention
How do I prevent a prolapsed hemorrhoid?
Any internal hemorrhoid has the potential for prolapsing. So, the best prevention is to reduce your risk of hemorrhoids altogether. Here are some tips:
Avoid becoming constipated
Make sure you eat enough fiber or take
fiber supplements
Don’t strain to have a bowel movement
Go to the bathroom as soon as you have the urge
Don’t lift heavy objects
Exercise or move your body every day if you can
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you have a prolapsed hemorrhoid, especially if it’s causing you pain. Even if it’s not causing problems or heals on its own, your provider should know about it. Sometimes, other conditions can be confused with hemorrhoids, too.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A prolapsed hemorrhoid can be a pain in the butt — literally. It can make you feel uncomfortable and cause unpleasant symptoms like itching or pain. Talking about hemorrhoids to your healthcare provider, friends or family members may be just as uncomfortable.
Most prolapsed hemorrhoids get better with at-home treatment, like using topical ointments or taking a stool softener. If that doesn’t help or a hemorrhoid keeps coming back, contact your healthcare provider. They can discuss other options to help you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When hemorrhoids cause pain or bleeding, you want the best possible care. Cleveland Clinic’s providers can make you more comfortable with a variety of treatments.
Hemorrhoids Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us