Meningitis: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Meningitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Meningitis
Meningitis makes the protective layers surrounding your brain and spinal cord swell. Bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites and noninfectious conditions can cause meningitis. Common symptoms include fever, neck stiffness and light sensitivity. If you think you have meningitis, go to the ER immediately.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Meningitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Meningitis?
Classic symptoms of meningitis in adults are fever, headache and neck stiffness, but not everyone has every symptom. Newborns and babies may instead vomit, act fussy, not eat well, lack energy and be difficult to wake up.
Meningitis is
inflammation
of the three tissues that surround your brain and spinal cord, the
meninges
. Another name for it is spinal meningitis. This condition can be life-threatening.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your meninges normally protect your brain and spinal cord from injury. They contain nerves, blood vessels and
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
. When your meninges become inflamed, they swell too much and put pressure on your brain and/or spinal cord.
Infectious diseases
, like viruses and bacteria, can cause meningitis. Noninfectious conditions, like cancer and head injuries, can cause it, too.
Meningitis needs medical treatment right away.
Types of meningitis
Infectious types include:
Bacterial meningitis
(most common)
Viral meningitis
Fungal meningitis
Parasitic meningitis (eosinophilic meningitis)
Noninfectious types include:
Autoimmune meningitis
Carcinomatous (cancer) meningitis
Drug-induced aseptic meningitis (DIAM)
Post-traumatic meningitis
Your healthcare provider may also describe meningitis as:
Acute
: The symptoms come on suddenly. Bacterial meningitis is often acute.
Chronic
: The symptoms develop slowly and last a month or more.
Aseptic
:
If your CSF tests negative for bacteria, providers call it aseptic meningitis. This means either the bacterium causing it is difficult to grow or your case isn’t caused by bacteria. The most common cause of aseptic meningitis is a viral infection.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of meningitis
Symptoms of meningitis can vary depending on age.
Advertisement
Symptoms of meningitis in children and adults can include:
Fever
Stiff neck
Sensitivity to light (
photophobia
)
Headache
Nausea or vomiting
Confusion or
altered mental status
Lack of energy, extreme sleepiness or trouble waking up
Lack of appetite
Signs of meningitis in babies can include:
Bulging
soft spot (fontanelle)
on your baby’s head
Poor feeding
Irritability
Sleepiness or trouble waking up from sleep
Low energy or slower responses (lethargy)
If you have symptoms of meningitis, see a healthcare provider right away.
A provider can diagnose it, find the cause and offer the best treatment.
What does a meningitis headache feel like?
Meningitis can cause severe headaches that can be quite painful. The pain may spread down your back or to other parts of your body. It may be almost impossible to move your neck in certain ways.
Some people have mild pain. Don’t wait for severe pain to see your healthcare provider if you have other symptoms of meningitis.
Meningitis causes
Infectious diseases (caused by something harmful from outside your body) and noninfectious conditions cause meningitis. Specific causes of each type include:
Bacterial meningitis
: Common bacteria include
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
group B
Streptococcus
and
Neisseria meningitidis
.
Viral meningitis
:
Viruses include non-polio enteroviruses, like group B coxsackievirus and echovirus.
Fungal meningitis
:
Some fungi that can cause meningitis include
Cryptococcus neoformans
,
Coccidioides immitis
and
Candida
.
Parasitic meningitis (also called eosinophilic meningitis)
: Parasites that can cause this include
rat lungworm
and
Baylisascaris procyonis
(a roundworm)
.
Drug-induced aseptic meningitis (DIAM
):
NSAIDs
and antibiotics are the most common causes of DIAM. But overall, it’s rare.
Carcinomatous meningitis
: Cancer cells get into your meninges and cause inflammation. It can occur in the advanced stage of any cancer.
Post-traumatic meningitis
: This can result from brain or head injury.
Autoimmune meningitis
: Autoimmune conditions like
lupus
and rheumatoid arthritis are causes.
How does someone get it?
You can get meningitis in many ways, depending on whether the cause is infectious. You could get it:
From a contagious bacterial or viral illness passed person-to-person
From food contaminated with something infectious
From fungi in the environment that you breathe in
As a complication of noninfectious conditions, like cancer or lupus
From a head injury or as a complication of brain surgery
As a side effect of a medication
Meningitis itself — swelling of the meninges — isn’t contagious. But some of its causes are. Most bacterial and viral causes of meningitis can spread from person to person.
Risk factors
Your age, where you live or travel, and certain health conditions can increase your risk of meningitis.
You’re at a higher risk for it if you:
Are under 5 years old or over 65 years old
Have a
weakened immune system
Have a
CSF leak
Don’t have a spleen
Have chronic nose and ear infections
Have pneumococcal pneumonia
Have alcohol use disorder
Have a brain or spinal cord injury or surgery
Have
sickle cell disease
Live in or travel to places where infectious diseases that cause meningitis are common
Live in a group setting, like in a college dorm
Complications of this condition
Complications of meningitis can include:
Hearing or vision loss
Behavioral and thinking issues
Movement issues
Seizures
Increased intracranial pressure
Buildup of fluid in your brain
Damage to the blood vessels in your brain
Sepsis
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider will do a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. They’ll ask several questions about your medical history and recent activities, like whether you’ve traveled. This can help narrow down the cause of meningitis.
You’ll need tests to confirm the diagnosis and find the cause.
Tests that are used
Some tests your healthcare provider may use to diagnose meningitis include:
Nasal
or throat swab
: Your provider uses a soft-tipped stick (swab) to take a sample from your nose or throat. A lab tests your sample for signs of infection.
Brain CT scan or MRI
: These imaging tests look for inflammation around your brain.
Blood tests
: These can also look for signs of infection.
Lumbar puncture/spinal tap
: Your provider inserts a needle into your lower back to collect a sample of your cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). A lab tests your CSF sample for signs of infection.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Meningitis treatment depends on the cause. Medications treat most infectious cases. Treatment for noninfectious cases involves addressing the underlying condition or injury.
Medications and other therapies that may be a part of your treatment plan include:
Antibiotics
for bacterial meningitis
Antifungals
for fungal meningitis
Antivirals
for certain cases of viral meningitis, like herpesvirus and influenza
Corticosteroids
to reduce inflammation
Pain relievers
IV fluids to keep you hydrated
Advertisement
How long does meningitis last?
Viral meningitis can go away on its own within about a week. Symptoms of bacterial or fungal meningitis may last a few days to a week or more after treatment. It can take weeks to months to feel completely recovered. Chronic meningitis may last for months to years.
Some people have long-lasting or permanent health issues from meningitis.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll need follow-up appointments with your healthcare provider to make sure your treatment is working. It may be helpful to ask your provider these questions:
What type of meningitis do I have?
What treatment will I need?
How can I manage my symptoms?
When should I follow up?
What signs and symptoms should prompt me to go to the ER?
How can I avoid getting meningitis again?
Will I have any long-term issues from meningitis?
Am I contagious to others?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have meningitis?
The outlook for meningitis depends on the cause, how severe it is and how soon you get treatment. With quick treatment, you can usually make a full recovery. But it can take a long time to feel completely well again.
You might have to stay in the hospital for a few days. Treatment may continue even after you go home. Your healthcare provider will follow up with you to check for lasting health concerns.
Can you recover from meningitis?
Yes, you can recover from most forms of meningitis. But it’s a very serious illness and requires immediate treatment.
Advertisement
Bacterial meningitis is the deadliest of the common forms of meningitis. According to the
World Health Organization
, about 1 in 6 people who get this type die. Around 1 in 5 has severe complications.
Prevention
Can I prevent meningitis?
Meningitis isn’t always preventable. But there are steps you can take to reduce your risk of getting the infectious diseases that typically cause it. They include:
Get
vaccinated
against the bacterial and viral infections that can cause meningitis. Ask your providers which ones they recommend for you or your child.
Wash your hands
frequently with soap and water.
Avoid contact with others when sick with a contagious illness. Cover your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze. Disinfect frequently touched surfaces.
Avoid swimming in or drinking water that could be contaminated. Use distilled or treated water for nasal irrigation.
Practice safe food prep
. Don’t drink unpasteurized milk or eat food made from unpasteurized milk.
Take precautions to avoid mosquito and tick bites.
Your healthcare provider might also prescribe
prophylactic
antibiotics to help prevent a bacterial infection if you’re at high risk. Talk to your provider about prophylactic antibiotics if someone you live with or are around a lot has:
Meningitis caused by
N. meningitides
A serious
Hib infection
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Meningitis is a serious condition that can have long-term consequences. Unlike injuries or illnesses that affect your body, you can’t see or feel your meninges beginning to heal. People may assume you’re completely recovered when you’re still working through issues, from hearing loss to thinking challenges. If that’s your situation, take the time to explain how meningitis continues to affect you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment