Frontal Lobe Seizures: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Frontal Lobe Seizure
Advertisement
Advertisement
Frontal Lobe Seizure
Frontal lobe epilepsy is a pattern of abnormal electrical activity in the front part of your brain, behind your forehead. It causes frontal lobe seizures that usually happen at night. Antiseizure medications and surgery may help manage this condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy and Seizures Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is frontal lobe epilepsy?
Frontal lobe
epilepsy
is a type of seizure disorder affecting your
frontal lobes
. It causes frontal lobe
seizures
, which is a pattern of abnormal electrical activity in your brain.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The frontal lobes are the largest of the four lobes in your
brain
. They’re located behind your forehead. There’s a lobe on the left and right side. They’re responsible for your:
Behavior and personality
Cognition (thinking, learning and decision-making)
Movement
Speech
Frontal lobe seizures are a type of
focal (partial) seizure
. This means that the
seizures
start in one area of your brain. Seizures can start on either the left or right frontal lobe.
It’s often misdiagnosed as a mental health disorder or
sleep disorder
, as these seizures often happen at night. A healthcare provider can help you manage them.
What are the types of frontal lobe epilepsy?
Autosomal dominant sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy (formerly known as autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy and nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy) is a seizure disorder that happens during
sleep
. This type of frontal lobe epilepsy typically runs in families.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of frontal lobe epilepsy?
The main symptom of frontal lobe epilepsy is a brief focal seizure (a seizure that starts in one area of your brain).
The features of a frontal lobe seizure can include:
Abnormal behavior such as screaming, laughing or swearing
Turning your head or eyes to one side
Leg kicking or pedaling
Thrashing or convulsions
Uncontrolled, repetitive movements (like arm and leg waving)
Twitching or repetitive jerking
Loss of consciousness
or awareness (staring off into space)
Urinary or fecal incontinence
Muscle weakness
Difficulty speaking
Personality changes
Sleep disturbances
Advertisement
These usually occur in clusters (when you have more than two seizures in 24 hours). They often happen while you’re asleep but may happen when you’re awake. They also tend to be short, lasting less than a minute.
You may experience an aura or unusual feelings before a seizure starts. These feelings could include:
Sudden emotional changes like fear, anxiety, anger, sadness or joy
Abnormal sensations (like
numbness
or tingling)
Altered senses (smell, hearing, sight, taste or touch)
After a frontal lobe seizure, you may have
confusion
,
memory loss
or muscle soreness. This is the
postictal state
.
What causes frontal lobe epilepsy?
Abnormal electrical activity in your frontal lobe causes frontal lobe epilepsy. Neurons (
nerve
cells) usually send signals to other cells in your brain. When a frontal lobe seizure happens, neurons fire signals uncontrollably.
Common reasons why this may happen could include:
Abnormal formation of your brain during fetal development
Brain infections
Stroke
Traumatic brain injury
Brain tumor
Genetic variations
Sometimes, the cause isn’t known.
Can you inherit frontal lobe epilepsy?
Yes, you can inherit one type of frontal lobe epilepsy from your biological parents, although this is rare. A type of sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy is an
autosomal dominant
condition. This means a child can inherit it if one biological parent passes on the genetic variant to the child.
What are the risk factors for frontal lobe epilepsy?
Frontal lobe epilepsy can affect anyone at any age. You may be more at risk of developing frontal lobe epilepsy if you:
Have a biological family history of epilepsy
Had a brain infection at a young age
Experienced a stroke, traumatic brain injury, or have a tumor or lesion on your frontal lobe
Have a developmental delay
Were born with brain abnormalities
What triggers frontal lobe seizures?
Triggers are things that may make seizures more likely to happen. Common triggers may include:
Stress
Flashing lights
Sleep deprivation
Substance use
These differ for each person. It helps to keep track of what you were doing or how you felt before a seizure started to identify what may be triggering for you.
Are frontal lobe seizures dangerous?
Frequent frontal lobe seizures may lead to the following:
Increased risk of injuries
Status epilepticus
(seizures that last longer than five minutes), which is a life-threatening emergency
Sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (this is rare)
Having seizures can often have a significant impact on your mental health and emotional well-being. You may consider talking with a mental health professional in addition to other treatments recommended by a healthcare provider.
Contact a provider right away if you experience
thoughts of suicide
. You can also call or text the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline at
988
(U.S.). This hotline connects you to a national network of local crisis centers for free and confidential emotional support. The centers support people in suicidal crisis or emotional distress 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is frontal lobe epilepsy diagnosed?
To diagnose frontal lobe epilepsy, your healthcare provider will review your medical history and perform a
physical exam
. Testing helps confirm a diagnosis.
What tests diagnose frontal lobe epilepsy?
The following tests can help diagnose frontal lobe epilepsy:
MRI
: An MRI makes detailed pictures of your brain. This scan can help your provider see tumors, lesions or other problems that might be causing frontal lobe seizures.
Electroencephalography
(EEG)
: An EEG records the electrical activity in your brain. The EEG helps determine the starting location of the seizure.
Video EEG
: A video EEG records your movements and behavior alongside your brain’s activity. You may need to stay overnight in a hospital for video-EEG monitoring. Sometimes, a sleep study is done, especially as most frontal lobe seizures occur during sleep.
Stereoelectroencephalography
(SEEG)
: During SEEG, a surgeon implants electrodes in your brain. These devices detect seizure activity deep in your brain, in areas that an EEG might not find. SEEG is typically done if your seizures aren’t responding to medications and if brain surgery is considered to treat seizures.
Magnetoencephalography (MEG)
: An MEG test records magnetic activity produced by brain electrical activity and can help determine the location of the abnormal activity in your brain.
Advertisement
Your provider may also do
neuropsychological testing
to learn more about whether or not seizures affect brain functioning.
Management and Treatment
How is frontal lobe epilepsy treated?
The goal of frontal lobe epilepsy treatment is to reduce how many frontal lobe seizures you experience. Your healthcare provider may recommend the following:
Antiseizure medications
Epilepsy surgery
Neuromodulation
In addition, your provider may recommend changing the foods you eat to a high-fat, low-carbohydrate meal plan (
ketogenic diet for epilepsy
).
Frontal lobe seizure medication
Antiseizure medications may help you manage frontal lobe seizures. These medications regulate electrical activity in your brain and may reduce the frequency of seizures. These are usually the first line in managing frontal lobe seizures.
Your provider will review your symptoms and prescribe medications to fit your needs. They’ll explain the possible side effects to look out for before you start taking a new drug. Your provider may need to adjust the dosage or type of medication you receive until they find one that works best for you.
Frontal lobe seizure surgery
A healthcare provider may consider epilepsy surgery if medications aren’t successful at managing frontal lobe seizures. Your healthcare provider may recommend a frontal lobe resection. This is where they remove the affected part of your frontal lobe where seizures start. They may also remove a brain tumor or other lesion in this area.
Advertisement
Before the procedure, your surgeon will make detailed maps of your brain using imaging scans. They may also surgically implant electrodes to do a specialized stereo-EEG (SEEG) from recording inside your brain. All of this information helps your surgical team:
Target the specific areas of your brain causing seizures
Avoid damaging areas of your frontal lobe that control important brain functions
Neuromodulation for frontal lobe seizures
In some cases, surgery may not be a safe option to treat frontal lobe seizures. Your provider may recommend neuromodulation. This treatment uses an implanted device that sends an electrical impulse, which may stop a seizure before it begins.
Common types of neuromodulation devices include:
Vagus nerve stimulation
(VNS)
: A surgeon will implant a small device under the skin of your chest. It connects to a wire. The wire wraps around your vagus nerve in your neck and sends impulses to the nerve. Some VNS devices can detect a change in heart rate during a seizure and send additional electric impulses to the vagus nerve.
Responsive neurostimulation (RNS)
: RNS is a device implanted in your skull. RNS monitors your brain’s activity and only sends electrical impulses when it detects you’re experiencing a seizure.
Deep brain stimulation
(DBS)
: A surgeon will implant a DBS device in your chest. The wires are connected to the electrodes implanted in your brain. A healthcare provider programs this device to send electrical currents to your brain.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy and Seizures Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for frontal lobe epilepsy?
Your healthcare provider can give you the best information on what your outlook looks like. It varies from person to person based on many factors like your general health and how often you have seizures.
Medications may help you manage seizures long term. But sometimes, medications don’t work well for everyone. Surgery may be another option. While there isn’t a cure for frontal lobe epilepsy, many people report fewer seizures or seizure freedom with the right combination of medications or after surgery.
Your provider will let you know what treatment options they recommend to help you stay safe.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you experience new or worsening symptoms. Stay regular with your follow-up visits so your provider can make sure your treatment is working as expected. Let them know if you have side effects after starting a new medication.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you have frontal lobe epilepsy, you should ask your provider:
What type of treatment do you recommend?
What are the side effects of treatment?
Are antiseizure medications safe to take if I want to start a family?
How do I keep myself safe during a seizure?
Am I a candidate for surgery?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The two largest lobes in your brain have an important job. But you might not realize how vital this part of your brain is until it malfunctions. Fortunately, there are treatment options available for frontal lobe epilepsy and the seizures it causes.
A healthcare provider will help you choose one or a combination of medications that work best for you. Don’t be alarmed if medications aren’t successful. In some cases, surgery or neuromodulation may be a better option for what your brain needs. No matter what you choose, your care team will be with you to answer any questions you might have. They may also recommend a support group or mental health counseling if you’re interested.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy and seizures can impact your life in challenging ways. Cleveland Clinic experts can help you manage them and find relief.
Epilepsy and Seizures Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/02/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment