Bacillary Dysentery: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bacillary Dysentery
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bacillary Dysentery
Bacillary dysentery is a bacterial infection that affects your digestive system. Symptoms include diarrhea, fever, stomach pain, nausea and vomiting. It’s most common in areas that don’t have water sanitation. Most cases go away without treatment. But severe cases can be life-threatening and require treatment at a healthcare facility.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Bacillary Dysentery?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Bacillary Dysentery?
Bacillary dysentery (pronounced “BAS-uh-ler-ee” “DIS-uhn-ter-ee”) is a gastrointestinal (GI) disease — it affects your
digestive system
(GI tract). “Bacillary” means it relates to
bacteria
.
Dysentery
is severe diarrhea that contains blood or mucus.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you have bacillary dysentery, a
bacterial infection
becomes more severe, causing
inflammation
in your small and large intestines. Symptoms range from mild to life-threatening.
Anyone can get bacillary dysentery, and the bacteria that cause it spread easily. It affects about
165 million people worldwide each year and kills more than 1 million people each year
. It’s more common in areas that don’t have water sanitation — facilities that prevent diseases that spread through drinking water.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of bacillary dysentery
Bacillary dysentery symptoms may include:
Diarrhea containing blood or mucus
Feeling an urgency to poop but you don’t
Fever
Nausea and vomiting
Stomachache
Your symptoms may be mild or severe.
What is the cause of bacillary dysentery?
Some of the most common bacteria that can cause bacillary dysentery include:
Shigella
, which leads to
shigellosis
Salmonella
, which causes
salmonella
(salmonellosis)
Campylobacter
, which causes
campylobacteriosis
Escherichia coli
, which leads to an
E. coli
infection
These bacteria usually pass from person to person when poop from an infected person gets into another person’s mouth (fecal-oral route). Common examples include:
Making and/or serving food without washing your hands
Not washing your hands after using the restroom or changing diapers
Drinking contaminated water
Anal sex
, including rimming (analingus) and other sexual contact involving the anus
Touching contaminated objects or surfaces
Advertisement
What is the incubation period for bacillary dysentery?
The incubation period for the bacteria that can lead to bacillary dysentery can be from one day to a week. An incubation period is the amount of time between exposure to a
germ
and the appearance of symptoms.
Complications of this condition
Bacillary dysentery complications may include:
Extreme inflammation
Dehydration
(infants, people 65 and older and people with a compromised immune system (
immunocompromised
) are at a greater risk of developing dehydration)
Sudden (acute)
kidney disease
Widening (dilation) of your large intestine
These complications may be life-threatening. It’s important to get medical care right away if you have symptoms.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers will review your medical history, ask about your symptoms and conduct a
physical exam
. If they think you have bacillary dysentery, they’ll recommend a stool culture. A stool culture is a type of
bacterial culture test
. It checks a sample of your poop for the presence of bacteria that can cause bacillary dysentery.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Many people who have bacillary dysentery don’t need medical treatment. Symptoms often get better in a few days to a week. In these cases, you should:
Avoid over-the-counter antidiarrhea medications like
loperamide
(Imodium A-D
®
, K-Pek II
®
) and
bismuth subsalicylate
(Pepto-Bismol
®
, Bismatrol
®
), which can make your symptoms worse.
Drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration.
Avoid people for at least two full days (48 hours) after the last time you have diarrhea to prevent spreading bacillary dysentery to others.
Take over-the-counter
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) to reduce pain and fever.
In severe cases that require medical attention, treatment often includes:
Antibiotics
to get rid of the bacterial infection
IV fluids
to prevent or treat dehydration
Less often, a
blood transfusion
if you have a lot of blood loss from bloody diarrhea
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if your symptoms don’t go away after a few days or if they get worse.
Go to the nearest
urgent care or emergency room
if you have signs of moderate or severe dehydration, like:
Confusion
Dark-colored pee or difficulty peeing
Dizziness
or lightheadedness
Dry cough
Dry mouth
Headache
Lack of tears in your eyes
Muscle cramps
Swollen feet (
edema
)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Most people who have bacillary dysentery feel better in a few days without medical treatment. But some people are at a greater risk of developing dehydration. Dehydration complications may cause:
Heart attack
Kidney failure
Stroke
In severe cases, dehydration can also be fatal.
Prevention
Can bacillary dysentery be prevented?
The best way to prevent bacillary dysentery is to prevent the spread of germs. Wash your hands with soap and clean water after using the restroom and before handling food.
You can also help reduce your risk of infection by:
Not sharing personal items with others, like towels.
Not using water unless you know it’s germ-free (sterile). You can boil water, use chlorine tablets or use bottled water. This includes water you use to drink, make ice, cook and brush your
teeth
.
Staying away from people who are sick.
Thoroughly cooking all food.
Washing all fresh fruits and vegetables with clean water or peeling them before eating.
Advertisement
How can I avoid spreading it?
If you have bacillary dysentery, the following steps can help prevent spreading the infection. For the first 48 hours after your last symptoms, you should avoid:
Being around others
Having sexual intercourse
Preparing food
Swimming
It’s also a good idea to:
Clean toilets, sinks, handles and other surfaces with disinfectant wipes or sprays.
Wash your laundry, including bedding, in hot water.
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between bacillary dysentery and amoebic dysentery?
Bacteria cause bacillary dysentery. A single-celled parasite (amoeba) causes
amoebic dysentery
(amoebiasis).
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Stomach pain and diarrhea with blood or mucus are some of the telltale signs of bacillary dysentery. It’s a common condition, and it usually goes away on its own without treatment.
In the meantime, isolate yourself from others if you can (even better if you have a second bathroom to use by yourself) to keep the germs from spreading and drink fluids to help prevent dehydration. If your symptoms linger (or get worse) and you can’t hold down water, get to the nearest urgent care or ER for treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment