Physical Exams for Men: What To Expect
Search
Advertisement
Advertisement
September 13, 2023
/
Living Healthy
/
Men's Health
Physical Exams for Men: What To Expect
Screenings and tests done during a wellness check can uncover hidden health issues
If you’re an adult
male
, the odds are good that you’ve avoided scheduling a regular health screening.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
SPOILER ALERT: That’s not the best idea, especially when the candles start to add up on your birthday cake.
Regular physical exams offer important insight into your health and body as you age. It’s a way to detect health issues before they become … well, significant health issues.
Yet a 2023 survey by Cleveland Clinic found that
almost half of men (44%) DO NOT get an annual physical
. The survey was done as part of Cleveland Clinic’s national MENtion It® educational campaign.
Perhaps knowing what happens during a physical exam can help change that number for guys. For more on what to expect during a screening, we turn to primary care specialist
Daniel Sullivan, MD
.
What is a men’s wellness exam?
Think of a wellness exam as an opportunity to verify that you’re as healthy as you think you might be.
Not every issue in your body is an obvious one, after all. Bruises and broken bones are easy to see. But it’s a little tougher to spot
high cholesterol levels
or
elevated blood sugar
with the naked eye.
Tests done during a standard wellness exam can reveal “hidden” issues that deserve attention.
“You can’t treat a condition if you don’t know it’s there,” notes Dr. Sullivan. “Once we learn about an issue, we can consider options to appropriately address it and prevent an illness down the line.”
Advertisement
How often should you have a physical exam?
If you’re in good health, the general recommendation is to start getting regular wellness exams at age 35. “After that, if you’re feeling good, going once every few years is plenty until age 50,” says Dr. Sullivan.
Then, once you cross the half-century mark, an annual checkup is recommended given age-related health issues that become more common. These would include:
Heart disease
Diabetes
Colon cancer
Prostate cancer
Decreased testosterone
Consider those timetables very general, though. More frequent wellness screenings may be called for depending on your personal health history, your family’s health history or lifestyle habits (such as smoking).
What can men expect at a health checkup?
Many of the tests done during a routine health exam are the same regardless of sex or age. Others are a bit more specific to men or your age.
Let’s break it down.
Physical exam basics
The start of an exam for everyone typically includes some basic tests to offer a quick health snapshot. You can expect tests looking at:
Blood pressure
.
High blood pressure
looms as a silent killer, which is why getting a reading is critical. “High blood pressure can wear out your heart, stress your kidneys and put you at higher risk of a stroke,” explains Dr. Sullivan.
Heart rate
. A heart that’s beating too fast or too slow may provide a clue for a heart issue or other health problem.
Heart rate
also can be an indicator for overall fitness.
Body temperature
. A higher-than-average temperature could signal an infection.
Breathing and heart sounds
. That
stethoscope
providers wear around their necks isn’t just for show. The tool allows them to listen for anything unusual in your lungs or heart.
Eyes
. How your pupils react to light can offer insight into your neurological function.
Ears
. A quick look into your ear can spot a potential infection. The quick check also could reveal a
wax buildup
that makes hearing more difficult.
Height and weight
. These measurements allow your healthcare provider to calculate your
body mass index (BMI)
. A high BMI can indicate an increased risk of cancer, heart disease and stroke. Drastic changes over time may signal health issues, too.
Blood test
A blood test also is generally included as part of a general wellness check, notes Dr. Sullivan. (The blood draw may be done on a separate day from your main office visit given fasting requirements.)
A blood test offers a look at cholesterol and blood sugar levels, “hidden” factors that could show the potential for heart disease and diabetes.
In addition, it can screen for viruses like
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus)
and
hepatitis C
.
“If you were exposed to either of those viruses, which you could pick up through sexual contact or something inadvertent, there are staggeringly effective treatments to put the fire out,” says Dr. Sullivan.
Prostate exam
The prostate is a small gland that’s part of the male reproductive system. It’s also a common spot for cancer to appear — especially later in life. (Fact: On average, 1 in 8 men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer during their life.)
It’s recommended that prostate cancer screenings begin by age 55 and continue through age 75.
“A screening may find the cancer sooner, and early treatment is better than waiting for symptoms,” states Dr. Sullivan. “It’s important to have a conversation on this to decide what path you want to take.”
Testing is typically done one of two ways:
Advertisement
Prostate specific antigen (PSA) test
. This blood test measures the amount of PSA in your body. Higher levels of the protein may be a sign of prostate cancer.
Digital rectal exam (DRE)
. During an in-office DRE, your healthcare provider inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into your rectum to feel your prostate for abnormalities that could indicate prostate cancer. (The
U.S. Preventative Services Task Force
doesn’t recommend DRE given a lack of evidence regarding its benefits.)
Testicular exam
Did you know that
testicular cancer
is the most common cancer in younger males (ages 15 to 35)? “It’s a cancer of young men,” says Dr. Sullivan.
During a wellness exam, your healthcare provider may check your testicles for any
hard lumps that may signal cancer
. An early diagnosis is key, as testicular cancer is very treatable with a cure rate of 95%.
(On a side note, taking two minutes once a month to do a
self-exam of your testicles
is highly recommended. It’s a simple process, too.)
Colon cancer test
While a
colon cancer
screening won’t be done in the office during your physical exam, expect to chat about your options during your visit.
Colon cancer screenings are generally recommended beginning at age 45, says Dr. Sullivan. In some cases,
elevated risk factors
(such as a family history of the disease) may warrant earlier testing.
Advertisement
It should be noted, too, that
colon cancer is becoming more common in younger adults
.
The “gold standard” for a colon cancer screening is a
colonoscopy
, a procedure where cancer-causing polyps can be found and removed. “A cancerous polyp that’s in the trash can can’t hurt you,” says Dr. Sullivan.
Some people opt for a stool test for colon cancer screening. In this test, you send a sample of … well, poop to a lab for testing.
The tests can detect colon cancer
but are not as accurate as a colonoscopy.
Topics to discuss at a wellness check
Expect to have a conversation about healthy living. (After all, that’s why you’re at this exam, right?) Expect to chat about the importance of exercise and nutrition for keeping your body in tip-top shape.
A wellness check also offers an opportunity to talk about (or get) vaccines, including:
A seasonal
flu shot
to guard against influenza
Updated
COVID-19 vaccines
The new
vaccine for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
, particularly if you’re age 60 or older
The
shingles vaccine
if you’re age 50 or older
An
updated tetanus shot
every 10 years
The
pneumococcal
vaccine to guard against pneumonia
“An annual checkup is a time to talk about things that will improve not only your length of life, but your quality of life,” reassures Dr. Sullivan. “It’s worth the investment of time.”
Advertisement
Learn more about our
editorial process
.
Health Library
Physical Examination
Overview
Test Details
Results and Follow-Up
Health Library
Physical Examination
Overview
Test Details
Results and Follow-Up
Advertisement
Related Articles
March 5, 2025
/
Primary Care
Signs vs. Symptoms: Here’s Why They’re Different
Signs are what your provider can see, but symptoms are what you feel or experience
April 10, 2023
/
Primary Care
Here’s What Happens at a Yearly Check-Up
An annual physical exam is important for many reasons, including your chance to ask questions
January 9, 2023
/
Primary Care
10 Embarrassing Questions You Should Ask Your Doctor
From odors to colors, it’s more than OK to ask your doctor these questions
December 29, 2020
/
Heart Health
What Does Your Doctor Listen for With a Stethoscope?
This iconic medical tool has an enduring role
September 16, 2020
/
Primary Care
5 Ways to Make the Most of Your Doctor’s Appointment
Simple tips to make your visit more effective
September 24, 2019
/
Primary Care
Why We Forget What the Doctor Told Us (and What To Do About It)
Tips to help you get the most from your visit
September 4, 2018
/
Urinary & Kidney Health
10 Questions Every Man Is Afraid to Ask His Doctor
What you really want to know about what's going on down there
October 30, 2025
/
Sex & Relationships
Are ‘Blue Balls’ Real?
Arousal without orgasm can be uncomfortable, but it’s no reason to pressure sexual interactions
Trending Topics
Sleep
Breathing Problems? Try These Sleep Positions
If you’re feeling short of breath, sleep can be tough — propping yourself up or sleeping on your side may help
Mental Health
What Is Anxious Attachment Style — and Do You Have It?
If you fear the unknown or find yourself needing reassurance often, you may identify with this attachment style
Nutrition
Are Prebiotic Sodas Good for You?
If you’re looking to boost your gut health, it’s better to get fiber from whole foods
Health Categories to Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Ad
Rendered:
Fri Oct 31 2025 11:24:01 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)