Hereditary Fructose Intolerance: Symptoms, Treatment & Diet
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hereditary Fructose Intolerance
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hereditary Fructose Intolerance
Hereditary fructose intolerance is a rare genetic condition that makes you unable to digest fructose because you’re missing a liver enzyme. Treatment involves eliminating foods that contain fructose. Healthcare providers find it most often in babies when they begin eating solids.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is hereditary fructose intolerance?
Hereditary fructose intolerance is a
genetic condition
that causes you to be unable to digest fructose (and substances like fructose). Fructose is a natural sugar that’s mostly in fruits.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
People with this condition don’t have the enzyme to break down fructose, called fructose-1-aldolase. This causes fructose to build up in your liver and kidneys. Without treatment, this can lead to health conditions like
kidney failure
and
liver failure
.
Healthcare providers most often diagnose hereditary fructose intolerance in babies after they begin
eating solid foods
. It’s possible to receive a diagnosis later in life, too.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hereditary fructose intolerance?
People with the condition often don’t like the taste of fruits or sweet foods. Other symptoms could include:
Not growing as expected (
failure to thrive
)
Nausea and vomiting
Abdominal pain
Jaundice
Low blood sugar
Malnutrition
Convulsions
If you notice that your child isn’t gaining weight, growing slowly or refuses to eat fruits, talk to their healthcare provider.
What causes hereditary fructose intolerance?
You have hereditary fructose intolerance when your liver can’t produce an enzyme called fructose-1-aldolase due to an error in your
genetic code
. This enzyme is responsible for metabolizing fructose.
Hereditary fructose intolerance is genetic. It’s an
autosomal recessive
disorder, which means both biological parents must carry the gene for their child to have the condition. (Just because both parents are carriers doesn’t mean their child will have the disease.)
Advertisement
What are the risk factors for hereditary fructose intolerance?
Since the condition is genetic, having a birth parent with the condition is the largest risk factor. Both parents must have the irregular gene for a child to be at risk of inheriting hereditary fructose intolerance. People who are carriers may want
genetic counseling
to learn how this disease affects their family.
What are the complications of hereditary fructose intolerance?
Without proper treatment, the disease can cause life-threatening complications. Some of the complications are:
Kidney damage (which can lead to kidney failure)
Liver damage (which can lead to liver failure)
Enlarged spleen
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Blood clotting issues
Growth problems due to
malabsorption
of nutrients
Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)
Metabolic acidosis
Early diagnosis and treatment can often prevent these serious complications.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hereditary fructose intolerance diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose it by performing a physical examination and evaluating your child’s symptoms. This usually happens once you begin giving your child fructose-containing foods.
The following tests can also lead your provider to a diagnosis:
Blood tests
: These tests check liver and
kidney function
and blood sugar levels.
Urine tests
: These tests check for fructose in your child’s pee.
Genetic tests
: This is a specific test that looks for changes in the fructose-1-aldolase (
ALDOB
) gene.
Liver biopsy
: Rarely, a biopsy can show the activity of the fructose-1-aldolase enzyme.
While rare, it’s possible to receive a diagnosis in adulthood, especially if your symptoms are mild.
Management and Treatment
How is hereditary fructose intolerance treated?
There’s no cure for hereditary fructose intolerance. Treatment focuses on completely avoiding foods and drinks that contain fructose, sucrose and sorbitol. Sucrose is made up of fructose. Sorbitol works like fructose in your body, which is why providers recommend eliminating it, too.
Foods to avoid
Eliminating foods that contain fructose (or related sugars) will be the main part of your child’s treatment plan. Some of those foods are:
Anything that contains high fructose corn syrup (many processed foods)
Fruits (all fruit contains some amount of fructose)
Vegetables (some vegetables have very low amounts of fructose)
Honey, agave nectar, maple syrup and similar sweeteners
Sugary drinks like fruit juices and soft drinks
Low sugar or diet foods and beverages that contain sorbitol
Because this can be difficult to manage on your own, your healthcare provider can help you figure out what you/your child can eat. This often involves working with a
dietitian
who specializes in
metabolic disorders
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has hereditary fructose intolerance?
You can expect a lot of change and preparation in your child’s — and family’s — daily life. Hereditary fructose intolerance is a lifelong disease that requires careful management. But careful management is possible.
Advertisement
Some ways to manage avoiding all foods that contain fructose, sucrose and sorbitol include:
Educating your child, family and any caretakers about what contains fructose and related sugars
Carefully reading labels on food items
Packing your child’s meals for school and other activities
Having go-to restaurants that serve food your child can eat
Deciding if your whole family will follow your child’s dietary restrictions
Over time, you’ll figure out what works best for your child and family. And your child’s healthcare team will be by your side to help you. You may also consider joining a support group to learn from others going through the same thing. Your child can live a healthy life with this disease. They can go to school, participate in activities and live a long, happy life. Work with your child’s healthcare team on a meal plan that eliminates fructose in all forms.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your child’s healthcare provider if you suspect fructose intolerance, especially if you have a family history of the condition. They can recommend what to do next.
What questions should I ask my provider?
Questions to ask include:
What foods should my child avoid? Can a dietitian help me?
Is there any damage to my child’s kidneys or liver so far?
Will my child live a normal life?
Will my child pass this on to their child?
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hearing your child has a genetic condition that affects them for the rest of their life can feel scary. You may be wondering how you’ll cope with the changes a hereditary fructose intolerance brings. What foods are safe? Will my child be OK? These are all normal questions to ask as you navigate this condition.
While there are limitations to what your child can eat, there are still many safe and delicious foods you can serve them. It just may take a lot of time and practice to find what works best for your child and family. You don’t have to do it alone. Your child’s healthcare team is there to help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us