Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease (Perthes Disease): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease affects the growing end of the femur bone that fits into your child’s hip socket. It causes the end of the bone to break down and then regenerate over several years. This process can alter the shape of the bone and how it fits in the socket. Your healthcare provider will work to prevent or correct this deformity.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease?
Legg-Calve-Perthes happens when there’s a temporary interruption in blood supply to the femur. Without blood supply, the head of the femur starts to die.
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (also known as Perthes disease) is a rare condition that affects children’s hips. It starts when the top of the
thigh bone
(femur) temporarily loses its blood supply.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Because the bone needs fresh blood to get oxygen and nutrients, it starts to
die and break down
. After the blood flow returns to normal, your child’s bone will slowly repair itself. But it may not have its original shape and size.
Perthes disease is most common in kids ages 5 to 7. But it can affect kids as young as 2 or as old as 12. It progresses in stages. First, your child’s affected bone breaks down from a loss of blood supply. Then, after blood flow is restored, it will start to regrow. The breakdown phase may take up to a year. The rebuilding phase may last two to five years.
How much it affects your child depends on how much their thigh bone changes. Some kids lose more bone tissue than others. This can happen for a few reasons:
More severe blood supply interruption
More time without the right blood supply
They use their bone too much while it’s weakened, causing additional damage
Treatments can help your child’s femur regrow correctly. Most children have no long-term complications after treatment. Kids who continue to have poorly fitted hip joints will have ongoing symptoms.
Hip dysplasia
can lead to complications like arthritis later in life.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Legg-Calves-Perthes disease
Signs and symptoms of Perthes disease develop over time. You or your child might start to wonder what’s up when symptoms appear and don’t seem to ever get better.
Advertisement
Early symptoms might include:
A limp
: Your child may favor one leg while walking to keep weight off the affected side. A limp often appears before your child notices any pain. They may not know why they’re limping.
Hip pain
: If your child feels pain, it’s usually when their bone first starts to break down. Pain will probably be worse when they move and use that hip.
Referred pain
: Some kids may feel pain in their knees, thighs, pelvises or bellies instead.
Leg cramps
: Your child may have cramps or
spasms
in the muscles connected to their hip.
Later signs and symptoms of LCPD may include:
Trendelenburg gait
: This is an
unusual walking pattern
. Weak hip muscles make your child’s pelvis tilt down on the affected side. This will affect how they walk.
Limited range of motion
: Your child may have difficulty rotating their hip. They may not be able to open their thighs out, or turn their knees in as far as usual.
Muscle atrophy
: One of your child’s thighs or one side of their butt may look noticeably smaller than the other.
Uneven leg lengths
: One leg may appear shorter than the other.
Perthes disease causes
Perthes disease happens when something slows or stops the blood supply to the head of your child’s femur. Healthcare providers aren’t always able to find a specific cause.
Blood flow can stop if a blood vessel is blocked or squeezed.
Artery disease
or a blood clot might block it from the inside.
Swelling might compress a blood vessel from the outside. Sudden trauma or a
repetitive strain injury
can cause swelling in your child’s hip. This can cut off blood flow to their thigh bone.
1 in 10 cases appear
genetic
. It’s possible that certain genetic changes can pass through generations in your biological family. Experts have identified that a change in the
COL2A1
gene may cause LCPD.
Risk factors
Perthes disease is five times more common in
males
. About half of kids who develop it have some type of
blood-clotting disorder
.
Your child may have a higher risk of developing Legg-Calve-Perthes if they have:
Delayed skeletal growth
Low birth weight
Short stature
Abnormal teeth
HIV
Environmental factors can also play a role. These are things about where you live or spend time that can affect your health. Your child’s risk of LCPD can increase if they:
Live in a lower-than-average socioeconomic status
Are exposed to
secondhand smoke
Play sports or do gymnastics
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will begin with a thorough
physical examination
. They’ll use X-rays to take pictures of your child’s bones. X-rays can show evidence of Perthes syndrome. They’ll also show its stage and severity. In some cases, your child might need an
MRI
to see certain features in more detail.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
Treatment for Legg-Calve-Perthes disease
Treatment for Legg-Calve-Perthes depends on a few factors, including:
Its severity
Its stage
Your child’s age
In general, younger kids tend to do better with more conservative treatments. That’s because their bones naturally grow and develop faster. Older children might need more help to restore their bone tissue.
Your child’s healthcare team will develop a personalized treatment plan. This may include:
Restricted activity and weight-bearing
: Your child might need to stop or limit walking for a while. They may need crutches or another assistive device to get around.
NSAIDs
: These over-the-counter (OTC) medications help manage pain and reduce inflammation. They include aspirin and ibuprofen.
Physical therapy
: A physical therapist will work with your child to rehab their hip with special exercises. You might need to help your child practice their exercises.
Traction
: An orthopaedic traction device applies gentle, increasing force to gradually stretch your child’s hip into alignment. This treatment takes place over several days.
A cast or braces
: During the remodeling phase, your child might need a cast or brace to keep their bone safely in place.
Surgery
: Some children might need surgery to
reshape the bone
so it fits into its socket. They might need a
joint replacement
to extend or reshape the hip socket. Kids older than 7 are more likely to need surgery.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for Legg-Calve-Perthes disease?
It can take your child several years to recover completely from Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. This can intrude on their childhood, to some extent. But when it’s over, they should be able to return to their usual activities.
Perthes syndrome is temporary, but it can cause permanent changes. Kids who don’t get the right treatment soon enough have an increased risk of hip
osteoarthritis
later in life. But most children don’t have long-term complications.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease is an unexpected diagnosis. You might have a lot of questions. Your healthcare provider can help (and your child) understand what’s going on. Don’t be afraid to ask any questions you have. Encourage your child to ask questions, too.
There are lots of reasons for optimism. Most kids don’t have too much discomfort during treatment. They might have some limitations, but they’re usually temporary. Your child will need some type of orthopedic therapy. But in the end, most kids have no long-lasting symptoms or issues.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment