Angina: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Angina
Advertisement
Advertisement
Angina
Angina is chest pain or discomfort that comes and goes. Angina may be a sign of a heart attack, and you should seek medical care if you’re experiencing angina. Your provider will work to treat your symptoms and the underlying cause.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Possible Causes
Care and Treatment
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Angina feels like pressure, tightness or squeezing in your chest. The discomfort may spread to other parts of your upper body like your arms or jaw.
What is angina?
Angina (commonly pronounced an-JY-nuh) is
chest pain
or discomfort that happens when your
heart
isn’t receiving enough blood. Angina is a symptom of
heart disease
— most commonly plaque buildup or a blockage in your coronary arteries. Without treatment, dangerous complications like a heart attack or
cardiac arrest
could occur.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
About 11 million people in the U.S. experience angina. It’s common and generally treatable. The most important thing you can do is tell your provider about any chest discomfort you feel. This is true even if you think it’s minor. Don’t ignore any new or changing symptoms. Angina can range in severity from a vague ache in your chest to crushing pressure.
Angina can be a warning sign of a
heart attack
— sometimes days or weeks in advance. If you have unexpected, severe or worsening chest pain, call 911 (or your local emergency services number).
Angina pectoris is another name for this same symptom. But providers usually just call it angina.
What does angina feel like?
Most people with angina describe having chest pressure or pain. It can be mild or more severe. It’s common to feel vague discomfort, rather than actual pain. Angina might feel like:
Squeezing
Tightness
Heaviness
Crushing
Burning, like heartburn or indigestion
This discomfort may spread to your jaw, teeth, shoulders, arm or back.
Angina can happen alongside other symptoms, like:
Sweating
Dizziness
Weakness
Gas or bloating
Upset stomach or nausea
Feeling clammy
Skin that’s paler than usual
Feeling of impending doom
Types of angina
There are four main types of angina:
Stable angina
: This is chest discomfort that comes and goes in predictable patterns. Physical activity is a common trigger. Each episode is usually short (about five minutes or less). The discomfort feels the same each time. It doesn’t grow more severe or start happening more often. Rest or medicine makes it go away.
Unstable angina
: This is chest discomfort that’s different, more severe or more frequent than usual. It happens without warning and may have no clear triggers. An episode may last longer (15 minutes or more). Rest and medicine usually
don’t
make it go away.
THIS IS A MEDICAL EMERGENCY.
Microvascular angina
: Problems with small blood vessels in your heart cause this type of angina. The tightness or pressure can last 15 minutes or more. Treatment can prevent damage to your heart from a lack of oxygen.
Prinzmetal (variant) angina
: Coronary artery spasms cause this type of angina. It usually occurs when you’re sleeping or resting. This makes it different from other types. An episode typically lasts five to 15 minutes.
Advertisement
Healthcare providers consider your triggers when describing the severity of your angina. They may use a scale of 1 to 4. The higher the number, the more severe the angina:
1
: You have angina only when you’re pushing yourself with physical activity. Your usual activities don’t cause it.
2
: Walking or climbing stairs quickly can trigger angina. You may also notice it if you move around after a heavy meal. Cold weather, wind or strong emotions may also cause it.
3
: Walking a shorter distance at a normal pace can trigger angina.
4
: Any physical activity can trigger angina. You may even have it while resting.
Possible Causes
What causes angina?
Reduced blood flow
to your heart causes angina. Your heart may not get enough blood due to:
Coronary artery disease (CAD)
: This is the most common cause of angina. It happens when plaque builds up in your coronary arteries.
Coronary microvascular disease
: This means tiny arteries in your heart are damaged.
Coronary artery spasm
: Your coronary arteries quickly tighten and then open up. You can have this condition without having coronary artery disease.
Risk factors
You’re more likely to develop angina if you:
Are older
:
Males
over 45 and females over 55 have a greater risk of angina than younger adults.
Have risk factors for coronary artery disease
: These include high blood pressure, high cholesterol, family history of heart disease, overweight/obesity and diabetes.
Have severe
anemia
: This means you don’t have enough healthy red blood cells to carry oxygen to different parts of your body — including your heart.
Have certain heart conditions
:
Heart valve disease
,
heart failure
and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
raise your risk for having angina. These conditions force your heart to work harder.
Are exposed to harmful substances
: Smoking, vaping, secondhand smoke, recreational drugs and exposure to particles in the air raise your risk for angina.
Care and Treatment
How is angina treated?
Medications can stop angina episodes and reduce how often you have them. But your provider will also treat the condition that’s causing your angina. This means you may need a combination of medicines, procedures and changes to your daily habits. The goals of treatment are to improve blood flow to your heart and lower your risk of a heart attack.
Your provider may recommend:
Medicines
:
Nitroglycerin
can stop an angina episode in its tracks. You may also need
beta-blockers
,
extended-release nitroglycerin
or
calcium channel blockers
to manage angina long-term. They relax your blood vessels and help blood reach your heart.
Procedures
: If your coronary arteries are narrow or blocked, you may need a procedure or surgery. Your provider can use a
small balloon and tube (stent)
to reopen your artery so blood can flow through. Or they can create a
new path around blockages
.
Changes to your daily habits
: Eating heart-healthy foods, moving around more, quitting smoking and limiting alcohol are just a few ways to help your heart. Your provider will explain which exercises are safe for you.
Does angina go away on its own?
No. You usually need treatment for angina. An episode of stable angina attack may go away within five minutes of rest. But it will likely reoccur without medical evaluation and treatment.
Advertisement
Unstable angina is a warning sign of a heart attack. Don’t wait to seek medical care.
How can angina be prevented?
Your provider may prescribe medicines that prevent angina episodes. Follow your provider’s guidance on how to take these medicines.
You can lower your risk of developing conditions that cause angina by:
Eating in
heart-healthy ways
Getting enough physical activity
Not smoking or vaping
Limiting alcohol
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
When To Call the Doctor
When should angina be treated by a healthcare provider?
Call 911 or your local emergency number if:
You have
early warning signs
of a heart attack, including chest pressure, cold sweats, fatigue and nausea
Your stable angina suddenly becomes worse, happens without a usual trigger or doesn’t go away
Call your healthcare provider if you have:
Questions or concerns about your treatment plan
Side effects from your medicines
Symptoms that are new or getting worse
Your provider will help you learn how to manage angina in your daily life. For example, they may ask you to keep a log of your angina episodes. Include the date and time, what it felt like, what you were doing and possible triggers. Your provider will also tell you if there are any limits on what you should do from day to day.
If your provider prescribes nitroglycerin, be sure to keep it with you at all times.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You’ve probably seen enough movies to know what chest pain looks like. But angina may not make you clutch your chest or collapse. It might not even feel like pain. It may be more subtle. And it may come and go so quickly that you question if it’s even a big deal.
Advertisement
But angina is
always
worth taking seriously. It’s your heart telling you that something isn’t right. And you should seek medical care. The conditions that cause angina are treatable. The sooner you start treating them, the better.
If you’ve been diagnosed with angina, talk with your provider about what’s “normal” for you. Ask your provider what’s out of the ordinary for you and when you should call 911.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment