Poisoning, Types of Poison: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Poisoning
Advertisement
Advertisement
Poisoning
Poisoning is when a toxic substance (poison) makes you sick or harms you. Poisons can come from plants, animals, household cleaners and chemicals, medications, carbon monoxide and more. Call poison control at 1-800-222-1222 (U.S.) if someone in your household is exposed to poison even if they don’t have symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is poisoning?
Poisoning is when exposure to a toxic substance makes you sick or harms you. Many substances are toxic to humans. Examples include
heavy metals
, certain gases and even some plants in your garden. Poisoning often happens suddenly and accidentally. For example, a child might drink cough syrup, or you might splash cleaner into your eye.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Poisoning is sometimes a method of self-harm for people thinking about suicide.
If you have thoughts of self-harm, call or text the Suicide & Crisis Hotline at 988 (in the U.S.). This free, confidential service is available 24/7.
Symptoms and Causes
Poisoning symptoms
The signs and symptoms of poisoning vary according to how the poison gets into your body. For example:
Symptoms of poison chemicals in your eye include eye pain, redness or swelling.
Signs and symptoms if you swallow poison include digestive issues like diarrhea, nausea and/or vomiting.
Getting poison on your skin can cause a rash, pain and stinging.
Signs and symptoms also vary by:
The amount and type of poison
Your age and overall health
How long you’re exposed to the poison. Acute exposures last seconds or minutes, while chronic exposures happen over a long period of time.
Symptoms of acute poison exposure
There are many possible symptoms of acute poisoning. These can affect your whole body and/or individual parts. Symptoms may show up immediately or hours or days after exposure to a toxin.
If you think you have poisoning symptoms, call poison control or your local emergency services number. Symptoms include:
Changes in body temperature
Changes in
heart rate
Chest pain
Confusion
Cough
, possibly with blood
Diarrhea, nausea and/or vomiting
Dizziness, weakness or
fainting
Eye pain
, redness, swelling or tearing
Headache
Severe burning in your eyes, nose, throat and airways
Skin rash, redness, pain, burning or stinging
Stomach pain and cramping
Trouble breathing
Trouble seeing or
loss of vision
Advertisement
Symptoms of chronic poison exposure
Chronic (long-term) exposure may not show symptoms until many years have passed. For example:
Long-term exposure to toxic gases can cause
lung
damage. Symptoms that may develop include shortness of breath and chronic wheezing.
Long-term
radon
exposure can lead to lung cancer.
What are the effects of poisoning?
The effects of poisoning range from mild to severe. Some cases are fatal. Serious cases may lead to:
Hospitalization
Long-term treatment
Permanent disabilities or injuries
How poisoning affects you depends on many things, including:
The type of poison
. Certain types of poison cause mild symptoms that go away with at-home care. Others are more likely to cause severe illness.
How it enters your body
. Poisons can enter your body through your
skin
, mouth, nose or eyes. Swallowing a toxic substance (like a household cleaner) often causes more harm than touching it with your skin.
The amount that enters your body
. Poisons are generally more dangerous in larger quantities.
How long you had exposure to it
. A poisoning can be either acute (seconds or minutes) or chronic (long-term). Chronic exposures often happen on the job, especially in mining, factories or agriculture.
How soon you get treatment
. Quick treatment may limit or stop the effects of poisoning.
Factors like your age and health
. Poisons affect children differently than adults. Children are smaller, so a dose that wouldn’t harm you could be deadly to them. People with underlying medical conditions might also get sicker from poisons or have a harder time recovering.
Causes of poisoning
Poisoning happens when you’re exposed to enough of something to make you sick or harm you. Poisons, by definition, are any substances that can cause sickness or harm. They can be liquids, solids or gases. Poisoning can occur if:
You inhale a poison in the air
You eat or drink a substance that contains a poison
A poison gets into your eye
A poison absorbs into your skin
An animal or insect bites or stings you and injects venom
Some substances are dangerous even in tiny amounts. Others will only hurt you in large amounts.
Types of poison
There are many types of poisons. You know some by name, like carbon monoxide or lead. Others are less obvious and contained in foods or products you use every day. Here are some examples:
Poisonous plants
. Certain plants contain toxins that can harm you when absorbed into your skin or ingested. Examples include
poison ivy
and
poison hemlock
.
Venom
.
Venom
is a poison that animals make. It can enter your body through a wound or injury. Examples include
bee stings
,
jellyfish stings
,
scorpion stings
,
fire ant bites
and
snake bites
. Venom exposure can cause mild symptoms or life-threatening reactions.
Heavy metals
. When heavy metals build up in your body, they can become poisonous. Examples include
mercury poisoning
,
arsenic poisoning
and
lead poisoning
.
Carbon monoxide
. Breathing in carbon monoxide (CO) fumes can lead to
carbon monoxide poisoning
. CO is dangerous because you can’t see or smell it. A working CO detector is the only way to know it’s there. CO can cause death after just a few minutes.
Contaminated food
. Toxins from bacteria, fungi and mold can contaminate your food and cause
food poisoning
. This happens when you eat food that’s not fresh, washed properly, cooked thoroughly or stored at the correct temperature. Common culprits are
E. coli
,
salmonella
and
listeria
. Ciguatoxin is a toxin in
some fish
that can lead to serious illness.
Mushrooms
. Toxins from
poisonous mushrooms
cause digestive symptoms that usually pass on their own. But some toxins can lead to liver and kidney failure. Always use extreme caution. Deadly mushrooms are easy to mistake for edible ones.
Medications
. Any medicine (prescription or over-the-counter) can become a poison if taken incorrectly. Common examples include
narcotic
pain medications,
acetaminophen
(Tylenol®) and
blood thinners
. Tell your provider about all medicines you’re taking. They’ll make sure the medicines are safe for you and won’t
interact
.
Nicotine
.
Nicotine poisoning
can happen to anyone, but it’s most common in children who eat cigarettes or consume liquid nicotine (from
e-cigarettes
).
Alcohol
.
Alcohol poisoning
happens when you consume ethyl alcohol (commonly called “alcohol”) faster than your body can process and eliminate it. It can also happen with types of alcohol your body can’t process safely, like isopropyl (rubbing) or methyl alcohols (also known as “methanol” or “wood alcohol”).
Cleaning products
. Many
household cleaners
contain chemicals that are poisonous when ingested, mishandled, combined or used incorrectly.
Pesticides
. Chemicals in most pesticides are poisonous if consumed.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose poisoning
Experts at a poison control center or other healthcare providers diagnose poisoning. This can happen over the phone and/or in-person.
Management and Treatment
First aid for poisoning
Doing first aid within seconds or minutes of a poison exposure can prevent serious harm. Only attempt first aid if the person is:
Awake
Alert
Breathing normally
Able to swallow
If any of the above aren’t true, call 911 immediately.
First aid depends on the type of exposure.
Type of poison exposure
First aid
Poison that’s swallowed and burns or irritates the throat
Drink a little water or milk.
Poison in the eye
Rinse eyes immediately to lower risk of vision loss. (Remove contact lenses first.) Rinse eyes under running, tepid water for at least 15 to 20 minutes. Blink throughout.
Poison on the skin
Remove clothing with the poison on it. Rinse skin immediately with running, tepid water for at least 15 minutes.
Poison that’s inhaled
Immediately move outdoors to fresh air.
Type of poison exposure
Poison that’s swallowed and burns or irritates the throat
First aid
Drink a little water or milk.
Poison in the eye
First aid
Rinse eyes immediately to lower risk of vision loss. (Remove contact lenses first.) Rinse eyes under running, tepid water for at least 15 to 20 minutes. Blink throughout.
Poison on the skin
First aid
Remove clothing with the poison on it. Rinse skin immediately with running, tepid water for at least 15 minutes.
Poison that’s inhaled
First aid
Immediately move outdoors to fresh air.
When to call for help
Skip first aid and call 911 right away
if a person:
Collapses or loses consciousness
Has a
seizure
Has difficulty breathing
Call 911
after
starting first aid
if a person:
Has severe
eye
irritation, pain, redness, swelling or vision issues
after rinsing for 15 to 20 minutes
Has severe
skin
symptoms like blistering burns, pain, swelling or redness
after rinsing for 15 minutes
Otherwise, after doing first aid,
call poison control at 1-800-222-1222
. Do this even if there are no signs or symptoms yet. This is a national number, but it routes your call to your local center.
A poisoning expert will talk to you over the phone. They’ll ask for key information so they can offer the best possible advice. Be prepared to share:
The person’s age and weight
Known health conditions and allergies
The type of poison or product
Amount of exposure
How it entered the body (swallowed, inhaled, etc.)
How much time has passed since exposure
First aid provided
Noticeable symptoms like vomiting
The person’s exact location and the nearest hospital
Advertisement
The expert will give you detailed instructions on what to do and whether you should go to a hospital.
Treatments for poisoning
Poison control or your healthcare provider will decide the best treatment. Often, first aid is enough to help you recover. But you may need care at a hospital.
Treatments vary according to the type of poison and how it affects you. Besides first aid, other possible treatments include:
Antidotes
. These are medications or substances that counteract or reverse a poison’s effects. There are many different types. What works against one poison may not work against others. Some poisons have no antidote.
Activated charcoal and stomach pumping
. These methods may prevent the poison from getting into your bloodstream. Only a healthcare provider should use activated charcoal and
stomach pumping
. Don’t try them on your own.
Supportive care
. Various forms of supportive care, like
mechanical ventilation
and IV fluids, help your body function while the poison clears from your system.
Induced vomiting (rare)
. NEVER induce vomiting unless poison control or a trained, qualified healthcare provider tells you to.
Chelation therapy
. This form of treatment uses medicine to remove metals in your body so they don’t make you sick. Only a qualified health professional should give you this therapy.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have poisoning?
Poisoning affects each person differently. It depends on the type of poison and other factors like your age and health. Some common forms of poisoning, like food poisoning or poison ivy exposure, are mild and go away with at-home care. More serious situations may require hospitalization. Sometimes, poisoning can be fatal.
When in doubt, err on the side of caution and get medical attention immediately.
Prevention
Can poisoning be prevented?
You can prevent or lower your risk of most types of poisoning. Here are some tips:
Install a carbon monoxide detector in your home. Change the batteries yearly.
Keep all medications out of reach of children. Always secure prescription medications in a locked storage place. Talk to your healthcare provider about appropriate doses for
medications
— prescription and over the counter (OTC).
Store cleaners, soaps and household or cleaning chemicals in their original packages and where children can’t reach them. NEVER mix cleaning products or household chemicals.
Don’t touch or eat unfamiliar plants you encounter outdoors. If you’re traveling in an unfamiliar area, research plants and animals to avoid.
Take
food safety
measures like cooking meat to the proper temperature and rinsing fruits and veggies under running water.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s easy to overlook many common sources of poisoning that could put you or your family at risk. But you can do a lot to keep yourself and loved ones safe. Whether you double-check that medications are locked away or double down on food safety, simple steps can make a lifesaving difference.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/31/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider