Intensive Care Unit (ICU): Care & Admission Eligibility
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Intensive Care Unit (ICU)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Intensive Care Unit (ICU)
The intensive care unit (ICU) is a unit in hospitals that provides round-the-clock monitoring and treatment for people with serious illnesses or injuries. Healthcare providers may send you to the ICU directly from an emergency room or another unit of the hospital if your health rapidly declines.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Intensive care unit staff includes multidisciplinary healthcare providers who treat critically ill or injured people.
What is the ICU in a hospital?
An intensive care unit (ICU) is a special area in a hospital or healthcare facility for people who have a life-threatening illness or injury. Being in the ICU is serious. People in an ICU require specialized healthcare providers to constantly monitor their health and provide treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Other names for an ICU include:
Critical care unit
Intensive therapy unit
Intensive treatment unit
How do I know if I need ICU care?
Healthcare providers consider many factors to determine if you need ICU care. These include:
Diagnosis
How you’re responding to treatment so far
Other medical conditions that you have (
comorbidities
)
Severity of your illness or injury
Providers will also consider your personal healthcare wishes. Some people may not want ICU care if the treatments affect their quality of life or if there’s a low chance that they recover.
Reasons for ICU admission
There are many conditions that may require treatment in an ICU. Some common conditions include:
Post-surgery care
Ruptured
brain aneurysm
Sepsis
Severe
bacterial
or
viral infection
Stroke
Sudden (acute)
organ failure
, like your
heart
,
kidneys
,
liver
or lungs (
respiratory failure
)
Surgery recovery
Traumatic injury
, such as a gunshot wound or injuries from an automobile accident
Traumatic brain injury
Your body doesn’t get enough blood flow (
shock
)
Cancer
-related care
What type of care is provided in the ICU?
Intensive care units provide round-the-clock monitoring and treatment. They often use equipment to help monitor your health.
ICUs provide multidisciplinary care. Multidisciplinary care is when you have a group of healthcare providers who specialize in conditions that affect different parts of your body. These may include:
Advertisement
Critical care physicians (intensivists)
Trauma surgeons
Nurse practitioners
and physician assistants (advanced practice providers or APPs)
Nurses
Respiratory therapists
Occupational therapists
Residents (physicians who have finished medical school and are receiving additional training)
Fellows (physicians who have finished their residency and are receiving more specialized training)
Clinical
pharmacists
Physical therapists
Nutritional specialists
Social workers
Case managers
What type of equipment is in an ICU?
Common types of equipment that providers use to treat and monitor people in the ICU include:
Anesthesia
machines
. These machines deliver medications that prevent you from feeling pain during medical procedures.
Central
and
peripheral IVs
. These deliver medications that help prevent pain and
anxiety
.
Defibrillators
. Providers use defibrillators to treat
cardiac arrest
.
Imaging equipment
. Providers may need to use
X-rays
,
ultrasounds
and other types of imaging equipment to look inside your body.
Life support
machines
. These support or replace organs that aren’t working as they should. They include
mechanical ventilation
for when you can’t breathe on your own,
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) to help your heart and lungs, and continuous renal replacement therapy, which is a type of
dialysis
that does the work of your
kidneys
.
Peripheral IVs
. Peripheral IVs are thin plastic tubes that providers use to give
IV fluids
, provide liquid nutrition (
enteral nutrition
), deliver medications and conduct
blood transfusions
.
Urinary catheters
. Catheters drain
urine
(pee) from your
urinary bladder
.
Vital signs
monitors
. These measure your body temperature, blood pressure,
heart rate
(pulse) and breathing rate (respiratory rate).
What types of medications are in an ICU?
Common types of medications that healthcare providers use in an ICU include:
Antiarrhythmics
to treat an abnormal heart rhythm
Antibiotics
to treat infections
Antipsychotic medications
to treat
psychosis
and psychosis-related conditions
Antiseizure medications
to treat
seizures
Beta-blockers
to treat conditions that affect your
circulatory system
Blood pressure medications
(antihypertensives) to treat
high blood pressure
(hypertension)
Calcium channel blockers
to treat an abnormal heart rhythm, high blood pressure and an accelerated heartbeat (
tachycardia
)
Diuretics
to treat heart failure and swelling (
edema
)
Pain relievers
to treat moderate to severe pain
Neurostimulants to help treat
traumatic brain injuries
and
stroke
Sedatives
to treat pain or discomfort
Vasopressors
to treat
low blood pressure
(hypotension)
What should I expect if I am admitted to the ICU?
The intensive care unit is busy. All people who need care in the ICU require close monitoring at all times. Healthcare providers will try to make you as comfortable as possible. But many people find the activity, sounds and smells overwhelming.
Unlike other hospital units, the ICU has fewer beds. Each ICU nurse cares for only one to two people at a time. There are stricter restrictions on visitors, too — fewer people can visit, and they may need to turn off their cell phones, avoid bringing food or flowers, and stay home if they’re not feeling well.
Advertisement
If you have a contagious disease, you may need to stay in an isolated part of the ICU to prevent the disease from spreading. Providers may need to wear additional personal protective equipment (PPE) while they care for you. This may include:
Eye protection, such as safety glasses or goggles
Face shields
Gloves
Gowns
Head coverings
Masks
Respirators
Shoe covers
If you’re unconscious (unable to wake up), sedated or otherwise unable to communicate your wishes, family members may need to make decisions about your care for you. In an emergency, providers may need to make decisions for you.
When can I leave the ICU?
It depends on the severity of your condition. Many people in the ICU recover and can leave the hospital. But conditions that require ICU care can be complicated and unpredictable. You may only need to spend a few hours in the ICU, or you may stay there for weeks or even months. Healthcare providers will give you a better idea of what to expect.
Additional Common Questions
Are there different types of ICUs?
Some hospitals may have specialized ICUs that help specific people or conditions. These may include:
Cardiac intensive care unit (CICU) to treat people who have heart conditions
Cardiothoracic intensive care unit (CTICU) to treat people who have heart and lung conditions
Neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) to treat newborn babies
Medical intensive care unit (MICU) to treat complex medical problems, severe infections and respiratory failure
Pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) to treat children
Surgical trauma intensive care unit (STICU) to treat people after planned or emergency surgery
Advertisement
Does ICU mean life support?
Not always, but many people who spend time in the ICU need medical procedures that help keep their organs working for them. These procedures may include mechanical ventilation, dialysis, a defibrillator and more.
Is ICU end-of-life care?
Sometimes. An ICU provides specialized medical care to people who are seriously ill or injured. But sometimes, people won’t recover from a condition, even with ICU treatments. If you, your care team and/or your loved ones decide you no longer need ICU treatment, you may move to a general ward in the hospital or, if possible, you may go home or to a
hospice
facility.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The intensive care unit (ICU) in a hospital provides care for people who are experiencing serious and possibly life-threatening conditions. It can be scary, stressful and overwhelming, not only for the people who need ICU care, but also for their loved ones. ICU staff understand your feelings. They’ll do everything they can to ensure the smoothest outcome and provide comfort during this difficult time.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment