Shoulder Dystocia: Signs, Causes, Prevention & Complications
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Shoulder Dystocia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Shoulder Dystocia
Shoulder dystocia is a condition that happens when one or both of your baby’s shoulders get stuck during vaginal delivery. There are no signs and no way to prevent the condition. Causes may include having a large baby, having a small pelvis or being in the wrong position. Severe complications can occur, including nerve injuries to your baby.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
Shoulder dystocia can cause brachial plexus palsy
What is shoulder dystocia?
Shoulder dystocia occurs when one or both of your baby’s shoulders get stuck inside your pelvis during
childbirth
. The word dystocia comes from the Greek words “dys,” meaning difficult, and “tokos,” meaning birth.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Shoulder dystocia is a medical emergency. Babies with this condition are usually born safely. But it can cause serious complications for you and your baby.
How common is shoulder dystocia?
Shoulder dystocia is a rare condition. Statistics vary widely because the condition is sometimes over-diagnosed or underdiagnosed. The average rate also varies depending on the baby’s birth weight. Shoulder dystocia occurs in 0.6% to 1.4% of babies weighing between 5 pounds, 8 ounces and 8 pounds, 13 ounces at birth. The rate increases to 5% to 9% of babies born weighing more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs of shoulder dystocia?
While there are risk factors that can lead to shoulder dystocia, the condition can happen to anyone. There are no symptoms, and there’s no way to predict if shoulder dystocia will occur. Your obstetrician may only notice the condition after you deliver your baby’s head. It becomes clear when your baby’s head emerges and then pulls back in against the area between your vagina and rectum (perineum). This is called the “turtle sign.”
What causes shoulder dystocia?
Shoulder dystocia occurs when your baby’s shoulder or shoulders get stuck behind your pubic bones during delivery. The following factors may cause shoulder dystocia:
Fetal macrosomia
: Your baby weighs more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces.
Your baby is in the wrong position.
Your pelvic opening is too small.
You are in a position that limits the room in your pelvis.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is shoulder dystocia diagnosed?
Your obstetrician will diagnose shoulder dystocia if three factors are met:
You delivered your baby’s head but you aren’t able to push your baby’s shoulders out.
At least one minute has passed since your baby’s head has emerged but their body hasn’t.
Your baby needs medical intervention to be delivered successfully.
Management and Treatment
How is shoulder dystocia treated?
Your obstetrician may recommend scheduling a
C-section
if you have diabetes or if your baby is very big.
If you're at risk for shoulder dystocia and having a vaginal delivery, your healthcare provider will have a safety checklist ready. A safety checklist includes steps that should be taken in the event of shoulder dystocia.
Things will happen fast in the delivery room if your obstetrician diagnoses shoulder dystocia. Your obstetrician and nursing team may try several interventions or maneuvers. They may want to move you into a better position to widen your pelvis. Or they may want to move your baby into a better
fetal position
to move their shoulders.
The HELPERR mnemonic is a tool your healthcare team may use to treat shoulder dystocia. HELPERR stands for:
H — Help
: Your obstetrician will call for help. They'll use the safety checklist and call for additional help from other healthcare providers. These providers may include an anesthesiologist, a neonatologist and extra
labor and delivery
. Necessary equipment will be brought to your room.
E — Evaluate for episiotomy
: Your obstetrician will decide if you need an episiotomy to assist with the delivery of your baby. An episiotomy is a cut (incision) in your perineum to make the opening to your vagina larger. Your provider will only perform this procedure if they need to make room for rotation maneuvers.
L — Legs
: Your obstetrician may use the McRoberts maneuver. With the McRoberts maneuver, your obstetrician will ask you to press your thighs up against your belly (abdomen). This method helps to flatten and rotate your pelvis.
P — Pressure
: Your obstetrician may use suprapubic pressure. With suprapubic pressure, your obstetrician will press on your lower belly (abdomen) above your pubic bone. This puts pressure on your baby’s shoulder in an attempt to rotate and deliver it.
E — Enter maneuvers
: Your obstetrician may perform enter maneuvers or internal rotation. Your obstetrician will reach up into your vagina to try to turn your baby.
R — Remove posterior arm
: Your obstetrician may use Jacquemier’s maneuver. With Jacquemier’s maneuver, your obstetrician will remove one of your baby’s arms from the birth canal. This may make it easier for their shoulders to pass through.
R — Roll the patient
: Your obstetrician may use the Gaskin maneuver. With the Gaskin maneuver, your obstetrician will have you turn over on your hands and knees to get into a new position.
In severe cases when other techniques aren’t working, your obstetrician may use one of the following methods:
Clavicle fracture
: Your obstetrician will break your baby’s collarbone to release their shoulders.
Zavanelli maneuver
: Your obstetrician will push your baby’s head back into your uterus and perform a C-section.
Symphysiotomy
: Your obstetrician will make a cut (incision) in the cartilage between your pubic bones to enlarge your pelvic opening.
What are the complications of shoulder dystocia?
Complications resulting from shoulder dystocia during labor can affect you and your baby.
Complications that can affect you
Extreme heavy bleeding after giving birth (postpartum
hemorrhage
).
Severe
tearing
of the area between your vagina and anus (perineum).
Rectovaginal fistula: A rectovaginal fistula is an abnormal connection between your vagina and rectum.
Uterine rupture: A uterine rupture means your uterus tears during labor.
Separation of your pubic bones.
Complications that can affect your baby
The most common complication of shoulder dystocia in your baby is
brachial plexus palsy
. The brachial plexus nerves run from your baby’s spinal cord in their neck through their arm. These nerves are responsible for providing feeling and movement in your baby’s shoulder, arm and hand. Damage to these nerves can cause weakness and
paralysis
on the affected side. Other complications to your baby may include:
Advertisement
Fractures to your baby’s collarbone (clavicle) and/or upper arm bone (humerus).
Horner’s syndrome
: A rare disorder affecting your baby’s eyes and face.
Compressed umbilical cord: The
umbilical cord
can get trapped between your baby’s arm and your pelvic bone. When the umbilical cord is flattened, it can cut off oxygen and blood flow to your baby. This is very rare, but it can cause brain injury or death.
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook (prognosis) for shoulder dystocia?
Research has shown that by the age of three months, half of all babies born with shoulder dystocia are functioning completely. By the age of 18 months, 82% of babies are functioning completely.
If your child suffered a brachial plexus injury, the outcome is generally positive. But some interventions may affect your child’s long-term outcome. They may have trouble with fine motor skills and other uses of their affected limb. More than 90% of these injuries improve within six to 12 months. Less than 10% result in permanent injury.
If you’ve had a baby with shoulder dystocia, your chances of the condition occurring again increase by 15%. Be sure to discuss this with your healthcare provider if you plan on having more children. If you had a C-section due to shoulder dystocia,
vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC)
isn’t recommended.
Advertisement
Prevention
What are the risk factors for shoulder dystocia?
Shoulder dystocia can happen to anyone. Most cases of the condition occur in babies with normal birth weights. But certain risk factors increase the likelihood of the condition. These risk factors include:
Diabetes: Pre-existing
diabetes
and
gestational diabetes
can both cause your baby to be large. People with diabetes have a 20% chance of delivering a baby weighing more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces at birth.
Macrosomia: Macrosomia means your baby weighs more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces at birth. If you have a big baby, your healthcare provider may recommend a C-section.
Shoulder dystocia in a previous pregnancy.
Pregnant with
twins
or other multiples.
Overweight and/or gaining excess
weight during pregnancy
.
Short stature.
Abnormal pelvic structure.
Older than 35.
Giving birth after your
due date
.
Certain conditions during labor and delivery may also be risk factors for shoulder dystocia. The most common of these risk factors is having an assisted vaginal delivery. This means your obstetrician has to use a vacuum extractor or forceps to help deliver your baby through the birth canal. Other risk factors during labor and delivery may include:
Taking
oxytocin
to induce labor.
Getting an
epidural
.
Very long first stage of labor (contraction phase).
Very short or very long second stage of labor (pushing phase).
Using inappropriate pressure or maneuvers to deliver your baby.
Advertisement
How can I prevent shoulder dystocia?
Shoulder dystocia can happen to anyone. Most cases happen in babies with normal birth weights and can’t be prevented. But to lower your risk you can:
Manage your diabetes.
Maintain a healthy weight throughout your pregnancy.
Ask your obstetrician about
inducing labor
.
If you’re past your due date, call your healthcare provider.
Discuss the possibility of a C-section with your obstetrician.
Consider
forgoing labor medications
such as an epidural.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Shoulder dystocia is an injury that can happen during childbirth. It can be overwhelming to think about the things that can go wrong during labor and delivery. But it’s important to remember these conditions are rare and your healthcare team is trained on what to do. In the rare event of any complications, try to stay calm and place your trust in your providers. They’ll do everything they can to deliver your baby safely without any long-term complications.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/23/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us