CNS (Central Nervous System) Vasculitis: Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
CNS (Central Nervous System) Vasculitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
CNS (Central Nervous System) Vasculitis
CNS vasculitis affects blood vessels in your brain and spinal cord (your central nervous system). There’s no cure, but your healthcare provider will help you find treatments that reduce the inflammation and minimize damage to your CNS.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is CNS Vasculitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is CNS Vasculitis?
CNS (central nervous system) vasculitis is a type of
vasculitis
. It causes inflammation in the
blood vessels
that supply blood to your
brain
and
spinal cord
. Healthcare providers sometimes call it primary angiitis of the central nervous system or granulomatous angiitis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
central nervous system
is the part of your
nervous system
that regulates everything your body does. It oversees movements and actions you’re aware of (like using your fingers to scroll through this article) and ones you don’t control (like breathing and your
heart
beating).
Types of CNS vasculitis
Healthcare providers classify CNS vasculitis as either primary or secondary:
Primary CNS vasculitis
.
Primary CNS vasculitis happens on its own without other conditions causing or triggering it.
Secondary CNS vasculitis
. Secondary is the medical term for something happening alongside or because of another issue. Conditions that cause inflammation can trigger CNS vasculitis. Autoimmune diseases and infections are the most common secondary CNS vasculitis triggers.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of CNS vasculitis
Symptoms of CNS vasculitis can include:
Severe
headaches
that last a long time
Forgetfulness or confusion
Tingling, numbness or changes in your sense of touch (sensations)
A feeling of weakness
Worsening
vision
(including
blurred vision
or
double vision
)
Seizures
Encephalopathy
(brain swelling) that can cause mood or personality changes or make you
faint
(pass out)
CNS vasculitis complications
If you have vasculitis, your blood vessels swell and thicken. This makes it harder for blood to flow through them. Over time, the
inflammation
from CNS vasculitis can damage your brain or spinal cord and cause serious, potentially life-threatening complications, including:
Advertisement
Strokes
Transient ischemic attacks
(“mini-strokes”)
Brain aneurysms
These issues are all medical emergencies. Go to the emergency room or call 911 (or your local emergency services number) if you think you’re experiencing symptoms that might be a stroke or a brain aneurysm rupture.
CNS vasculitis causes
CNS vasculitis is an
autoimmune disease
. Autoimmune diseases happen when your
immune system
accidentally attacks your body instead of protecting it.
People with primary CNS vasculitis develop it without a known cause or trigger (idiopathically).
Secondary CNS vasculitis usually develops alongside (secondary to) conditions that cause inflammation in your body. Other autoimmune diseases and certain infections can trigger it, including:
Lupus
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA)
Microscopic polyangiitis
Behçet’s syndrome
Sjögren’s syndrome
Viral infections
(like
Epstein-Barr virus
and
varicella-zoster virus
)
Bacterial infections
(like
tuberculosis
and
syphilis
)
Risk factors of central nervous system vasculitis
Anyone can develop CNS vasculitis, but it’s more common in
males
. It’s most likely to develop in people around age 50, but can occur at any age.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose CNS vasculitis?
A healthcare provider will diagnose CNS vasculitis with a
physical exam
and some tests. They’ll ask you about your symptoms and when you first noticed them. Tell your provider if the symptoms come and go (recur) or if certain times of day or activities make them better or worse.
Diagnosing CNS vasculitis can be a
differential diagnosis
. This means your provider will probably use a few tests to rule out other, more common conditions before diagnosing you with CNS vasculitis. You may need:
MRI
CT scan
Angiogram
Biopsies
You might need to see a
rheumatologist
— a healthcare provider who specializes in treating inflammatory diseases.
CNS vasculitis markers
Markers are signs of a disease that your provider can look for in your
blood
or body using laboratory tests. Tests your provider may use to check you for markers of CNS vasculitis include:
Blood tests
to look for signs of
anemia
An
ESR test
to look for markers that indicate inflammation in your body
A
C-reactive protein (CRP) test
to look for inflammation markers that your liver releases
A
lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
to examine your cerebral spinal fluid for a
high white blood cell count
Management and Treatment
CNS vasculitis treatments
Your provider will suggest treatments that manage inflammation. The most important part of treating CNS vasculitis is reducing how much it damages your brain or spinal cord. Most people need a combination of
corticosteroids
and
immunosuppressants
.
You might need higher doses of medication at first. Then (usually after a few months), your provider may reduce how often you receive infusions or injections of medication. They’ll adjust your medications to help you reach a remission stage — a long period where you have very mild (or no) symptoms.
Advertisement
If you have secondary CNS vasculitis, you may need other treatments to manage the condition that triggered it. Your provider will tell you what to expect.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Monitor the symptoms you’re experiencing and keep track of any changes you notice. Talk to your provider if you notice any changes, especially if it feels like symptoms are happening more often or more severely. Tell your provider if it feels like a treatment isn’t working (or isn’t as effective as it used to be).
Your provider will tell you how often you’ll need regular follow-up appointments, blood tests or additional screenings.
Go to the emergency room or call 911 (or your local emergency number) if you’re experiencing any of the following symptoms:
You think you might be experiencing stroke or brain aneurysm rupture symptoms.
You can’t breathe.
Your vision suddenly gets worse or you have
sudden vision loss
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have central nervous system vasculitis?
There’s no cure for CNS vasculitis. Many people are able to enter extended periods of remission once they find the right medications that work for them. Some people are in remission for months or years before experiencing symptoms again.
CNS vasculitis doesn’t usually affect how long you can expect to live (your life expectancy). But this can be hard to estimate. That’s because CNS vasculitis can cause severe complications like strokes and aneurysms. People who experience those complications are much more likely to die sooner than usual.
Advertisement
Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re worried about your health or how much having CNS vasculitis can affect it.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Any condition that affects your central nervous system (CNS) can be scary. And that’s especially true when you find out your immune system might be damaging your brain and spinal cord. The good news is that many people with CNS vasculitis find a combination of medications that manage it. Once you find treatments that work, your provider will help you minimize how much the symptoms affect your life.
Remember, asking questions about your health is never bad. Talk to your provider about all your concerns. They’ll answer any questions you have and help you feel confident that you know what’s going on inside your body and how you can manage it.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment