Chilblain Lupus: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Chilblain Lupus
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chilblain Lupus
Chilblain lupus is a rare complication of cutaneous lupus erythematosus (lupus that affects your skin). The condition causes painful red or purplish sores, usually on your fingers or feet. Typically, these sores develop or worsen after exposure to cold weather. Your provider may prescribe medications to lower inflammation and swelling.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lupus Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Chilblain Lupus?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Chilblain Lupus?
Chilblain lupus is an uncommon type of lupus that affects your skin (
cutaneous lupus erythematosus or CLE)
. Chilblain lupus causes painful red or purple sores and discolored patches (plaques) of skin. These small sores (chilblains) form or worsen after exposure to cold temperatures. The word “chilblain” comes from words that mean “cold” and “sore.” For most people, avoiding cold temperatures and taking medications keep symptoms at bay.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
For many people, chilblain lupus develops after being diagnosed with the most common type of lupus,
systemic lupus erythematosus
. Other people get the disease randomly. Either way, the condition can be uncomfortable and debilitating. If you notice itchy, raised patches or plaques, especially on your fingers or toes, reach out to your healthcare provider for treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of chilblain lupus
Chilblain lupus causes red or purple
skin patches or sores
. Usually, these sores appear on your:
Fingers
Heels
Soles of your feet
Toes
Less commonly, you may get sores on the palms of your hands, knees, nose or ears. Typically, these sores appear or worsen in cold or wet weather.
Chilblain lupus symptoms may also include:
Blisters
or ulcers
, open sores caused by poor blood circulation
Depigmentation
, patches of skin lightening or losing color
Heel fissures
, deep cracks in the skin on your heels
Hyperkeratosis
, skin thickening
Raynaud’s phenomenon
, temporary blood restriction in your fingers and toes
Chilblain lupus causes
Chilblain lupus can be inherited (genetic) or sporadic (random). Sporadic chilblain lupus means you develop the condition later in life, usually as an adult. Researchers don’t know why it occurs.
People with inherited chilblain lupus have a
gene variant (change)
. A change in either the
TREX1
or
SAMHD1
gene can lead to chilblain lupus. The
TREX1
gene helps with DNA repair. The
SAMHD1
gene plays a role in your immune response. Both gene mutations can be found in people who have a biological family history of the disease or who develop it as children.
Advertisement
Chilblain lupus risk factors
Anyone can develop chilblain lupus, but it’s most common in adults. People who live in cold, wet climates may be more likely to have chilblain lupus.
Some conditions can increase a person’s chances of getting chilblain lupus, including:
Anorexia nervosa
, a life-threatening eating disorder
Intestinal lymphoma, a rare type of
lymphoma
(lymph system cancer) that starts in your small bowel
Pregnancy
Complications of chilblain lupus
Without treatment, chilblain lupus skin lesions can get infected. People with chilblain lupus have higher risks of bacterial skin infections (
cellulitis
).
In addition, if you haven’t developed it already, chilblain lupus can also lead to systemic lupus erythematosus.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose chilblain lupus
A
dermatologist
or a
rheumatologist
can diagnose chilblain lupus. Usually, healthcare providers use a test called a skin biopsy.
During a
skin biopsy
, your provider takes a small skin sample. They send this sample to a laboratory, where specialists look at it under a microscope. Examining skin under a microscope can tell healthcare providers whether chilblain lupus or another condition is causing skin sores.
Management and Treatment
Chilblain lupus treatment
For mild chilblain lupus symptoms, you may only need to protect yourself from cold temperatures. If you smoke, your provider will also encourage you to quit.
Smoking
constricts your blood vessels, which can make chilblain lupus symptoms worse.
Your provider may prescribe medications for moderate to severe chilblain lupus. Common medications include:
Antibiotics
like dicloxacillin (Dycill®) or erythromycin (Ilosone®), which treat bacterial skin infections
Antimalarial agents
like
hydroxychloroquine
(Plaquenil®), which fight fatigue, reduce
inflammation
and decrease joint pain
Calcineurin inhibitors
like
tacrolimus
(Prograf™) or
mycophenolate mofetil
(CellCept®), which decrease inflammation by lowering your immune system response
Calcium channel blockers
like nifedipine (Adalat®), which encourage your blood vessels to open
Steroid ointments
like
fluocinolone acetonide
(Synalar®) or
hydrocortisone butyrate
(Locoid®), which decrease swelling and lower inflammation
Systemic steroids
like
prednisone
(Deltasone®), which are swallowable pills that reduce inflammation and swelling
Rarely, your provider may recommend surgery to treat chilblain lupus. Your provider may surgically remove chilblain sores and perform a
skin graft
. During a skin graft, your provider takes a small amount of healthy skin from one part of the body and safely transfers it to another.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you develop red or purple, itchy or painful sores on your fingers, heels, soles of your feet or toes, see your healthcare provider. They’ll be able to diagnose your condition and get you on your way to treatment.
Advertisement
You may also want to ask your healthcare provider:
What’s the most likely cause of chilblain lupus?
Am I likely to develop systemic lupus erythematosus?
How can I prevent chilblain lesions from developing?
How can I treat existing chilblain lesions?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lupus Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have chilblain lupus?
Chilblain lupus is a lifelong condition. With treatment and proper cold protection, many people manage symptoms well.
In people who developed chilblain lupus randomly (not genetically),
18%
will go on to develop systemic lupus erythematosus.
Prevention
How can I prevent chilblain lupus?
You can reduce your chance of developing chilblain lupus by protecting yourself from cold temperatures. You may:
Get regular physical activity to improve blood flow and regulate your body temperature
Make sure your home and workspace are insulated and heated
Soak your hands or feet in warm water several times a day
Warm cold hands or feet gradually to encourage blood flow to return
Wear thick wool socks, gloves and warm shoes whenever you’re in a cold environment
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Like other forms of skin lupus, chilblain lupus can cause uncomfortable symptoms that lead you on a wild goose chase to find a treatment that works for you. Don’t give up hope. Working with a trusted healthcare provider, you can find a solution that helps clear up your condition and gets you back to living pain-free. In the meantime, look for a support group to talk to other people who share your diagnosis. They can offer ideas and insight to help you manage the disease.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knowing your body’s immune system is battling itself can be stressful. Cleveland Clinic’s lupus experts are here to treat and manage your disease for the long haul.
Lupus Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment