Vasovagal Syncope: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vasovagal Syncope
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vasovagal Syncope
Vasovagal syncope happens when your nervous system overreacts, and you pass out from things like feeling anxiety or exhaustion or seeing needles. The stress of these types of reactions can make your blood pressure drop too much. Vasovagal syncope is the most common type of reflex syncope, which happens automatically for reasons you can’t control.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Overview
What is vasovagal syncope?
Vasovagal syncope happens when your nervous system overreacts and your
blood pressure
and
heart rate
drop suddenly, causing you to faint or pass out. You’re usually unconscious for less than one minute.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This is the most common type of reflex
syncope
, which happens automatically for reasons you can’t control. People also sometimes call it neurocardiogenic syncope because factors involving your
heart
, brain or both cause it.
Vasovagal syncope (pronounced “vay-so-vay-gal sin-co-pee”) may seem scary, but this type of fainting is usually harmless.
One out of 3 people
will experience vasovagal syncope at least once in their life. It can happen to people of all age groups. In people under 40, most cases of fainting are vasovagal syncope (neurocardiogenic syncope). In older adults, it makes up about half of the cases of fainting.
Most of the time, a vasovagal syncopal episode happens when you’re standing or sitting. It’s rare for it to occur if you’re lying down.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of vasovagal syncope
You’re most likely to have symptoms 30 to 60 seconds right before a vasovagal syncopal episode.
Common symptoms include:
A sudden feeling of tiredness (
fatigue
)
A sudden warm feeling
Lightheadedness or
dizziness
Loss of color in your skin (
pallor
)
Nausea
Profuse sweating
Slow
pulse
Yawning
Tunnel vision
Vasovagal syncope causes
Vasovagal syncope is a reflex reaction to something going on around you. But the reflex is either too strong or happens at the wrong time. This all starts in the part of your
nervous system
that works without you having to think about it — your
autonomic nervous system
.
Advertisement
One of the key nerves in this system is the vagus nerve, which controls your heart rate and blood pressure. If your
vagus nerve
becomes too active, it can cause your heart rate and blood pressure to drop too much or too quickly (or both).
If your blood pressure drops too much, this causes vasovagal syncope. You pass out because your
brain
isn’t getting enough
blood
flow.
Something happening to you or near you almost always brings on vasovagal syncope. Triggers can be things you see or feel that upset you. Common triggers include:
Needles or medical instruments
. This includes blood draws,
blood donations
or the sight of certain medical tools or instruments, like scalpels.
Seeing blood
. Fainting at the sight of blood is also a common cause of vasovagal syncope.
Stress
, anxiety or emotional upset
. Strong emotions or pain can cause you to pass out.
Fatigue or exhaustion
. Over-exertion, even just from standing too long, can be enough to cause you to pass out.
Complications of this condition
During a vasovagal syncope episode, you may experience:
Brief disorientation or
confusion
Eyes
staying open but rolling up and back into your head
Falling when you lose consciousness
Loss of
bladder
control
Twitching movements, which people may mistake for a
seizure
Once you come to (regain consciousness), you’ll usually recover in about 20 to 30 seconds. Then, you may experience:
Anxiety or nervousness
Dizziness
Fatigue
Headache
Nausea
Pale skin (pallor)
Sweating
Urge to poop
A vasovagal syncopal episode can happen again, especially if you stand within 30 minutes of the first fainting episode.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose vasovagal syncope
A healthcare provider will ask questions about what might have caused you to faint. You should mention any recent changes in your health or unusual symptoms you’ve noticed, even if they don’t seem important. These can help your provider make an accurate diagnosis. A provider will ask you what medications and
supplements
you take. They’ll also check your blood pressure and heart rate.
A provider may also run the following tests, depending on the circumstances of your symptoms:
Blood tests
. These can detect several conditions that can cause fainting, like
low iron in your blood (anemia)
.
Electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG)
. This test measures electrical activity in your heart and may detect an abnormal heart rhythm.
Echocardiogram
. This test shows your heart’s structure. It can identify or rule out an issue that’s causing an abnormal heart rhythm.
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
. This test measures electrical activity in your brain. This can help determine if you passed out because of a seizure.
Tilt-table test
. In this test, you lie on a table that a healthcare provider tilts upward. People with vasovagal syncope may pass out or start to pass out during this test.
Hemodynamic test
. This test uses a special type of X-ray (gamma camera) to detect an injected tracer. This shows how your blood circulates and any problems with that.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How do you treat vasovagal syncope?
Most people who have vasovagal syncope will recover on their own. For others, treatment may include:
IV fluids
. These are especially helpful if you’re
dehydrated
.
Trigger education and avoidance
. Knowing what causes vasovagal syncope can help you avoid that trigger or at least be ready for it. You may be able to avoid passing out entirely.
Medications
. Some medications for
heart rhythm disorders
or blood pressure may help. These include
fludrocortisone
and
midodrine
.
Compression stockings
. Waist-high stockings (medical grade) work best. If you find these too uncomfortable, you can wear compression clothing made for athletes.
Counter-pressure maneuvers
. These include crossing your legs and squeezing your leg muscles tightly for several seconds, as well as interlocking your fists and pulling your arms apart. These maneuvers can help increase your blood pressure and prevent you from fainting.
Pacing devices
. In rare cases, you may need a
pacemaker
or another device that can help you avoid passing out because of pauses in your heartbeat.
Catheter ablation
. Healthcare providers are using cardioneuroablation to treat rare cases. This targets
nerves
in your heart.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you pass out, you should receive emergency medical care right away. Serious or life-threatening conditions can cause vasovagal syncope. A healthcare provider should examine you right away to determine if a more severe condition caused you to faint.
Advertisement
It’s also essential to get medical attention after passing out if you hit your head (even only slightly). If you’re taking
blood-thinning medications
, you should always get medical attention after a fall. This is because these medicines give you a much higher risk of internal bleeding.
You should talk to a healthcare provider if:
You’ve never had a vasovagal syncopal episode before and passed out
You’ve never had vasovagal syncope before and had several instances where you’ve nearly passed out
You have a vasovagal syncope diagnosis and your symptoms change or episodes become more frequent
You may want to ask a provider:
What caused this vasovagal syncopal episode?
How can I keep it from happening again?
Do I need more testing?
Do I need treatment?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
You may be able to prevent vasovagal syncope episodes by drinking more fluids, eating more salt and standing up slowly. Talk with your provider before you increase your salt intake, as it increases your blood pressure.
Many people who have vasovagal syncope can limit its impact on their lives. They can learn to recognize the symptoms of a vasovagal syncopal episode and avoid known triggers. Knowing what it feels like before you have an episode can allow you to lie on your back or sit so you don’t get hurt if you fall.
Advertisement
If you can recognize an episode before it happens, you may be able to stop it. Your healthcare provider can teach you techniques that keep your blood pressure high enough so that you don’t pass out. These include:
Squeezing a foam or rubber ball
. Clenching your fist like this may help you stay conscious.
Arm-tensing
. Curl both of your hands like you’re holding something, interlocking your fists. With one hand facing palm-down and the other facing palm-up, hook your curled hands together. Try to pull them apart.
Leg-crossing
. While standing, cross your legs so one knee is behind the other. Keep your balance and then tense up the muscles in your legs, belly and butt.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Vasovagal syncope can disrupt your life and make you afraid to go places. But it’s usually not dangerous. Ask your healthcare provider for tips and resources. Their goal is to help you adapt to your condition so you don’t have to stop enjoying your life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment