Synechiae (Eye): Symptoms, Types & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Synechiae (Eye)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Synechiae (Eye)
Eye synechiae are abnormal adhesions between your iris and your lens or cornea. Scar tissue causes the thin membranes to stick together. Severe synechiae can lead to glaucoma and permanent vision loss.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What are synechiae of the eye?
Synechiae (the plural of synechia) are adhesions between tissues in your eye, meaning the tissue sticks together in places where it shouldn’t. It occurs when your iris (colored part of your eye that contains your pupil) sticks to the clear tissue in front of or behind it. It can create pressure in your eye and lead to vision issues. Ocular synechiae is another name for this condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A synechiae diagnosis can be scary. But the good news is that there are effective treatments for synechiae. It’s important to catch the condition as early as possible, so contact a healthcare provider if you notice any changes in your vision or how your eye looks or feels.
Types of ocular synechiae
There are two types of ocular (eye) synechiae:
Posterior synechiae
: Your
iris
sticks to your lens, which is the transparent tissue behind your iris. Your lenses help your
eyes
focus light so you can see clearly. Posterior synechiae are the most common type of ocular synechiae.
Anterior synechiae
: Your iris sticks to your
cornea
, which is the clear covering on the front of your eye. Your cornea protects your eye and focuses light.
Who gets eye synechiae?
You’re at a higher risk of developing ocular synechiae if you have:
An eye disease that causes
inflammation
, such as
uveitis
or iritis (iris inflammation).
An
eye injury
.
Cataracts
.
Eye surgery.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes eye synechiae?
Synechiae of the eye are usually the result of inflammation or injury in your eye. Scar tissue can cause your iris to stick to the layers of tissue in front of or behind it. Sometimes, synechiae are congenital, meaning they’re present at birth.
What are the symptoms of ocular synechiae?
Symptoms of ocular synechiae may include:
Changes to the size or shape of your
pupil
or iris, such as
miosis
(small pupils) or
mydriasis
(large pupils).
Eye pain
, aching or irritation.
Eye redness
.
Sensitivity to light.
Vision loss
.
Watery eyes
.
Advertisement
What are the potential complications of ocular synechiae?
Glaucoma
(optic nerve damage due to pressure inside your eye) is ocular synechiae’s most serious side effect. Glaucoma can cause permanent vision loss or blindness if it isn’t treated.
Ocular synechiae affect how a clear fluid called
aqueous humor
moves from the front to the back of your eye. The fluid provides protection and nutrition to your eye. It also regulates the pressure in your eye.
Ocular synechiae can block the aqueous humor and prevent it from flowing through your eye as it should. This fluid buildup can increase the pressure in your eye
(intraocular pressure),
damage your optic nerve and lead to glaucoma.
Diagnosis and Tests
What type of healthcare provider diagnoses eye synechiae?
Eye care specialists
diagnose and treat issues that affect your eyes and vision. You’ll probably see an
ophthalmologist
,
optometrist
or both for synechiae.
How are eye synechiae diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider does an
eye exam
to diagnose synechiae. Your eye exam may include:
Visual acuity test
with reading charts to check for vision loss.
Visual field test
to check your ability to see things off to the side (peripheral vision).
Eye pressure check
(
tonometry
) and other
glaucoma tests
.
Slit-lamp exam
to look at the back of your eye with a special microscope.
Optical coherence tomography
to get detailed images of the back of your eye.
Management and Treatment
How are ocular synechiae treated?
Treatment for ocular synechiae depends on your symptoms and the severity of the condition. Your care plan may include:
Mydriatic eye drops
: Mydriatic eye drops dilate (enlarge) your pupils. They also relax muscles in your iris. These eye drops may help separate your iris from your lens or cornea.
Corticosteroids
:
Corticosteroids
are medications that reduce inflammation and may help break apart scar tissue in your eye. Your provider may recommend steroid eye drops, ointments, pills, injections or intravenous (IV) infusions.
Glaucoma medication
: Certain eye drops and medications, such as
beta-blockers
and
prostaglandins
, reduce fluid buildup and pressure in your eye. These medications may help prevent permanent optic nerve damage and vision loss.
Surgery
: If you have glaucoma caused by severe synechiae, you may need surgery. An eye surgeon uses a laser or makes an incision (cut) in your eye to drain fluid and reduce intraocular pressure. Surgeons can treat synechiae during
cataract surgery
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for someone with ocular synechiae?
Synechiae doesn’t usually cause vision loss if it’s caught, diagnosed and treated early. But left untreated, severe synechiae can lead to permanent eye damage and vision loss.
Prevention
Can I prevent eye synechiae?
Talk to your healthcare provider about the risk of eye synechiae if you have an eye disease such as uveitis. Your provider may prescribe eye drops or medications to reduce inflammation and scar tissue formation, which may prevent synechiae.
Advertisement
Living With
What questions should I ask my doctor about eye synechiae?
Can my iris heal on its own without treatment?
If I need eye surgery, what steps can I take to prevent eye synechiae?
What are the chances that eye synechiae will lead to glaucoma?
What are the signs of eye synechiae getting worse?
Will eye synechiae get worse over time?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Eye synechiae occur when your iris adheres to your lens or cornea. It results from scar tissue from eye trauma, inflammation or surgery. In severe cases, synechiae can lead to glaucoma and permanent vision loss. While any condition affecting your eyes and vision can be scary, there’s a variety of effective treatments for eye synechiae.
Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re experiencing vision changes or eye problems. They can refer you to an eye care specialist who can diagnose your condition and build an appropriate care plan. Eye synechiae are usually treatable with eye drops, medication or surgery.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/29/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment