Angiodysplasia of GI Tract: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Angiodysplasia of Gastrointestinal (GI) Tract
Advertisement
Advertisement
Angiodysplasia of Gastrointestinal (GI) Tract
Angiodysplasia of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract is bleeding in certain organs in your digestive system. The condition happens when abnormal blood vessels leak blood. Symptoms include fatigue and weakness from blood loss or bleeding from your rectum. Treatment depends on your symptoms, but may be blood transfusions, iron transfusions or surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endoscopy Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Angiodysplasia of Gastrointestinal (GI) Tract?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Angiodysplasia of Gastrointestinal (GI) Tract?
Angiodysplasia of gastrointestinal tract is a common type of
gastrointestinal bleeding
. It typically affects people age 60 and older. Healthcare providers may call this condition gastrointestinal angiodysplasia (GIAD).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Angiodysplasia is the medical term for abnormal blood vessels. In angiodysplasia of GI tract, abnormal blood vessels leak blood. This condition can affect any part of your GI tract. But it typically develops in your colon (which is in your large intestine), your small intestine or your stomach.
The condition may not cause symptoms. You may find out you have angiodysplasia of GI tract after you have tests for other issues that affect your GI tract.
Bleeding from angiodysplasia of GI tract often goes away on its own. But it can come back if abnormal blood vessels start leaking blood again.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of angiodysplasia of gastrointestinal tract
The most common symptoms happen when blood loss leads to
iron-deficiency anemia
. This condition causes symptoms, including:
Fatigue
Shortness of breath
Weakness
Other symptoms are changes in your poop or when you poop. Those are:
Bright red blood
(rectal bleeding
) that you see in the toilet or when you wipe
Melena
(black stool) that’s sticky or tarry and smells very bad
Angiodysplasia of gastrointestinal tract causes
Experts don’t know the exact cause of this condition. One theory is that blood vessels weaken and leak as we get older. Another theory involves the rare condition gastric arteriovenous malformation (
AVM
). An AVM is a cluster of abnormal blood vessels that can swell and leak blood.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Having certain medical conditions or taking certain medications may increase your risk. Medical conditions that may increase your risk include:
Aortic stenosis
Autoimmune diseases
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (
COPD
)
Chronic kidney disease
Cirrhosis
Congestive heart failure
Diabetes
Liver failure
Venous thromboembolism
Von Willebrand disease
Medications that help with blood flow (blood thinners) may increase your risk. Those medications include:
Anticoagulants
Antiplatelet drugs
Sometimes, receiving a left ventricular assist device (
LVAD
) may lead to angiodysplasia of gastrointestinal tract.
Complications of angiodysplasia of gastrointestinal tract
Rarely, this condition can cause heavy bleeding that can lead to severe anemia.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose angiodysplasia of gastrointestinal tract
A healthcare provider may do different tests to diagnose this condition. For example, you may have blood tests or imaging tests. A provider may do procedures to see what’s happening in your GI tract.
Blood tests
You may have blood tests that detect anemia or other conditions that can cause GI bleeding. Tests may include:
Complete blood count (CBC)
Coagulation test, like a
prothrombin time test
or
fibrinogen test
, to see if your blood clots like it should
Kidney function tests
Liver function tests
Imaging tests
Imaging tests to diagnose angiodysplasia of GI tract are:
Angiogram
CT scan
Radionuclide scan uses safe levels of radioactive material to highlight red blood cells
Procedures
Your provider may use a procedure, such as:
Balloon-assisted enteroscopy
Capsule endoscopy
Colonoscopy
Management and Treatment
How is angiodysplasia of gastrointestinal tract treated?
There’s no single treatment for this condition. Healthcare providers will tailor treatment to your situation. For example, if the condition causes anemia, a provider may recommend supportive care. They may do procedures to find the abnormal blood vessels and stop the bleeding.
Supportive care
This is treatment for anemia. Supportive care may include:
Blood transfusion
Iron infusion
Oral iron supplements
Procedures
Providers may combine procedures. First, they find the abnormal blood vessels. Then, they block or close them. Examples of combined procedures are:
Argon plasma coagulation
done during a colonoscopy, endoscopy or enteroscopy
Electrocauterization
as part of a colonoscopy
Embolization
done during angiography
Your provider may recommend surgery if you have heavy bleeding. Surgery involves removing the section of your intestine that the condition affects.
Recovery time
Your recovery time will depend on the procedure healthcare providers use. In some cases, you may need to rest for a day after your treatment. But some procedures involve an overnight stay in the hospital. If you’re receiving treatment, ask your healthcare provider what to expect.
Advertisement
When should I seek care?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you feel very tired all the time, weak or short of breath. These are anemia symptoms. Blood in the toilet after you poop or wipe is another reason to contact a provider.
Contact your provider if your symptoms come back after treatment or get worse.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endoscopy Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have angiodysplasia of gastrointestinal tract?
Bleeding from this condition often goes away on its own. When it doesn’t, there are treatments that can keep abnormal blood vessels from leaking blood. Treatments typically solve the issue.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Many conditions cause fatigue — feeling tired all the time no matter how much rest you get. But fatigue is a common symptom of angiodysplasia of the gastrointestinal tract. In this condition, abnormal blood vessels leak blood, so you develop iron-deficiency anemia. Another symptom is spotting blood in the toilet or after you wipe. Both symptoms are a reason to talk to a healthcare provider. They’ll find out the causes of your symptoms. Then, they’ll recommend the treatment that’s right for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having an endoscopy can be lifesaving. Cleveland Clinic’s providers will help you feel comfortable with the process so you can get the care you need.
Endoscopy Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us