Bernard-Soulier Syndrome: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bernard-Soulier Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bernard-Soulier Syndrome
Bernard-Soulier syndrome is a rare blood disorder that makes it harder for your body to form clots. It can cause you to have fewer, larger platelets, which means you bruise and bleed more easily than usual. It’s often misdiagnosed or overlooked.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Bernard-Soulier syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Bernard-Soulier syndrome?
Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS) is a rare condition that affects how your
blood
clots. Normally, clotting helps stop bleeding after an injury. But in BSS, that process doesn’t work as it should.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
People with BSS have fewer platelets, and the platelets they do have are larger than normal.
Platelets
are tiny cells that help form clots. Because of these differences, people with BSS tend to bruise easily and bleed more than usual.
Experts think BSS affects about
1 in 1 million people
worldwide. But it might be more common than we realize because it’s often missed or mistaken for something else.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Bernard-Soulier
Most people with BSS show signs early in life. You or your child may notice:
Bleeding gums
Easy bruising, even from small bumps
Frequent nosebleeds
Heavy periods
(if menstruating)
Long-lasting bleeding after small cuts
Tiny red or purple spots under skin (
petechiae
)
These symptoms may vary from person to person. Some may have mild issues, while others bleed more severely.
Bernard-Soulier causes
Bernard-Soulier syndrome is a
genetic condition
. That means it’s caused by a change (variation) in your genes and is present at birth. You inherit it from one or both of your biological parents.
This condition is linked to changes in the
GP1BA
,
GP1BB
or
GP9
genes. These genes help control how your body forms blood clots.
Risk factors
You’re more likely to have BSS if both your parents carry the gene mutation (
autosomal recessive
). In some cases, just one parent can pass it down (autosomal dominant).
Advertisement
Complications of this condition
The biggest risk with BSS is
serious bleeding
. Other problems may include:
Infections from
blood transfusions
Reactions to blood transfusions
Low iron levels (
iron deficiency anemia
)
Thankfully, most people with BSS can avoid serious issues with the right care and precautions from their healthcare team.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers use blood tests to check for Bernard-Soulier syndrome. These tests look at how many platelets you have and if there are changes in the genes that cause BSS. Your provider might also look at your blood under a microscope to see if your platelets are bigger than normal.
Another test, called platelet
flow cytometry
, checks for certain proteins on your platelets. This helps confirm the diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
Bernard-Soulier syndrome treatment
There’s no cure for Bernard-Soulier syndrome, but treatment can help manage symptoms and reduce bleeding risks. Your provider may recommend:
Platelet transfusions:
Often used during surgery or after serious bleeding, these provide healthy platelets to support clotting.
Antifibrinolytic therapy:
Medications like
tranexamic acid
(Cyklokapron®) help slow or stop bleeding, especially during dental work or minor injuries.
Your care team may also advise avoiding activities or medications that increase bleeding risk. In some cases, they’ll create a personalized emergency plan, including when to seek immediate care.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have BSS, it’s important to watch for signs that you need medical attention. Call your provider if you:
Bleed when brushing your teeth, even with a soft toothbrush
Can’t stop bleeding after an injury
Have frequent or worsening nosebleeds
Have unusually heavy or prolonged menstrual periods
Notice new or large bruises without an obvious cause
Quick treatment can help prevent more serious complications. Always err on the side of caution and reach out to your care team with concerns.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Treatment can help manage symptoms and prevent complications. Your healthcare provider may recommend that you:
Avoid medicines that increase bleeding risk, like aspirin,
NSAIDs
or some allergy medications
Learn how to stop nosebleeds at home.
Limit alcohol and sugary foods that affect platelet count.
Sign up with an emergency center that’s ready to treat serious bleeding.
Take
iron supplements
if needed.
Use a soft toothbrush to protect your gums.
Wear a medical ID bracelet.
Most people with BSS can live normal, active lives. But you’ll need to take precautions. Avoid high-risk activities like contact sports and check in regularly with your primary care provider. You may also need a platelet transfusion before any planned surgery.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What other conditions look like BSS?
Other bleeding disorders with similar symptoms include:
Glanzmann thrombasthenia
Hemophilia
May-Hegglin anomaly
Von Willebrand disease
If you have signs of a bleeding problem, a blood specialist can help find out what’s going on and how to treat it.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
There’s no way to prevent being born with Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS). But having BSS doesn’t mean you have to settle for a less active life. You may need to take extra care to avoid injuries that could lead to bleeding. But with the right treatment and support, many people with BSS live full, healthy lives. And you’re not alone. Your healthcare team is here to help, so reach out whenever you have questions or need support.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Living with a noncancerous blood disorder can be exhausting. But there’s hope. Cleveland Clinic’s benign hematology experts provide personalized care and support.
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials