Calf Strain (Pulled Calf Muscle): Treatment & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Calf Strain (Pulled Calf Muscle)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Calf Strain (Pulled Calf Muscle)
A calf strain occurs when you overstretch the muscles in the back of your lower leg. Also called a pulled calf muscle, this injury can range from mild to severe. Treatment for mild injuries typically involves rest, ice, compression and elevation. Severe injuries may require additional treatment from a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Calf Strain?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
What Is a Calf Strain?
A calf strain, or pulled calf muscle, occurs when you overstretch a muscle in your calf.
A calf strain, or pulled calf muscle, occurs when you overstretch a muscle in your calf. Your
calf muscles
are in your lower leg behind your shin bone (
tibia
) and extend from the base of your thigh down to your heel. They help you flex and bend your foot, ankle and knee. A strained calf muscle can cause pain and prevent you from running, jumping and doing other activities.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most calf injuries are mild, but a severe calf strain can result in a partially or completely
torn calf muscle
. Whether you have a mild or severe injury, you should see a healthcare provider as soon as possible. Early diagnosis and treatment will get you back to participating in the sports and activities you love sooner.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of calf muscle strains
Calf strain symptoms may include:
Bruising
on your calf muscle
Difficulty tensing your calf muscles or standing on your toes
Muscle pain
when flexing your ankle or pointing your toes
Difficulty bending your knee
Snapping or popping sensation in your calf
Sudden
calf muscle pain
Swelling
in your calf muscle
Most people with a strained calf muscle say they can’t continue with their activity immediately following an injury.
Calf muscle strain causes
Calf strains usually occur when someone suddenly moves or overstretches their calf after standing still. Quick pivots, jumps or abrupt stops can cause strains. This injury is especially common when your toes get forced upward (toward your body) and your ankle pulls your calf muscles down too quickly.
Risk factors
Anyone can get a pulled calf muscle. But these
strains
are more common in athletes who perform lots of stop-and-go movements with quick bursts of speed. Sprinters, football players, soccer players and tennis players are prone to strained calf muscles. Sometimes, the injury is called “tennis leg.”
Advertisement
Other risk factors for calf strains include:
Age.
People over age 40 may be more likely to get strains during physical activity.
Lack of conditioning.
It’s important to warm up and stretch before physical activity and condition your
muscles
before the start of a sports season.
Medical history.
People with a history of calf strains or other leg injuries are more likely to get a new injury.
Muscle quality.
People with tight or short calf muscles have a higher risk of calf muscle strains.
Sex.
Some
studies
suggest that
males
are more likely to get calf muscle injuries.
Complications of calf strains
Depending on the severity of your condition, complications of a pulled calf muscle may include:
Chronic pain
Compartment syndrome
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Reinjury
Scar tissue
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose calf strains
A healthcare provider will perform a
physical exam
and review your symptoms. It’s important to describe in detail how you got the injury and how your calf felt immediately after the injury. This information can help your healthcare provider make a diagnosis.
Tests that are used
You may need imaging exams to rule out other conditions that cause lower leg pain, like
Achilles tendon ruptures
or deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Research shows that
up to 10% of people
with symptoms of calf pulls have DVT, which can be a life-threatening condition.
Your healthcare provider may request the following tests:
Ultrasound
, to check for
blood clots
around your calf muscles
MRI
, to assess for rupture
Management and Treatment
How do you heal a calf strain quickly?
Pulled calf muscle treatment usually includes
RICE
, which stands for:
Rest.
Stop running or physical activity to avoid further damaging your calf muscle.
Ice.
Apply an ice pack or cold compress for 20 minutes every two hours. Don’t apply ice directly to your skin.
Compression
.
Reduce swelling and fluid buildup by applying a compression bandage or wrap to the injured area.
Elevation.
Lift your leg into an elevated position, preferably above the level of your heart. Support the entire length of your leg with pillows, blankets or cushions.
You can perform RICE at home, but it’s always good to check in with your healthcare provider about any special instructions.
Once your provider diagnoses your injury, they may recommend additional calf strain treatment, including:
Pain relievers
Physical therapy
Soft
cast
or boot to keep your lower leg from moving
While healing from a calf strain, you should avoid:
Applying heat to the injured area
Drinking alcohol
Massaging your calf
Walking or participating in physical activity
Calf strain recovery time
Most people recover fully from pulled calf muscles without any permanent damage. Ask your healthcare provider when you can gradually start to do light activities again. Depending on the severity of your injury, it may be several weeks or even months before you can return to full activities.
Advertisement
Once you’ve had a calf muscle strain, you have a higher risk for future strains in that area. Reduce your risk of reinjury by allowing your injury to fully heal before getting back to normal activities.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should contact your provider if you:
Are unable to walk or bear weight on your leg
Can’t bend or flex your foot, ankle or knee
Have severe pain in your calf
Notice swelling in your lower leg, foot or ankle
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Prevention
How can I prevent a calf strain?
You can reduce your risk of a pulled calf muscle by:
Keeping your calf muscles strong and conditioned
Not pushing through the pain
Resting and recovering between workouts
Stretching routinely
Using proper technique when playing sports
Warming up and stretching your calf muscles before physical activity
Wearing supportive footwear that fits properly
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Playing sports that require lots of quick movements can come with a risk of injury. Calf strains (pulled calf muscle) are one of the most common injuries that affect athletes. But anyone can pull a calf muscle. If you do, you’ll probably experience pain, swelling, and trouble bending and flexing your foot, ankle or knee. Don’t wait to get treatment. While you can probably treat a mild sprain with the RICE method, a trip to a healthcare provider’s office can ensure that you’re on your way to getting back on your feet sooner rather than later.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment