Medical Marijuana: What It Is, Uses & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Medical Marijuana
Advertisement
Advertisement
Medical Marijuana
Medical marijuana refers to the use of marijuana to help the symptoms of certain medical conditions. Each state in the U.S. that has medical marijuana laws regulates the use of these products. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) hasn’t approved marijuana for medical purposes to date.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What Is Medical Marijuana?
“Medical marijuana” is the term for using
marijuana
to help with symptoms related to medical conditions (not recreational purposes). The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) classifies marijuana as a Schedule I substance. This means that it has no currently accepted medical uses and a high potential for
addiction
. Because of this, healthcare providers can’t prescribe marijuana. But in states that legally allow it, providers may certify or confirm that people have a medical condition with symptoms that marijuana may treat or alleviate.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But not all hospital systems and healthcare providers certify medical marijuana in states where it’s legal. This is mainly due to the lack of thorough research and clinical trials on the medical uses of marijuana.
Marijuana analogs for medical purposes
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) hasn’t approved marijuana to treat any medical conditions. But it has approved certain purified substances derived from marijuana (analogs).
FDA-approved analogs of marijuana include:
Cannabidiol
(Epidiolex®)
. This analog prevents and controls
seizures
in people who have
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
or
Dravet syndrome
(two rare forms of
epilepsy
). This is a prescription medication, which is different from over-the-counter CBD (cannabidiol) products.
Dronabinol
(Marinol®) and
nabilone
(Cesamet®)
. These analogs can prevent and treat nausea and vomiting related to
chemotherapy
. Dronabinol can also help treat
loss of appetite
and weight loss in people with
HIV or AIDS
, as well as help treat agitation in people with severe
dementia
.
What is medical marijuana used for?
Each state in the U.S. with medical marijuana laws has specific qualifying medical conditions for which certified healthcare providers may recommend medical marijuana. In these cases, people use medical marijuana mainly to help with symptom management. It doesn’t directly treat a condition.
Advertisement
For example, in Ohio, these conditions include:
AIDS or positive status for HIV
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Alzheimer’s disease
Cachexia (muscle loss with or without fat loss)
Cancer
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy
(CTE)
Crohn’s disease
Epilepsy or another seizure disorder
Fibromyalgia
Glaucoma
Hepatitis C
Huntington’s disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD) and
irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS)
Multiple sclerosis (MS)
Pain
that’s either chronic and severe or intractable (difficult to manage)
Parkinson’s disease
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Sickle cell anemia
Spasticity
Spinal cord injury
or disease
Terminal illness
Tourette syndrome
Traumatic brain injury
(TBI)
Ulcerative colitis
Again, these conditions vary from state to state. Research on the effectiveness of marijuana for managing various symptoms is ongoing. It’s important to have a conversation with your healthcare provider about the risks and possible benefits of using marijuana for medical purposes. You should discuss immediate and long-term side effects, possible drug interactions and alternative treatment options.
Is medical marijuana safe?
It’s complicated. But the current answer is that researchers don’t know. Researchers have extensively studied the effects of THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) and understand them. But the reasons why people respond differently to THC and the effects of other chemicals (cannabinoids) in cannabis aren’t clear.
It’s like reading a book with an unknown number of pages missing. While you may be able to answer some questions about the contents of the book, you might not be able to answer others — or don’t have a complete answer.
Here are some factors to consider about the safety of medical marijuana.
Lack of FDA approval
To date, the FDA hasn’t approved a marketing application for marijuana for the treatment of any disease or condition. In other words, medical marijuana products don’t meet the standards that the FDA uses to approve prescription drugs. FDA approval of a drug means that:
The FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) has reviewed the data on the drug’s effects.
The research shows that the drug provides benefits that outweigh its known and potential risks for the intended population.
The use of cannabis products that aren’t FDA-approved can have unpredictable and unintended consequences, including serious safety risks. Also, there haven’t been rigorous clinical trials to support that these products are safe and effective for the various medical purposes for which people use them.
Instead of FDA approval, each state in the U.S. has its own requirements and regulations for medical marijuana use. For example, the Ohio Department of Commerce licenses and regulates medical marijuana cultivation, processing and testing laboratories in Ohio. And The State of Ohio Board of Pharmacy licenses and regulates the state’s medical marijuana dispensaries. Each state has different requirements regarding the quality and safety of making and dispensing of these products.
Advertisement
Labeling concerns
States also have different regulations on how they label medical marijuana. Many states require that the label include the amount of THC and CBD (cannabidiol) in the product, but other states have different requirements.
In addition, the concentrations of cannabinoids like THC and CBD stated on product labels are sometimes inaccurate.
The product labels for medical marijuana may appear similar to those on prescription medications, but they’re not prescription or FDA-approved medications.
Drug interaction risks
Researchers are studying how the substances in cannabis can affect how your body uses (metabolizes) certain medications. For example, studies show that using CBD and/or marijuana/THC increases your blood levels of the following medications:
Clobazam
(an
antiseizure medication
and
benzodiazepine
)
Warfarin
(an
anticoagulant
)
Diclofenac
(a type of
NSAID
)
In addition, CBD could increase blood levels of certain
antipsychotic medications
and
antidepressants
. THC can decrease brain concentrations of
risperidone
(an antipsychotic medication).
These are just a few examples. Researchers are still learning about other possible drug interactions. There are many unknowns — and over 500 chemical substances in the
Cannabis sativa
plant. So, it’s difficult to predict if medical marijuana will affect how your body uses any prescription or over-the-counter medications you take.
Advertisement
What are the side effects of medical marijuana?
Marijuana — including medical marijuana — affects each person differently based on several factors, like:
Your genetics
Your age
Your
sex
The amount and strength of the marijuana
How you consume marijuana/THC (smoking,
vaping
or ingesting)
How long you’ve used marijuana and/or how frequently you use it
If you’re taking medications and/or other substances
The effects you might experience from medical marijuana aren’t always the same as what someone else might feel. And different instances of marijuana use can cause different effects in the same person.
Studies show that marijuana use has certain short- and long-term effects. But researchers are still learning about these, especially long-term effects.
Some short-term effects include:
Euphoria and mood changes
Issues with thinking and problem-solving
Impaired memory
Disorientation and confusion
Relaxation and/or sleepiness (sedation)
Dizziness
Issues with coordination
Slowed reaction time
Dry mouth
Nausea
Hallucinations
Delusions (unshakable belief in something untrue)
Psychosis
— your risk of this is highest if you regularly use high-potency marijuana (high levels of THC)
What are the benefits of medical marijuana?
Scientists and healthcare providers can’t state any general benefits of medical marijuana with certainty. This is because there isn’t enough research yet about the medical benefits of these products, especially long-term effects. In addition, marijuana tends to affect different people in many different ways.
Advertisement
While individual people may report certain personal benefits, all of these factors make it difficult to come to any firm conclusions.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Even though “medical” is in its name, there isn’t enough information available to know if medical marijuana’s possible benefits outweigh its risks when you use it for health conditions. Your best bet is to research the laws in your area and talk with your healthcare provider about the short- and long-term effects of marijuana and if it’s right for you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A substance use disorder can turn your life upside down. Cleveland Clinic has the hope and treatment you need.
Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment