Myxedema Coma: Symptoms, Treatment & Management
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Myxedema Coma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Myxedema Coma
Myxedema coma is a rare, life-threatening complication of hypothyroidism. It happens when your body doesn’t produce enough thyroid hormones for several years. It can also happen when hypothyroidism isn’t well-managed. This leads to symptoms like slow heart rate, low blood pressure and confusion. It’s a medical emergency.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Myxedema Coma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is a Myxedema Coma?
A myxedema coma is a serious complication of severe
hypothyroidism
. You can have symptoms like a
slow heart rate
,
hypothermia
and
confusion
due to your organs shutting down. It happens when you have extremely low
thyroid hormone
levels.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Despite the name, you may not go into a
coma
. This is why some healthcare providers call it a myxedema crisis. It’s a rare, but life-threatening condition.
Myxedema crisis needs immediate medical care in the
intensive care unit (ICU)
. If a friend or loved one has hypothyroidism, watch for symptoms and call your emergency services number right away.
Symptoms and Causes
Signs of a myxedema coma include confusion, slow breathing, low body temperate and swelling.
Symptoms of a myxedema coma
Some of the symptoms of this condition are:
Confusion, disorientation or changes in
mental status
Coma or being unconscious
Edema
(swelling)
Hypothermia
(low body temperature)
Low blood pressure
Slow heart rate
Slow breathing
Myxedema coma is a medical emergency. You can lose consciousness, and your organs may begin to shut down. Without quick treatment, it can lead to
respiratory failure
or death.
Myxedema coma causes
The most common cause is not receiving treatment for hypothyroidism — usually for a long period of time. This could be because you don’t know you have it or it’s not well-managed.
Severe hypothyroidism deprives your body of thyroid hormone. You need this
hormone
to run your
metabolism
,
heart
,
muscles
,
brain
— almost every body system you have. Without thyroid hormone, your body will start to shut down.
There are some known triggers of myxedema coma for people with hypothyroidism:
Advertisement
Not taking, skipping or stopping thyroid medication
Certain medications like
lithium
,
amiodarone
,
sedatives
and tranquilizers
Cold temperatures
Heart failure
or
stroke
Infections like
pneumonia
Surgery
Trauma
Weakness or extreme
fatigue
Risk factors
The biggest risk factor for a myxedema crisis is having a long history of untreated hypothyroidism. Other risk factors include:
Being a
female
older than 60
Living in a cold area (
90%
of cases occur in winter weather)
If you’re receiving treatment for a thyroid condition, regular checkups with your provider are important. They help make sure your treatment is working.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose myxedema coma
Healthcare providers can diagnose it based on your symptoms, a
physical exam
and your health history. They may ask if you have a history of
thyroid disorders
, thyroid surgery or if you are taking thyroid medications. If you’re confused, it might be hard to share information. So, healthcare providers may have to diagnose you based on your symptoms and a physical exam.
Since it’s a medical emergency, you’ll most likely go to the ICU for immediate treatment. They’ll use
blood tests
to confirm
low thyroid hormone levels
.
Your provider may order other tests like:
Arterial blood gas (ABG)
Blood tests to check
white blood cell
count,
low blood sugar
and
electrolytes
EKG or ECG to check heart rhythm
Lumbar puncture
Any other tests your healthcare team feels are necessary
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Treatment for myxedema crisis typically takes place in an ICU where your healthcare team will monitor you closely. You’ll receive:
IV Medications
: Your provider will give you
levothyroxine (T4)
to quickly increase thyroid hormone levels. Sometimes, they also give you liothyronine (T3). You may receive
hydrocortisone
to help
replace the hormones your adrenal glands aren’t making.
IV fluids
: IV fluids help stabilize your body. They can raise your blood pressure, replace lost electrolytes and treat dehydration.
Supportive care
: This could include things like a warm blanket for hypothermia,
oxygen therapy
or
mechanical ventilation
to help you breathe, or
antibiotics
to treat an underlying infection.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Seek medical care right away if you believe your loved one is having a myxedema crisis. Symptoms could include confusion, swelling and shallow breathing.
If you have hypothyroidism, be sure to take your medication exactly as it’s prescribed. Attend all your appointments with your healthcare provider. They’ll run tests on your thyroid hormone levels to make sure you’re taking the right dose.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a myxedema coma?
Myxedema coma is a serious condition that can turn fatal. Your healthcare team will need to recognize and treat it quickly. When this happens, the outcome is usually better. Even so, myxedema coma is fatal for about 2 to 6 out of 10 people.
Advertisement
Recovering from a myxedema coma can take days or weeks (depending on how severe your condition is). Be patient with yourself as you recover. Your body has gone through a lot. You’ll need to take thyroid medication for the rest of your life and have frequent checkups with your healthcare provider.
Prevention
Can I prevent a myxedema crisis?
The best way to prevent the condition is to get treatment for hypothyroidism. Visit your healthcare provider for checkups and take your thyroid medication as directed. This can prevent you from dangerously low thyroid hormone levels that can lead to myxedema crisis.
Telling your friends and family about the warning signs of myxedema coma is also a great prevention step to take. This can be beneficial if you become unconscious or have severe symptoms of the condition.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Myxedema coma is a scary complication of untreated hypothyroidism. Recognizing the signs and getting medical attention right away can make a huge difference. Taking medication for hypothyroidism and visiting your doctor regularly can prevent a myxedema coma. If you’ve survived a myxedema crisis, it’s normal to have lots of emotions and questions about what happened to you. Share these with your healthcare team so they can help support you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s experienced healthcare providers treat all kinds of thyroid disorders, including issues that cause hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes