Mantle Cell Lymphoma: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a blood cancer that starts in your lymphocytes (the white blood cells in your lymph nodes). People with MCL often experience a cycle of remission and relapse. That means symptoms may go away for a while and return later. There’s no cure for mantle cell lymphoma. But treatment can manage your symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Mantle Cell Lymphoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Is Mantle Cell Lymphoma?
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a rare
blood cancer
that starts in your
lymphocytes
(a type of white blood cell). It’s a subtype of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In most cases, MCL begins as a slow-growing cancer that later grows rapidly. It spreads throughout your
lymphatic system
. In its advanced stages, the cancer spreads from your lymph nodes to other areas, like your
bloodstream
, bone marrow and
digestive system
.
With mantle cell lymphoma, you might have periods of
remission
followed by periods of
recurrence
. That means the cancer can go away and come back, often several times. Treatment can’t cure MCL, but it can lengthen the amount of time you’re in remission.
Mantle cell lymphoma is rare, affecting about
1 in 200,000 people
. Anyone can develop this type of
cancer
. People between the ages of 60 and 70 have a slightly higher risk.
Types of mantle cell lymphoma
The two types of mantle cell lymphoma are:
Classical MCL
. This type starts in your
lymph nodes
but usually spreads to other areas of your body. It’s usually more aggressive (fast-growing). Most MCL cases are the classical type.
Leukaemic non-nodal MCL
. This type usually causes a swollen spleen and lymphoma cells in your
blood
and
bone marrow
. It tends to grow more slowly than the classical type.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of mantle cell lymphoma?
MCL symptoms vary from person to person and can look like ordinary illnesses. They may not always appear to be cancer-related. That’s one reason why mantle cell lymphoma is usually in the later stages at the time of diagnosis.
Advertisement
You might not have any symptoms with MCL. But if you do, they might include:
Bruising
Headaches
Fatigue
Fever
Indigestion
Loss of appetite
Night sweats
Swollen lymph nodes
Weakness
Unexplained weight loss
What causes mantle cell lymphoma?
Most of the time, mantle cell lymphoma happens when certain genes
mutate
(or change) and alter how your
B cells
function. Researchers don’t know what triggers this genetic change, but here’s how it works:
Abnormal B cells make too much cyclin D1 (a protein that helps B cells grow).
The cyclin D1 overload makes B cells duplicate and multiply uncontrollably.
The duplicate cells make
tumors
.
What are the complications of this condition?
As mantle cell lymphoma progresses, you might develop complications like:
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Ruptured spleen
Tumor lysis syndrome
Diagnosis and Tests
How is mantle cell lymphoma diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider may use many different tests to diagnose MCL, including:
Lab tests
. These may include a complete blood count (
CBC
), comprehensive metabolic panel (
CMP
),
LDH test
or a
uric acid level
test.
Biopsies
. Your healthcare provider may also recommend a
lymph node biopsy
or
bone marrow biopsy
. These procedures can help confirm the presence of cancer cells. Once a provider takes a tissue sample, they’ll send it to a
pathologist
for testing.
Imaging tests
. Your provider might take imaging tests to determine how far the cancer has spread. Depending on the location of the cancer, you might need a
colonoscopy
,
CT scan
,
EGD (esophagogastroduodenoscopy)
or
PET scan
.
Healthcare providers usually suspect mantle cell lymphoma after routine
blood work
shows a
high lymphocyte count
. If your lab results are abnormal, a healthcare provider will do an
exam
and ask you to describe your symptoms. They might gently press around your lymph nodes to see if they’re swollen.
What are the stages of mantle cell lymphoma?
Healthcare providers use a disease-specific
staging system
called the Mantle Cell Lymphoma International Prognostic Index (MIPI). It helps them predict survival rates. In general, late-stage MCL is more likely to come back than early-stage MCL.
Healthcare providers determine cancer stage by finding out how far the cancer has spread:
Stage I
. Localized to one lymph node or cluster of lymph nodes in the same area.
Stage II
. Cancer is in two or more lymph nodes or lymph node clusters on the same side of your
diaphragm
.
Stage III
. MCL has spread to both sides of your diaphragm. Or it’s in the lymph nodes in your
spleen
and above your diaphragm.
Stage IV
. Mantle cell lymphoma has spread to distant areas of your body or parts that aren’t lymph nodes.
Management and Treatment
How is mantle cell lymphoma treated?
MCL treatment is different for everyone. The option that’s right for you depends on factors like
tumor
location and growth.
Treatments for mantle cell lymphoma include:
Advertisement
Chemotherapy
Immunotherapy
Radiation therapy
Targeted therapy
Stem cell transplant
You might qualify for some treatments but not others.
If you have MCL, you may want to consider a
clinical trial
. Clinical trials test new ways to treat cancer. The new treatments might not cure mantle cell lymphoma, but they may give you more symptom-free time to enjoy life. Ask your healthcare provider if you could be a candidate.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for mantle cell lymphoma?
Mantle cell lymphoma isn’t a curable lymphoma. But there are treatments that can send it into remission.
Cancer in remission isn’t the same as cancer that’s been
cured
. Mantle cell lymphoma can come back (relapse) after being in remission for months or years.
The amount of time you experience remission may be shorter with MCL. But newer targeted treatments can increase the remission period. To learn more about your mantle cell lymphoma prognosis, ask your healthcare provider.
Survival rate
The five-year survival rate for mantle cell lymphoma is about
50%
. That means around half of the people diagnosed with this disease are still alive five years after diagnosis.
Survival rates
are just estimates. They can’t tell you how long you’ll live or how you’ll respond to a particular treatment. To learn what survival rates mean for you, talk to your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can mantle cell lymphoma be prevented?
You can’t prevent MCL. If you receive a diagnosis, it doesn’t mean you’ve done something wrong. Researchers are learning more about why genes mutate or change within our bodies to create cancers like MCL.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Taking care of yourself — physically, emotionally and mentally — is essential with mantle cell lymphoma.
Here are some suggestions that might help:
Acknowledge your emotions
. Ignoring negative feelings won’t make them go away. Honoring your emotions is the first step in finding the support you need.
Get support
. Joining a support group is a great way to find others who are going through similar situations. Ask your healthcare provider about local or online resources.
Manage your stress
. Find ways to relax and bring intention into your daily life. Try
meditation
or other
mindfulness
exercises.
Stick to a routine
. The cycle of remission and relapse can make you feel out of sorts. Finding a daily routine and sticking to it can help you regain control.
Talk to a counselor
. It’s important to take care of your mental health. A counselor or
therapist
can help you sort through complicated emotions.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re receiving treatment for mantle cell lymphoma, you’ll see your healthcare provider regularly. They’ll monitor your progress and help you manage side effects.
Advertisement
If your condition is in remission, you’ll have occasional follow-ups. Ask your provider how frequently to schedule these appointments.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), you’re living with the uncertainty of a disease that never really goes away. You might spend a lot of time worrying that a relapse could occur. Or you might wonder if treatment will work for you at all.
It’s natural to have these feelings. But if anxiety keeps you from enjoying life, talk to your healthcare provider. They can point you to resources to help you on your journey.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you hear that you might have lymphoma, you want care from experts you can trust. At Cleveland Clinic, we craft a treatment plan tailored for you and your needs.
Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials