Aortic Valve Disease: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Aortic Valve Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Aortic Valve Disease
Aortic valve disease is a form of heart valve disease that prevents your aortic valve from working properly. The valve is narrowed (stenosis) or leaky (regurgitation). Symptoms like chest pain, dizziness, trouble breathing and fainting may develop as it gets worse. Medicine and surgery can lower your risk of complications and help you live longer.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Aortic Valve Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Aortic Valve Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Aortic Valve Disease?
Aortic valve disease is an umbrella term for conditions that affect your
aortic valve
. This valve is like a door. It manages blood flow from your heart’s main pumping chamber (left ventricle) into a large artery called your aorta. Your aortic valve is supposed to open and close completely to help keep your heart working normally. If it has trouble doing either or both, you have this condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are two main types of aortic valve disease:
Aortic valve stenosis
: Your valve opening is narrowed or blocked. So, less blood can go through.
Aortic valve regurgitation
: Your valve doesn’t close tightly and is “leaky.” This means some blood goes back the wrong way each time your heart beats.
It’s also possible to have mixed aortic valve disease. This means your aortic valve is both narrowed and leaky.
Aortic valve disease is the most common form of
heart valve disease
in developed nations. It’s also the most dangerous, causing more deaths than any other type of valve disease in the U.S. Early diagnosis and treatment can be lifesaving.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of aortic valve disease
Early on, you may have no symptoms. As aortic valve disease gets worse, you may experience:
Chest pain or discomfort
Dizziness
Fainting
Fatigue
Heart palpitations
Shortness of breath with exertion, when lying down or when sleeping
Swelling in your feet and ankles
Aortic valve disease causes
The most common cause of aortic valve disease is wear and tear from aging. Your valve works hard over the years and eventually starts to break down. Plus, as you get older, calcium can build up on your valve flaps (leaflets). Over time, the calcium makes the flaps grow thick and stiff so they can’t open and shut properly. This is called calcific aortic valve disease, or aortic valve calcification.
Advertisement
Besides aging, other causes include:
Aortic dissection
Congenital heart disease
Endocarditis
High blood pressure
Radiation therapy to your chest
Rheumatic heart disease
Thoracic aortic aneurysm
Trauma to your chest
Risk factors
You face a higher risk of aortic valve disease if you:
Are over age 60
Have signs of calcium buildup on your valve
Were born with a
bicuspid aortic valve
Have a history of rheumatic fever
Have certain underlying conditions, like Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and lupus
Underwent radiation therapy to your chest for cancer, like for Hodgkin lymphoma
Complications of this condition
Aortic valve disease is serious and can lead to complications when untreated. The most common complication is
heart failure
. This is when your heart can’t pump enough blood to meet your body’s needs. Other complications include:
Abnormal heartbeats (arrhythmias)
Infection in your heart (infective endocarditis)
Heart attack
Stroke
Sudden cardiac arrest
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers diagnose aortic valve disease by doing a physical exam and running some tests. Your provider will listen to your heart with a stethoscope and do an electrocardiogram (
ECG/EKG
).
You may also need other tests, including:
Cardiac CT scan
Echocardiogram
Heart cath
Cardiac MRI
Stress test — using exercise or medication
Stages
There are four main stages of aortic valve disease. These range from mild to severe and include:
Stage A (at risk)
: Your aortic valve is working fine. But you have at least one risk factor for aortic valve disease. You don’t have symptoms.
Stage B (progressive)
: This is mild or moderate aortic valve disease. There are some changes to your valve function, but you don’t have symptoms.
Stage C (asymptomatic severe)
: This is severe disease. You don’t have symptoms during your normal routine, but may have them during a stress test. Your heart may be able to pump enough blood to your body (stage C1). Or it may have trouble doing so (stage C2).
Stage D (symptomatic severe)
: You have severe aortic valve disease that causes symptoms like chest pain or fainting.
The exact criteria for each stage vary slightly based on your condition (stenosis or regurgitation). Your provider uses your test results and symptoms to decide the stage. Without treatment, it can get worse over time.
Management and Treatment
How is aortic valve disease treated?
Treatment for aortic valve disease involves medicines to reduce your risk of complications and procedures to repair or replace your valve. Your healthcare provider will tailor treatment to your needs. They’ll consider whether your valve is narrowed or leaky (or both), how far the condition has progressed and symptom severity.
Advertisement
Medicines
Medicines can’t fix your valve. But they manage your symptoms and help protect you from complications. Your provider may prescribe medicine to:
Prevent abnormal heartbeats
Lower your blood pressure
Manage your cholesterol levels
Treat heart failure
Lower your risk of blood clots
Procedures and surgeries
You may need a procedure or surgery for severe aortic valve disease. Options include:
Surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR)
: Your surgeon replaces your aortic valve with either a tissue valve or a mechanical valve.
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
: This is a minimally invasive procedure that lets you avoid open-heart surgery. Your surgeon fits a new valve inside the old one.
Aortic valve repair
: Your surgeon repairs damage to your aortic valve so you can keep it. This option is less common than replacement.
Ross procedure
: This may be an option if you’re under 60. Your surgeon replaces your aortic valve with your pulmonary valve and gives you a donor pulmonary valve. This lets you avoid having a mechanical valve in the aortic position. But it’s a complicated procedure.
Your provider will explain which procedures or surgeries could help you the most and are safest for you. They’ll also tell you what you can expect in terms of recovery. Be sure to ask any questions so you feel as comfortable as possible moving forward.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you how often you need to come in for appointments to manage aortic valve disease. It’s crucial that you go to all of them. You need imaging tests on a regular basis to check your valve and heart function. These tests allow your provider to recommend treatment at the right time.
Call your provider right away if you have:
New or worsening symptoms
Side effects from your medicines
Signs of complications after a procedure or surgery (your provider will tell you what to look out for)
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you:
Pass out
Have difficulty breathing
Fall while taking blood thinners (these raise the risk of
internal bleeding
if you hurt yourself)
Have signs of a
wound infection
after your surgery or procedure
Have
symptoms of a heart attack
Have
signs of a stroke
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Aortic Valve Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Your outlook depends on many things, including when you’re diagnosed, how far aortic valve disease has progressed and your overall health. Talk to your healthcare provider about your
prognosis
. They can give you a sense of how you’ll respond to treatment and what to expect.
Here are some ways to help improve your outlook:
Follow your provider’s advice on the types of exercise that are healthy and safe for you. You may have some exercise restrictions.
Take good care of your teeth and gums to protect against dangerous heart infections. Having valve disease or an artificial valve raises your risk for these.
Eat
heart-healthy foods
.
Avoid tobacco products.
Advertisement
What is the survival rate of aortic valve disease?
People with aortic valve disease who don’t yet have symptoms have a low risk of sudden cardiac death (less than 1% chance per year). With close monitoring from a healthcare provider, you can live about as long as those who don’t have the condition. It’s crucial that you tell your provider as soon as you notice symptoms developing.
If you have stage D aortic valve disease (symptomatic severe), the prognosis is poor without treatment. Only about half of all people who don’t receive treatment survive at least two years.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with aortic valve disease may make you feel worried or uncertain about the future. But there are plenty of reasons for hope. Treatments can help you feel better and live longer. The key is making sure you see your provider regularly. Tell them about any new symptoms or changes in how you feel. They’ll help you understand which treatments are right for you and the best timing.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have aortic heart valve disease, you want the best care. Cleveland Clinic is number one in the nation for heart health. We’re ready to help you.
Aortic Valve Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment