Lyme Disease: Causes, Rash, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Lyme Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Lyme Disease
Lyme disease can develop when an infected tick bites you. The infection can cause a range of symptoms, like a bullseye rash, joint pain and nerve issues. Antibiotics treat Lyme disease. For some people, symptoms linger even after treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Lyme Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Lyme Disease?
See a healthcare provider as soon as possible if you have these symptoms.
Lyme disease (also called borreliosis) is an infection you can get from the bite of a deer
tick
. A bacterium called
Borrelia burgdorferi
causes the infection. Lyme disease is the most common tick-borne infectious disease in the U.S.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Initial symptoms of Lyme disease often include a “bullseye” rash, fever and fatigue. Without treatment, the infection can spread to many parts of your body. It can lead to complications that affect your nervous system, heart and joints.
Ticks are tiny creatures that can do a lot of damage to your health. That’s why you should be aware of where deer ticks live and do everything you can to prevent bites.
Stages of Lyme disease
Lyme disease can progress through three stages, including:
Early localized Lyme disease
: The early stage occurs one to 28 days following the tick bite.
Early disseminated Lyme disease
: The early disseminated stage develops three to 12 weeks after the initial infection.
Late Lyme disease
: The late stage may occur months after the initial infection.
Early treatment can help prevent the progression to late-stage Lyme disease.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Lyme disease
The symptoms of Lyme disease can vary depending on the stage.
Early symptoms
Symptoms of early Lyme disease include:
A bullseye rash (erythema migrans)
Fatigue
Fever
Headache
Muscle and joint aches
Stiff neck
Swollen lymph nodes
The bullseye rash starts as a small, red spot at the site of the tick bite. This can happen at any time between one and four weeks after the bite. The spot expands in the coming days or weeks, forming a circular, triangular or oval-shaped rash. The rash may look like a bullseye because it appears as a red ring that surrounds a clear center area. It can range in size from a dime to the width of your body.
Advertisement
Not everyone with Lyme disease develops this rash. It appears in about 7 to 8 out of 10 infected people.
Second-stage symptoms
Symptoms of the second stage of Lyme disease may include:
Multiple areas of rash
Paralysis of facial muscles (
Bell’s palsy
)
Heart palpitations
Episodes of dizziness or shortness of breath
Numbness or tingling (
neuropathy
)
Shooting pain (
radiculopathy
)
Late-stage symptoms
Symptoms of untreated late Lyme disease may include:
Swollen and painful joints (
arthritis
) — typically affecting large joints like your knee
Difficulty concentrating or other mental changes
Damage to several nerves, like those in your skin, muscles and organs
Lyme disease causes
A bacterium called
Borrelia burgdorferi
causes Lyme disease. You can get it if an infected deer tick (also called a blacklegged tick) bites you. In general, infected ticks must be attached for more than 24 hours to spread the infection.
Ticks that spread Lyme disease mostly live in wooded areas in the northeastern, mid-Atlantic and north-central United States. Depending on the stage of their life cycle, blacklegged ticks can range in size from that of a poppy seed to a sesame seed. They’re usually black with areas of reddish-brown or white on their backs, depending on whether they’re adults or nymphs
Taking steps to help
prevent tick bites
can lower your risk of developing Lyme disease.
Complications of this condition
Untreated Lyme disease can lead to complications like:
Arthritis that comes and goes
Heart block
or an interruption of the electrical system of your heart (Lyme carditis)
Inflammation of the tissue covering your brain and spinal cord (
meningitis
)
The bacteria invading your brain and spinal cord (
encephalopathy
)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Lyme disease
Your healthcare provider considers many factors when assessing you for Lyme disease, like:
Your symptoms
Your history of travel or activity in wooded areas
The likelihood you were exposed to infected ticks
Blood test results
Many people don’t remember or know that they’ve been bitten by a tick. This is because the tick is tiny, and its bite is usually painless.
Your provider may confirm the diagnosis using a blood test. It checks for
antibodies
to the bacterium that causes Lyme disease. But it can take several weeks after the initial infection for your body to make enough antibodies for the test to detect.
To be on the safe side, your provider may prescribe treatment without this blood test if:
You have a bullseye rash and have been in an area known for Lyme disease
You have a known tick bite from an area known for Lyme disease, but no symptoms
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Antibiotics
are the primary treatment for Lyme disease. Common antibiotics include doxycycline, amoxicillin or cefuroxime axetil.
How long you need medicine may vary based on your symptoms or the stage of Lyme disease. For example, you may be on antibiotics for around 10 days for the early stage. If you develop neurological or heart symptoms, you may need to take them for longer. Your healthcare provider will give you specific instructions.
Be sure to complete your round of antibiotics.
You may need other treatments to manage symptoms. For example, heart block may require a pacemaker. If arthritis symptoms don’t respond to antibiotics,
steroid injections
and other therapies may help.
Can my body fight off Lyme disease on its own?
No. You need antibiotics to fight off Lyme disease. Without treatment, the infection can spread in your body and cause complications.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you feel sick after spending time in areas where ticks might live, you should see your healthcare provider.
If you have a Lyme disease diagnosis and don’t feel better after taking all your antibiotics, contact your provider. This is especially true if you have symptoms like a stiff neck or mental confusion.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Early treatment with antibiotics cures most cases of Lyme disease. According to
one study
, about 80% of people who get early treatment recover completely. Recovery may be slower for some than for others. Keep in contact with your healthcare provider so they can monitor you.
Advertisement
Untreated Lyme disease may lead to serious health issues. But it’s rarely fatal.
Even after treatment, about 5% to 15% of people may experience lingering symptoms, like pain or fatigue. This is known as post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome (PTLDS). The symptoms don’t mean that you still have an infection. It’s more likely that your body didn’t respond properly to treatment.
More antibiotics are unlikely to help PTLDS. Instead, your healthcare provider will suggest other therapies to manage your symptoms.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
You can try to prevent Lyme disease by avoiding tick bites and promptly
removing ticks
. If you remove a tick within 24 hours, you can greatly reduce your chances of getting the infection.
Researchers are working on a vaccine for Lyme disease. It’s currently in clinical trials. If it’s successful, the vaccine may be another way to help prevent the infection.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’re going to spend time in an area that might have ticks, take measures to avoid being bitten. These simple habits can help prevent Lyme disease. If you find a tick on yourself, don’t panic. Remove it carefully and reach out to your healthcare provider to see if you need treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment