Idiopathic Definition & Characteristics
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Idiopathic
Advertisement
Advertisement
Idiopathic
Idiopathic is a medical term that describes a condition with an unknown cause. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis are examples. If you have an idiopathic condition, your provider will explain what the diagnosis means for you and which treatments are available. Ongoing research may reveal more about these conditions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What does idiopathic mean?
Idiopathic is a word healthcare providers use to describe a disease or condition that doesn’t have a known cause. Your provider will say your condition is “idiopathic” after they’ve ruled out all known causes. Some conditions have “idiopathic” built into their name because the lack of a known cause is a defining feature.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
is one example.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you hear your provider refer to your condition as “idiopathic,” you might feel anxious. After learning providers don’t know the cause, you might wonder how this happened or whether treatments can help you.
The first thing to do is talk to your provider about your diagnosis. Ask if they can explain more about possible causes or contributing factors. In some cases, lab or imaging tests may not reveal the exact cause, but providers may suspect a likely cause based on your symptoms or medical history.
Your provider can also tell you more about treatment options available to help you. Often, providers can treat signs or symptoms even if they can’t directly target the underlying cause. There may also be opportunities to take part in a
clinical trial
. Your provider will let you know what’s possible in your situation and offer resources to guide the way forward.
What are some examples of idiopathic diseases or conditions?
Examples of idiopathic conditions include:
Chronic idiopathic urticaria
. This is when you have hives that last a long time or go away and come back again (recur), but you can’t identify a trigger.
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)
. This is a type of arthritis involving excess bone growth. It causes pain and mobility problems.
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
. This is when cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) builds up in your skull for no known reason, causing severe headaches and vision changes.
Idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis
. This involves scarring and thickening of
lung
tissue that gradually gets worse, leading to breathing problems.
Idiopathic scoliosis
. This is a side-to-side curve of your
spine
without a known cause. It’s the most common type of scoliosis.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
. This is the most common type of arthritis affecting children and teens. It causes
joint
pain, swelling and tenderness.
Ménière’s disease (idiopathic endolymphatic hydrops)
. This is a rare
inner ear
disorder. Experts believe a buildup of fluid (endolymph) in your inner ear causes symptoms (like
vertigo
and
tinnitus
), but they’re not sure exactly what causes the buildup.
Advertisement
Future research may uncover causes for these conditions. But for now, providers consider them idiopathic.
Conditions that are often idiopathic
Some conditions are often idiopathic, but providers can identify a specific cause in some people. Examples of such conditions include:
Castleman disease
. Providers sometimes find a cause in people who have the multicentric form of this disease (enlarged
lymph nodes
throughout their body). But usually, this condition is idiopathic.
Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH)
. Certain medical conditions (like a
brain aneurysm
or
brain tumor
) can cause this buildup of cerebrospinal fluid. But about 50% of all cases are idiopathic.
Parkinson’s disease
. This degenerative
brain disease
can be either genetic or idiopathic. About 9 in 10 cases are idiopathic.
Pericarditis
. Plenty of things (from infections to chest injuries) can cause inflammation in the
sac
surrounding your heart. But in many cases, there’s no clear cause.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
. Damage to small blood vessels in your lungs raises pressure in your
pulmonary arteries
. Providers can sometimes pinpoint what causes this damage, but more commonly, PAH is idiopathic.
Uveitis
. Infections,
eye injuries
and
autoimmune diseases
can lead to this inflammation of the middle layer of your eye (
uvea
). But it’s common for
exams
and testing to reveal no known cause.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
Idiopathic vs. occult — what’s the difference?
Idiopathic and occult are two different medical terms with different meanings. Idiopathic means having an unknown cause, and providers use the word to describe medical conditions where all known causes have been ruled out. On the other hand, occult means hidden or unable to be seen. Providers typically use “occult” when referring to:
The place in your body where cancer started
. Occult primary cancer (also called
cancer of unknown primary
) is cancer that has spread to one or more sites throughout your body from an unknown site of origin. Testing or other methods aren’t revealing where the cancer started, so that site is occult, or hidden.
Findings that are hard to see.
For example, a
fecal occult blood test
looks for tiny traces of blood in your poop that you can’t see with just your eyes. Radiologists may use the word “occult” to describe issues that are hidden on one type of imaging test (like an
X-ray
) but visible on another type.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Despite all our differences, humans have one thing in common — the desire to know
why
. That urge is often the strongest when it comes to our bodies and our health. When you get a diagnosis, you might wonder, why did this happen? Why did it happen
to me
? How can I fix this?
Advertisement
When you have an idiopathic condition, not knowing the
why
can make you worry that there’s no way to make things better. But providers and researchers are constantly learning more about conditions with unknown causes. They’re also developing new and more effective treatments.
Take hope in the fact that tomorrow may bring more answers than we have today. Meanwhile, your provider will do everything possible to help you understand your condition and feel your best.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider