Vaginal Pimples: Bumps, Causes, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pimple on Vagina
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pimple on Vagina
Pimples are small red or brown bumps that appear on the surface of your skin. They can also occur on your vulva or labia. Clogged pores, ingrown hairs and skin conditions are common causes of vaginal pimples. You shouldn’t pop or squeeze pimples on your vagina.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a vaginal pimple?
A pimple is a small red or brown bump on the surface of your
skin
. It’s often due to
acne
, which is when skin pores become clogged with oil, dirt, sweat or dead skin cells. While you may only think of pimples as something that affects your face, a pimple can affect almost any skin on your body, including your
vulva
. Your vulva includes your external genitals like your vaginal opening,
clitoris
and labia (vaginal lips). This is sometimes called vaginal acne or vulvar acne.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It may be hard to tell if the bump on your genitals is a pimple. Pimples may look like sores, blisters or rashes that happen due to skin conditions or
infections
. First, try not to panic. Your vaginal skin is sensitive, and it can be completely normal to get a pimple “down there” from time to time.
Vaginal acne is common and usually not a reason for worry. Most pimples clear up within a few days with at-home treatment.
You should always contact a healthcare provider if you don’t know what a bump on your
vagina
is. It’s better to be cautious and not guess. You should also contact a provider if a pimple on your vagina causes pain, doesn’t go away or gets large.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a vaginal pimple?
The main symptom is a red or brown bump on the skin of your vulva and labia. The exact color may vary depending on your skin color. It may also be:
Small and raised (
papule
).
White at the tip because it’s full of pus (
pustule
).
Tender or sore when you touch it. It can also be painless.
Itchy.
What causes a pimple to form near my vagina?
The most common reason for vaginal pimples is a clogged pore. The skin on your vulva contains pores that can become clogged with bacteria, oil, sweat and dead skin. This triggers an
immune response
, which creates a pimple.
There could be many causes of a vaginal pimple other than a clogged pore. Sometimes, it’s not clear what causes a pimple. But some of the more common causes are:
Advertisement
Contact dermatitis
:
A skin reaction to something that touches your vulva. Some people are more sensitive to substances touching their genital skin than others. Common causes of vulvar skin irritation are hygiene products like detergents, soaps or sprays,
semen
and vaginal lubricants.
Folliculitis
: A condition that occurs when your hair follicles are
inflamed
or infected. This can happen when an opening in your skin (like a cut) gets bacteria inside of it. Some common causes of folliculitis are razor burn and shaving your pubic hair.
Hidradenitis suppurativa
(acne inversa):
A skin disease that affects the sweat glands in your groin. It can cause pus-filled sores that come back after treatment and leave scars.
Hormone
changes, like those that occur during your
menstrual cycle
, can also contribute to vulvar acne. This is mainly because hormones can cause your glands to secrete more oil.
What else can look like a vaginal pimple?
Certain conditions cause bumps that resemble pimples. But they’re cysts, warts or blisters.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
:
Certain STIs can cause pimple-like blisters or sores to develop. Some may closely resemble pimples. For example,
genital herpes
may look like a pimple when it first forms.
Genital warts
can also have a pimple-like appearance.
Skin tags
: Skin tags are small flaps of skin that typically form in an area where skin rubs against itself.
Bartholin cysts
: These occur when glands on either side of your vagina get blocked. The area becomes inflamed and a lump forms.
Molluscum contagiosum
:
A viral infection that causes tiny, painless raised lesions to form on your skin. These growths sometimes occur in the genital area. Breakouts can take months to clear up.
What does an STI pimple look like?
Figuring out the difference between a pimple and a bump from an STI can be tough as they can look alike. Here’s a list of differences that may be helpful if you’re unsure:
A pimple is usually one bump. It’s not in clusters or patches.
A pimple is often filled with pus. A bump from an STI may contain white, yellow or clear fluid.
A pimple doesn’t blister or become ulcerated.
A pimple doesn’t cause other symptoms like fever, flu-like symptoms or severe pain.
A pimple tends to get better within a week on its own. A bump from an STI typically doesn’t heal as quickly without medical attention.
It’s always best to talk with a healthcare provider if you’re unsure. They can order tests to see if an STI is the cause of the bump or if it’s a pimple.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is vaginal acne diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider can diagnose genital pimples after a quick examination. If the provider is concerned the pimple is something other than vaginal acne, they’ll perform a more thorough assessment.
This may include:
Checking for changes in your daily routine that may cause contact dermatitis.
Discussing your hygiene habits.
Asking you about your sexual history, number of sexual partners, etc.
Running tests
to rule out STIs.
Management and Treatment
How are vaginal pimples treated?
Treatment depends on the case. Pimples due to clogged pores or ingrown hairs go away on their own within a week. You may need to change your habits to avoid getting more pimples. This could include not shaving your pubic hair or changing out of sweaty clothes right away.
Advertisement
If the cause is a condition like contact dermatitis, eliminating soaps, detergents and other possible irritants can help you determine the root cause of the skin irritation. Often, making small changes to your hygiene habits can prevent more pimples from forming.
Other causes may need treatment with topical or oral medication. Possible treatments include:
Acne medications
to reduce inflammation or the amount of oil your skin produces.
Antihistamines
to treat allergies and other sources of contact dermatitis.
Antibiotics
if the pimple occurs due to a bacterial infection.
Antiviral medications
for viruses causing STIs.
If you’re not sure what’s causing a bump, always ask a healthcare provider before you put anything on your skin. They can help determine what may be causing your symptoms and recommend an appropriate treatment.
Should I pop a pimple on my vagina?
No. You shouldn’t squeeze or pop a pimple on your vagina. Other than being uncomfortable and painful, it’s very unsanitary. Popping a pimple can cause the bacteria inside to spread to other parts of your vagina. This just increases your risk of getting more vaginal pimples.
How can I manage my symptoms?
There are some things you can do to manage symptoms of a vaginal pimple:
Apply a warm compress for pain and itching.
Apply a cool compress for swelling.
Avoid clothing that irritates the area until it heals.
Advertisement
How long do vaginal pimples last?
Genital pimples will usually go away on their own in one to two weeks. Contact your provider if the pimple hasn’t cleared up within a few weeks.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for people with vaginal pimples?
Your outlook depends on the cause and the treatments you try. Many genital pimples clear up on their own within a few days. If your treatment includes medications, it can take a few weeks for pimples to clear up. Some people need to change their hygiene routine to protect against recurring pimples.
Prevention
How can I prevent vaginal pimples?
There are steps you can take to prevent certain causes of genital pimples:
Avoid tight-fitting pants or underwear.
Choose underwear made of cotton or breathable materials.
Wash your genital area daily with mild soap.
Practice safe sex. Use a
condom
or dental dam every time you have sexual intercourse.
Promptly change out of sweaty clothes.
Trim pubic hair instead of shaving.
Switch out pads and tampons regularly when you have your period.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see your healthcare provider if:
Genital pimples occur regularly.
They’re painful or large.
You’re concerned they’re not pimples.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a pimple on your vagina can be a big surprise. But they’re common and can form for many reasons. They typically clear up on their own within a few days with at-home care. In some cases, a healthcare provider may prescribe medicine. You shouldn’t feel embarrassed to call your healthcare provider if you’re concerned about a bump being a pimple or something else. Healthcare providers can determine the cause of growths that aren’t pimples and get you the treatment you need.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/12/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment