Medulloblastoma: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Medulloblastoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Medulloblastoma
Medulloblastoma is a cancerous brain tumor that starts near your brainstem in your cerebellum. The tumor is fast-growing and can spread to other areas of your brain and spinal cord. Medulloblastoma is more common in children than adults. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Brain Tumor Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Medulloblastoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Medulloblastoma?
Medulloblastoma is a cancerous type of brain tumor that starts in your cerebellum. It's most common in kids.
Medulloblastoma is a cancerous
tumor
of your
central nervous system (CNS)
. It forms in the
cerebellum
, an area near the back of your
brain
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Medulloblastoma mostly affects children and teens under the age of 16. Though rarer in older individuals, it can occur in adults as well. Medulloblastoma in adults is usually diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 45.
This type of cancer is rare, affecting about
437 children and adults
in the U.S. each year. But it is the most common type of
brain tumor in children
. Most cases are diagnosed between the ages of 5 and 9.
Medulloblastomas usually grow quickly. The cancer can spread to other parts of your brain and spinal cord through cerebrospinal fluid (a clear fluid that protects your brain and spinal cord from injury).
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of medulloblastoma
Medulloblastoma symptoms can vary depending on several factors, including your age, the size of the tumor and its stage of development. These symptoms may depend on the location of the tumor or because of pressure buildup inside of your skull. Warning signs may include:
Back pain
Balance issues
Changes in vision
Difficulty walking
Dizziness
Headaches
Nausea and vomiting
Tiredness
Urinary
or
bowel incontinence
(accidents with peeing and pooping)
Medulloblastoma causes
Researchers don’t know exactly why medulloblastoma happens. But there are certain
genetic disorders
that could increase your or your child’s risk for developing the condition, including:
Advertisement
BRCA1
gene mutations
.
BRCA1
(breast cancer gene 1) and
BRCA2
(breast cancer gene 2) make proteins to help repair damaged
DNA
. People who inherit certain variants of these genes have increased risks for many types of cancer.
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS)
. Also called
Gorlin syndrome
, this hereditary condition often occurs alongside
basal cell skin cancers
. People with NBCCS have about a 5% chance of developing medulloblastoma.
Turcot syndrome
. People with Turcot syndrome have
colon cancer
along with a tumor in their central nervous system, such as a medulloblastoma or
pituitary adenoma
.
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
. People with Li-Fraumeni syndrome have an increased risk of
sarcomas
, breast cancer, other types of
brain cancer
(like
gliomas
and
choroid plexus carcinomas
),
adrenal cancer
and
leukemia
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose medulloblastoma
Your healthcare provider will talk with you about symptoms and review your medical history in detail. If they suspect medulloblastoma, they’ll recommend tests to confirm your diagnosis.
Tests that are used
There are a few different tests that can help your healthcare provider make a diagnosis. These tests, from least to most invasive, might include:
Neurological exam
. Your healthcare provider will check your
hearing
and
vision
, along with your coordination and reflexes. This helps determine which area of your brain may be affected.
Imaging tests
. These might include
MRI
or
CT scans
. They can help your healthcare provider look for brain tumors.
Biopsy
. In some cases, your healthcare provider may take a tissue sample and send it to a
pathologist
for testing. Generally, they only do a biopsy if imaging tests aren’t enough to diagnose the condition.
Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
. A surgeon takes a sample of cerebrospinal fluid to test it for cancer cells. Healthcare providers usually only recommend a spinal tap after removing the tumor or managing the pressure buildup in your brain.
Management and Treatment
How is medulloblastoma treated?
It depends on many factors, including your age, overall health and the size of the tumor. The most common medulloblastoma treatment involves surgery followed by chemotherapy, radiation therapy or both.
Chemotherapy
. Your
oncologist
may give you
chemotherapy drugs
after surgery, after radiation therapy or in combination with radiation therapy. In some instances, a
stem cell transplant
is done after chemotherapy.
Radiation therapy
. This treatment can get rid of cancer cells that remain after surgery. Your healthcare provider may use it in combination with chemotherapy.
Surgery
. A
neurosurgeon
can do surgery to relieve the pressure buildup on your brain or to remove the tumor. Sometimes, complete removal of the tumor isn’t possible because it forms near structures deep within your brain.
Recovery time
Length of treatment can vary from person to person. Those who undergo any type of
brain surgery
usually need at least four to eight weeks to recover. For chemotherapy or radiation therapy, treatment could last several weeks or several months, depending on the case. To learn more about your or your child’s estimated treatment or recovery time, talk with your healthcare provider.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you or your child develops a combination of symptoms like headaches, nausea, confusion or vision changes, schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider. Those who are already undergoing medulloblastoma treatment should inform their healthcare provider about any side effects. They can help you manage your symptoms and ease your discomfort.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Brain Tumor Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have medulloblastoma?
Your team of medical experts may include:
Medical oncologists
Neurosurgeons
Pathologists
Physical therapists
Radiologists
Radiation oncologists
Neuropsychologists
They’ll create a personalized treatment plan according to your specific needs.
Can you survive medulloblastoma?
In many cases, yes. While medulloblastoma has the potential to spread throughout your entire nervous system, many people can be
cured
. There’s a higher chance of survival if the medulloblastoma hasn’t spread to other parts of your brain and spinal cord.
What is the prognosis for medulloblastoma?
The five-year medulloblastoma survival rate is over
80%
. This means that over 80% of all people diagnosed with medulloblastoma are still alive five years later. Researchers base these numbers on medulloblastoma outcomes in the past.
But keep in mind, survival rates can’t tell you what will happen in your situation. To better understand survival rates and what they mean for you, talk to your healthcare provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A brain tumor diagnosis is physically, mentally and emotionally taxing. And when it affects your child, it’s unthinkable. But there are effective treatments that offer hope. Ask your healthcare provider about clinical trials, which are new treatments that aim to improve outcomes. Also, talk to your healthcare provider about the resources available to you and consider joining a support group. Being around others who are going through the same thing can offer insight and comfort as you navigate this difficult time.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you learn you have a skull base tumor, you’ll want the best care from the best providers. Cleveland Clinic is here to help.
Brain Tumor Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials