Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance (MGUS)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance (MGUS)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance (MGUS)
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) happens when abnormal white blood cells make abnormal proteins called M proteins. M proteins don’t usually cause issues. Most people with MGUS don’t have symptoms. But a small percentage of people with this condition may develop blood cancer or a more serious blood disorder.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance (MGUS)
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance (MGUS)
MGUS is a
blood disorder
where your
plasma cells
make an abnormal protein (M protein). Blood and urine (pee) tests can detect this protein. Usually, M proteins don’t cause issues, and most people with MGUS don’t have any symptoms from the protein.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers consider MGUS a “benign precursor” to a
blood cancer
called
multiple myeloma
or one of several other conditions. This means that although MGUS isn’t cancer, it can become one. The language can be confusing. But most people with MGUS don’t develop serious disease.
Still, as there’s a chance that MGUS can progress, your healthcare provider will monitor your condition. If you’ve been diagnosed with MGUS, talk with your provider about how often you should be monitored and what tests you’ll need.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of MGUS
This condition rarely causes symptoms. You may not know you have MGUS until a routine
blood test
or
urine test
reveals you have M proteins.
MGUS causes
This condition happens when your
bone marrow
makes abnormal plasma cells. A plasma cell is a type of
white blood cell
. Normally, individual plasma cells produce antibodies.
Antibodies
are proteins that defend your body against
germs
.
In MGUS, abnormal plasma cells produce M proteins instead of the antibodies you need. Doctors don’t know why your body makes abnormal plasma cells in the first place.
Risk factors
MGUS is more common in people aged 50 and older. The risk of developing it increases with age. Starting at age 50, people have a
2% to 3%
chance of developing this condition. People aged 70 and older have a 5% chance. You may be more likely to develop MGUS if you:
Advertisement
Are Black
Are
male
Have a close relative with MGUS or a blood cancer
Have a history of exposure to pesticides or insecticides
Have a history of
autoimmune diseases
Have been exposed to high levels of radiation
Have served in the military
Complications of this condition
About 20 to 25 out of 100 people with MGUS develop a serious blood disorder, like multiple myeloma. Not all people with MGUS develop it, but all people with multiple myeloma have MGUS first.
MGUS sometimes progresses to conditions like:
Amyloidosis
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia
MGUS can increase your risk of:
Blood clots
Bone loss
or fracture
Infections
Kidney issues
Problems with the nerves throughout your body (
peripheral neuropathy
)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Providers diagnose MGUS by analyzing your blood and urine for signs of M protein. They also assess risk factors to see how likely it is that MGUS will become cancer or a serious blood disorder. These factors include:
The amount of M protein in your blood
: Levels higher than 1.5 grams per deciliter (g/dL) indicate more risk.
The type of M protein in your blood
: There are different kinds of immunoglobulin (Ig) M proteins. Some are more likely to progress to a serious condition.
The amount of free light chains in your blood
: Serum-free light chains (FLC) are proteins that plasma cells make. Serum
FLC tests
can detect abnormal concentrations of free light chains.
People at risk according to all three factors are more likely to develop blood cancer. People who don’t have any risk factors have little risk of developing it.
Management and Treatment
How is MGUS treated?
Most people with this condition don’t need treatment. Instead, your healthcare provider will monitor M protein levels in your blood. Sometimes, they’ll check a urine sample regularly, depending on how high the M protein levels are. This is called watchful waiting, or active surveillance.
For example, if you have higher levels of proteins, your provider may check your blood work every three to six months for the first year. Then, your provider may recommend checking your blood less often. You may need tests every six to 12 months for signs of cancer or another condition that may need to be treated.
If you have bone loss, your provider may recommend medications and other steps to improve bone density.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have MGUS, your healthcare provider will let you know how often to come in for tests. You should also reach out if you start noticing symptoms. Signs and symptoms of more serious conditions in people who have MGUS include:
Anemia
Bone pain
Dizziness
Easy
bruising
or bleeding
Fatigue
Headaches
Hearing
or vision loss
Night sweats
Rashes
or other skin conditions
Tingling or numbness
Unexplained weight loss
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
In general, most people with MGUS don’t have symptoms. Many never need treatment. A small percentage of people develop certain blood cancers or blood disorders that do require treatment with pills or other medications.
If blood and urine tests show M proteins, you’ll need regular blood and urine tests at least every six to 12 months. That way, your healthcare providers can watch for signs that MGUS is becoming a serious condition.
It’s unclear how MGUS impacts a person’s life expectancy. But screenings after a MGUS diagnosis improve survival rates for people who develop multiple myeloma.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is a bit of a medical mystery. There are quite a few things we still don’t know. For example, healthcare providers don’t know why some people never develop serious disease, while others do. But researchers are working to unravel some of the mystery. For instance, your provider may be able to predict if you’ll develop serious medical issues. This can take a lot of the guesswork out of this diagnosis. And it can help ease your mind knowing that you’ll get the screenings you need to get diagnosed and treated early.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Living with a noncancerous blood disorder can be exhausting. But there’s hope. Cleveland Clinic’s benign hematology experts provide personalized care and support.
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials