Prepatellar Bursitis (Knee Bursitis): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Prepatellar Bursitis (Knee Bursitis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Prepatellar Bursitis (Knee Bursitis)
Prepatellar bursitis is a common and treatable condition that causes the front of your knee to swell. It happens when the bursa sac in front of your kneecap becomes inflamed. You can treat most cases of prepatellar bursitis from home with rest, ice and elevation. But if your symptoms continue or you have an infection, see your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bursitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Prepatellar Bursitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Prepatellar Bursitis?
Prepatellar bursitis is inflammation of the bursa (a fluid-filled sac) that’s located in front of your kneecap (patella).
Prepatellar bursitis is
inflammation
of the bursa (a fluid-filled sac) that’s located in front of your kneecap (
patella
). Knee bursitis happens when irritation, infection or damage affects the bursa and it makes too much fluid. The extra fluid causes the bursa to swell and puts pressure on other parts of your
knee joint
. You can usually see prepatellar bursitis because the front of your knee looks swollen.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Prepatellar bursitis is the second most common type of
bursitis
. Other names for the condition include:
Housemaid’s knee
Carpenter’s knee
Coal miner’s knee
Carpet layer’s knee
Types of prepatellar bursitis
There are two types of prepatellar bursitis:
Acute prepatellar bursitis.
This type happens when sudden (acute) damage affects the bursa. It usually occurs due to trauma (like a forceful impact to your knee) or a
bacterial infection
.
Chronic prepatellar bursitis.
Chronic bursitis of the knee usually happens from repeated overuse or pressure on your knee, like frequent kneeling.
Symptoms and Causes
Signs and symptoms of knee bursitis
Knee bursitis symptoms depend on the type you have and how severe it is. There are three general signs of prepatellar bursitis. But you don’t need to have all three to have the condition. The three signs are:
Knee pain
. Some people feel achiness or tenderness even while resting. Others experience no pain while resting but feel pain or tenderness in their affected knee when they kneel or bend it.
Swelling
at the front of your knee
. You’ll be able to see and feel the swollen bursa sac through your skin. It usually feels squishy when you press on it.
Range of motion limits in your knee
. If you have a severe case of prepatellar bursitis, you may not be able to bend and stretch your knee like you usually do.
Advertisement
If an infection causes the knee bursitis, you’ll likely have additional symptoms, including:
Red, pink or purple skin
where your knee is swollen
Warmer skin where your knee is swollen
Fever
Achiness and
chills
If you’re experiencing symptoms of an infection, it’s important to contact your healthcare provider immediately or go to the nearest hospital. Infected prepatellar bursitis needs medical treatment. If left untreated, it can cause serious and life-threatening complications.
Bursitis of the knee causes
There are a few situations and conditions that can cause prepatellar bursitis, including:
Frequent kneeling
. Pressure and irritation from frequent kneeling cause most cases of prepatellar bursitis.
A direct hit to the knee
. Trauma to your knee from falling or getting hit with something can cause prepatellar bursitis.
Bacterial infection
. If you have a scratch, insect bite or cut on your knee that becomes infected, it can spread to your prepatellar bursa sac. This is called infectious bursitis.
Rheumatoid arthritis
and/or
gout
. Although it’s not as common, both rheumatoid arthritis and gout can cause prepatellar bursitis.
Risk factors for prepatellar bursitis
Anyone can get prepatellar bursitis, but it most commonly affects people:
Between the ages of 40 and 60
Who are
male
Who have jobs or hobbies that involve frequent kneeling, like carpentry and gardening
Who play contact sports that can lead to harsh knee impacts, like football, wrestling or rugby
Who have a health condition that weakens the
immune system
Future complications for knee bursitis
If left untreated, prepatellar bursitis that involves an infection can lead to severe complications like
septic shock
or even
death
. It’s essential to contact your healthcare provider immediately or go to the nearest hospital if you’re experiencing symptoms of an infection.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose prepatellar bursitis
Your healthcare provider will ask you questions about your symptoms and medical history. Then, they’ll do a
physical exam
, focusing on your affected knee. They’ll check for pain, tenderness and the range of motion of your knee. Imaging tests can also help confirm a knee bursitis diagnosis or rule out other possible conditions.
Tests that are used to diagnose prepatellar bursitis
Specific tests that providers can use to help diagnose prepatellar bursitis or rule out other possible conditions include:
Knee X-rays
. Your healthcare provider can use an X-ray to confirm whether or not you have a bone injury that’s causing your pain and swelling.
CT scan
or
MRI
. Your provider may request a CT scan or an MRI to check for an injury to the soft tissue in or around your knee that could cause swelling.
Ultrasound
. Your provider can use an ultrasound to determine whether you have an inflamed prepatellar bursa or another condition, like
pes anserinus bursitis
.
Prepatellar bursa
aspiration
. If your provider thinks you may have an infection in your bursa sac, they’ll draw fluid from the sac with a fine needle (aspirate) to check for
bacteria
.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is knee bursitis treated?
Prepatellar bursitis treatment depends on the severity of the condition. You can treat most cases of prepatellar bursitis that just involve inflammation from home without medical intervention. If an infection is the cause of the prepatellar bursitis, you’ll need
antibiotics
to treat it.
Treatment for prepatellar bursitis that involves just an inflamed bursa may include:
Resting and minimizing certain activities
. Be sure to avoid or minimize activities and motions that make your symptoms worse until your bursitis of the knee gets better.
Applying ice
. Applying ice to your knee at regular intervals can help reduce swelling and pain.
Elevating your leg
. Try to elevate your leg with the affected knee when you’re resting.
Compressing your knee
.
Compression can help reduce swelling.
Taking
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
.
NSAIDs like ibuprofen and naproxen can help reduce pain and inflammation.
Bursa injection
.
In some cases, your healthcare provider may give you a steroid injection to help with the inflammation if rest and anti-inflammatory drugs aren’t working.
Treatment for prepatellar bursitis that involves an infection may include:
Antibiotics
. You need antibiotics to treat a bacterial infection. Your healthcare provider may give you medication to take by mouth (orally) or through an IV (intravenously).
Surgical drainage
. If antibiotics aren’t treating the infection, your provider may need to surgically drain your prepatellar bursa.
Bursectomy.
If antibiotics and surgical drainage don’t treat the infection, your provider will need to surgically remove your bursa.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re experiencing a fever, chills and other signs of an infection, contact your healthcare provider right away or go to the nearest hospital. Prepatellar bursitis that involves an infection needs immediate medical treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bursitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis (outlook) for prepatellar bursitis?
You can treat most cases of prepatellar bursitis from home with rest, ice, compression and elevation. The swelling and other symptoms usually go away in a couple of weeks, and you shouldn’t have any lasting side effects. If the prepatellar bursitis doesn’t get better after two to three weeks of rest, reach out to your healthcare provider.
Chronic knee bursitis may be more difficult to treat, especially if you have a job that requires frequent kneeling. Your healthcare team will come up with a treatment plan that works best for you and your situation. If left untreated, chronic prepatellar bursitis can last months or even years.
Prevention
How can I prevent prepatellar bursitis?
There are a few things you can do to prevent prepatellar bursitis, including:
Using knee pads
. If you have a job that involves frequent kneeling or you play a contact sport, wearing knee pads can help cushion your knee and prevent too much pressure on your bursa.
Avoiding infections
. If you have a cut or insect bite on your knee, be sure to keep it clean to avoid getting an infection that could spread to your bursa.
Applying ice and elevating your knees after exercising
. Apply ice and elevate your legs after participating in activities or workouts that involve frequent kneeling or squatting.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Your knee is a hardworking joint. And you may not think about it much until you experience an issue with it. Prepatellar bursitis is a common condition that you can usually treat from home with rest, ice and elevation. But if your symptoms continue to affect your day-to-day life or don’t get better after a couple of weeks, reach out to your healthcare provider. They can determine a treatment plan that will work for your condition. If you’re experiencing symptoms of an infection, like a fever or warmth of the affected area, be sure to seek medical care as soon as possible.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bursitis can make your hobby or your job a real pain. Cleveland Clinic experts can help you find relief and get you back to doing the things you love.
Bursitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment