Sore Throat (Pharyngitis): Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Sore Throat (Pharyngitis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sore Throat (Pharyngitis)
A sore throat (pharyngitis) is a scratchy or burning feeling in the back of your throat. It may hurt to swallow or talk. Most sore throats happen because of a viral infection, like the common cold or flu. In addition to the soreness, you may have symptoms like a cough or runny nose. Most sore throat symptoms go away within three to 10 days.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
In addition to the soreness, pharyngitis may also cause changes you can see, like redness, swelling and white patches in your throat.
What is a sore throat?
A sore throat, or “pharyngitis,” is a scratchy, painful feeling in the back of your throat (
pharynx
). It happens when the tissue lining your throat (
mucosa
) becomes inflamed. If you have a sore throat, it may hurt to swallow or talk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Many things cause pharyngitis, from
viral
and
bacterial infections
to allergies and sleeping with your mouth open. Most sore throat symptoms go away with home care within a few days
.
But you should contact a healthcare provider if your sore throat lasts longer than a week, gets worse or you develop symptoms like a
fever
or swollen
lymph nodes
.
Types of pharyngitis
There are two main types of pharyngitis. Healthcare providers categorize them based on how long symptoms last:
Acute pharyngitis
: A sore throat that lasts from about three to 10 days. Most sore throats are acute pharyngitis.
Chronic pharyngitis
: A sore throat that lasts for more than 10 days (usually several weeks) or that keeps returning after you get better.
Symptoms and Causes
Causes of a sore throat range from common conditions like infections and allergies to habits like mouth breathing.
What are the symptoms of a sore throat?
Pharyngitis may start with a raspy feeling in your throat, as if your throat is dry. If your sore throat gets worse, you may feel a sharp pain in your throat when you swallow or talk. You may feel the pain in your
ears
or down the side of your neck.
If an infection is causing your sore throat, additional symptoms may include:
Fever.
Headache
.
Upset stomach.
Swollen lymph nodes
.
Nasal congestion (stuffy nose)
.
Runny nose
.
Cough
.
Fatigue
.
Hoarseness
.
Redness or swelling in your throat and
tonsils
.
White patches, spots or streaks in your throat and tonsils.
Advertisement
Learn the difference between pharyngitis and tonsillitis.
What causes a sore throat?
Most sore throats happen because you have a viral infection, like the
common cold
or
flu
. Less often, a sore throat (pharyngitis) may be a sign of the following conditions or issues:
Bacterial infection
: Conditions like
strep throat
and bacterial
sinus infections
may cause a sore throat.
Tonsillitis
: Tonsillitis occurs when your tonsils become infected and inflamed. Bacteria and viruses can both cause tonsillitis.
Allergies
: Allergic reactions from pollen, dust mites, pets or mold can cause mucus from your nose to drip down the back of your throat (
postnasal drip
). This can lead to a sore throat.
Acid reflux
: People with
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
feel burning and pain in their throats. This pain, called
heartburn
, happens when acid from your stomach backs up into your food tube (
esophagus
).
Overuse or irritants
: You can strain your throat by yelling or screaming. You may also develop a sore throat if you eat spicy food, smoke or drink very hot liquids.
Mouth breathing
: You may have a sore throat if you breathe through your mouth instead of your nose when you’re sleeping.
Tumors
: Although a sore throat rarely means cancer, it’s one potential symptom of
throat cancer
or benign (noncancerous) growths.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is pharyngitis diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms. They’ll perform a
physical exam
that involves looking at your throat,
tongue
and possibly your ears. They may do a
strep test
to check for the bacteria that causes strep throat.
Testing is important in case your provider can’t tell from your symptoms alone if your sore throat is related to a
virus
or
bacteria
. The results determine what treatments you’ll need.
Management and Treatment
How is a sore throat treated?
Treatment depends on what’s causing your pharyngitis. Viral infections usually clear up on their own within a week. In the meantime, your healthcare provider may recommend over-the-counter (OTC) medicines to ease your sore throat.
Other treatments for a sore throat may include:
Antibiotics
: You may need
antibiotics
to treat a bacterial infection. Most people need to take them for 10 days.
Over-the-counter antihistamine medications
:
Antihistamines
may dry postnasal drip related to allergies.
Over-the-counter antacids
:
Antacids
may help with acid reflux that causes heartburn and sore throats. Other steps, like avoiding big meals right before bedtime, may help.
Prescription mouthwash
: For a severe sore throat related to conditions like
cancer
, your provider may prescribe a special
mouthwash
(sometimes called “magic mouthwash”) that contains a mix of a numbing agent (like lidocaine), Benadryl® and Maalox®.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a sore throat?
Usually, a sore throat isn’t a serious medical issue. Instead, it’s typically an unpleasant sign that you’re sick with a cold or the flu.
Most sore throats related to a viral infection go away within three to 10 days. If your sore throat lasts longer than this, it may be a symptom of a condition that requires prescription medications or other treatments your healthcare provider can recommend.
Prevention
How can I prevent a sore throat?
Viral infections like colds and the flu often cause pharyngitis. You can reduce your chances of getting a sore throat by protecting yourself against these common infections. You can:
Stay up to date on vaccinations for the flu and
COVID-19
.
Wash your hands
often, using soap and water or alcohol-based sanitizers.
Avoid sharing food, drinks or utensils.
Avoid people with colds or other contagious
respiratory infections
.
Avoid being around others when you’re sick to reduce the risk of spreading infectious diseases.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
It may take some time to cure what’s causing your pharyngitis. In the meantime, there are
at-home remedies
you can try to relieve your sore throat. You can:
Take over-the-counter pain relievers
.
Acetaminophen (Tylenol®)
,
naproxen sodium (Aleve®)
and
ibuprofen (Advil®)
are all options that may help with a sore throat.
Suck on throat lozenges or hard candy.
This increases spit (
saliva
) production, which adds soothing moisture to your throat. But never try this with children under 5, who may choke.
Try ice or cold foods
. You can also try sucking on ice chips or popsicles to ease sore throat pain.
Drink soothing liquids
. Drinking tea with lemon and honey, broth or bouillon may help dry, scratchy throats. If coolness feels better on the back of your throat, try sipping ice water.
Gargle saltwater
. Gargling a mixture that’s ½ teaspoon of salt per 1 cup of water can ease inflammation and irritation in your throat.
Use a humidifier or vaporizer
. Adding moisture to your environment, especially to your bedroom when you’re sleeping, helps ease dry throats.
Rest your voice
. If your throat is sore from shouting, screaming, singing or even talking a lot, resting your voice may help.
Avoid irritants
. Avoid exposure to
secondhand smoke
, and steer clear of spicy foods and very hot liquids that may irritate your sore throat. If you smoke, work with your healthcare provider to quit.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if your sore throat lasts longer than a week. Reach out if you have any of the following symptoms:
Severe throat pain.
Trouble breathing or
swallowing
.
A fever, especially if it’s over 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius).
A visible bulge in the back of your throat.
Blood
in your saliva or phlegm.
A
rash
anywhere on your body.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask include:
What’s causing my sore throat?
What symptoms will let me know if it’s getting worse?
Will I need treatment, or can I manage my sore throat at home?
How long will my sore throat last?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe your sore throat started with a tickle in the back of your throat. Now that tickle is a pain — literally — and it hurts a lot when you swallow or talk. Most cases of pharyngitis happen because you have a viral infection that’ll run its course in a week or so. But you may need antibiotics if the soreness stems from a bacterial infection. Fortunately, there are many home remedies to ease sore throat pain.
There are instances, though, when pharyngitis may be a symptom of a serious medical issue. If you have a sore throat that lasts more than a week or keeps coming back, talk to a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have conditions affecting your ears, nose and throat, you want experts you can trust. Cleveland Clinic’s otolaryngology specialists can help.
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/22/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment