Rectovaginal Fistula (RVF): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Rectovaginal Fistula
Advertisement
Advertisement
Rectovaginal Fistula
A rectovaginal fistula (RVF) is an abnormal connection (hole) between your vagina and rectum. It causes poop and gas to leak out of your vagina. Several situations can lead to RVFs, but childbirth injuries are the most common cause. Surgery can often treat RVFs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Rectovaginal Fistula?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Rectovaginal Fistula?
A rectovaginal fistula (RVF) is a tunnel-like opening that develops between your
vagina
and
rectum
inside your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your rectum is the part of your
digestive system
that connects your
large intestine (colon)
to your
anus
(butthole). It holds poop and gas until your body releases them out of your anus. Your vagina is right next to your rectum inside your body.
A rectovaginal fistula happens when damage to tissue between your vagina and rectum causes the tissue to die. A hole (
fistula
) then forms, connecting your rectum to your vagina. This opening lets poop and gas enter your vagina. RVFs can range in size and shape.
RVFs can cause pain and other symptoms that disrupt your daily life. But they’re usually treatable, often with surgery. Your healthcare team will help you get the treatments and resources you need.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of rectovaginal fistula
The most common symptoms of a rectovaginal fistula include:
Foul-smelling
vaginal discharge
Gas
or poop that leaks out of your vagina
Painful intercourse
(dyspareunia)
Pelvic pain
Rectal bleeding
or
vaginal bleeding
It’s important to see your healthcare provider if you have these symptoms. RVFs require treatment to avoid complications.
Rectovaginal fistula causes
In general, a rectovaginal fistula forms when there’s damage to tissue between your vagina and rectum that results in the death of that tissue. This forms a hole, or a fistula. Rectovaginal fistulas can develop in a matter of days. Or they may form over several years.
Advertisement
Many situations can lead to the formation of a rectovaginal fistula. Specific causes include:
Childbirth injuries
.
Vaginal tears
and
episiotomies
that don’t heal properly are the most common causes of RVFs.
Diverticulitis
complications
.
Inflammation
and
abscesses
of the wall of a diverticulum (a small pocket in your colon) can break it down. This can affect your vaginal wall, as well, leading to RVF.
Inflammatory bowel diseases
(IBDs)
. Chronic IBDs, like
Crohn’s disease
and
ulcerative colitis
, can damage rectal and vaginal tissue, resulting in RVF.
Abdominal or pelvic surgeries
. Accidental damage to your vagina or rectum during surgery or poor healing post-surgery can lead to RVF. Examples include
J-pouch surgery
,
pelvic organ prolapse
surgery and
hemorrhoidectomy
.
Cancer
.
Cervical cancer
or
colorectal (colon) cancer
can lead to RVF. These fistulas are also called malignant fistulas.
Radiation therapy
to your pelvic region
. Radiation causes long-term tissue inflammation with poor healing, which could lead to RVF.
Intercourse or foreign body injury
. Injury to your vaginal wall and/or rectum during sex or due to an object that isn’t supposed to be there can lead to RVF.
Infections
. Anal gland or
Bartholin gland
infections can sometimes lead to RVF.
In very rare cases, you can be born with a rectovaginal fistula. Healthcare providers call this a congenital RVF.
Complications of a rectovaginal fistula
Complications of a rectovaginal fistula can include:
An abscess or infection, which could become life-threatening if untreated
Fistula recurrence (it comes back) after treatment
Irritation in your vagina,
vulva
,
perineum
or anus
Recurrent
urinary tract infections
(UTIs) or
vaginitis
(vaginal infections)
Living with a rectovaginal fistula can also affect your mental health and decrease your quality of life. It’s important to see a mental health specialist if RVF is causing distress or resulting in social isolation.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll likely do a
physical exam
and
pelvic exam
.
Your healthcare provider will then recommend specific tests to diagnose a rectovaginal fistula. These tests can also find the cause (if unknown) and the extent of the RVF.
Diagnostic tests for rectovaginal fistulas may include:
Endoscopy
, like
colposcopy
and/or proctosigmoidoscopy, to find the fistula
An examination while you’re under
anesthesia
to better evaluate the RVF
Complete blood count
(CBC) and
urinalysis
to check for infections
Pelvic
MRI
or
CT scan
to take images of your vagina and rectum
Biopsy
if your provider thinks cancer may be the cause
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for a rectovaginal fistula?
Resolving RVF involves treating:
The cause
The fistula itself
Any related complications
Together, you and your healthcare provider will decide the best treatment plan for your situation.
Providers typically start with conservative, nonsurgical treatment for small RVFs. This may include:
Antibiotics
for infections
Medications for the underlying condition, like IBD
Stool-bulking fiber supplements
Wound care and debridement (removing dead, damaged or infected tissue)
Most
women
need surgery to close the opening. There are many ways to do the surgery. For example, your provider may use your tissue or lab-made tissue to repair it. Your provider will determine the best surgical approach for your situation. They’ll explain the process in detail before surgery.
If the fistula is large or complex, you may need a temporary
colostomy
. This procedure diverts poop away from your large intestine and rectum until the fistula heals. Poop leaves your body through a surgical opening in your abdomen called a stoma. It collects in a bag that you change regularly. You’ll need another surgery later to reconnect your intestine and close the stoma.
Recovery time
In most cases, you can return to your routine a week or two after surgery. But it can take several months for the fistula to heal completely. Your recovery will depend on certain factors, like the fistula’s size and how extensive the surgery was.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll need follow-up appointments after you start treatment or get surgery to make sure the fistula is healing. Let your healthcare provider know if your symptoms get worse or you develop new symptoms.
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What complications could occur from surgery?
How can I take care of the fistula at home?
Can I take steps to prevent getting another rectovaginal fistula?
Am I at risk for other types of vaginal fistulas?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Your prognosis (outlook) depends on several factors, like:
The size and severity of the RVF
The cause of the RVF
Your overall health
The type of treatment or surgery you get
In general, complex RVFs are more difficult to treat than simple ones. You may need more than one surgery. Your healthcare provider can give you a better idea of what to expect.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe you’d never heard of a fistula before. But since you got diagnosed with a rectovaginal fistula, it’s all you can think about. RVFs can disrupt your daily routine and even your sense of self. Thankfully, treatment can help you regain control over the parts of your body that seem to have a mind of their own. Still, recovery may take time. Lean on your healthcare provider for guidance and support.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment