What Is an Ocularist: Definition & Responsibilities
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Ocularist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ocularist
You still need eye care if you have eye removal after an injury or disease, or were born with a congenital eye difference. That’s where ocularists come in. They specialize in making and maintaining prosthetic eyes. The care they provide is essential to helping people feel comfortable with prosthetic eyes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
What is an ocularist?
An ocularist is an
eye care specialist
who provides care for people needing
prosthetic eyes
due to injury, infection or congenital disease (present at birth). Losing or damaging an eye can be a traumatic experience, and the need for a prosthetic can be overwhelming. Ocularists offer long-term care. They collaborate with your healthcare team to create or restore a more natural facial appearance with the goal of enhancing your health-related quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What do ocularists do?
Ocularists are specially trained technicians. They’re a part of your healthcare team if you need a prosthetic eye after partial (
evisceration
) or total (
enucleation
) removal of your eye. They can also assist after surgeries for conditions like
microphthalmia or anophthalmia
, which involve having underdeveloped or absent eye development, respectively.
Ocularists work closely with other eye specialists, like
ophthalmologists
, who perform eye surgery, and oculoplastic surgeons. After removal of your eye, you typically wait at least six weeks to allow for healing prior to receiving a prosthetic.
Getting a prosthetic eye involves several steps and ongoing care for many years, including:
Fitting
. Ocularists take measurements of your eye socket to provide examples of prosthetic eyes and help design one that fits you perfectly.
Fabricating
. This includes the physical process of making the eye. Some ocularists specialize in using different materials, ranging from acrylic to silicone to cryolite glass.
Appearance
. One of the most important parts of the ocularist’s job is making prosthetic eyes look as natural as possible. This includes carefully painting the artificial eye so it matches the color of your other eye.
Cleaning and maintaining
. Ocularists teach you how to insert, remove and care for your prosthetic eye. Regular cleaning is important to maximize implant lifespan and prevent infections. You should see an ocularist at least once a year (more often for children) to check the fit, clean the eye and ensure the surrounding tissues remain healthy.
Advertisement
How many ocularists are there in the United States?
The American Society of Ocularists’ national directory lists 165 members in the United States, out of a total of 287 worldwide. The National Examining Board of Ocularists (NEBO), a U.S.- and Canada-based organization, oversees and maintains a list of 165 Board Certified Ocularists (BCOs) worldwide.
Can ocularists prescribe medication?
No, ocularists aren’t doctors and can’t prescribe medications. But they can refer you to eye specialists, like ophthalmologists, who can.
Who cleans prosthetic eyes?
Ocularists can clean prosthetic eyes, but other eye care specialists may also offer this service. Your eye care specialist, like an ophthalmologist,
optometrist
, or
optician
on an eye specialist’s staff, can tell you if they can provide this service or refer you to someone who does.
What does it take to become an ocularist?
To become an ocularist in the United States or Canada, you need to complete an apprenticeship recognized by the American Society of Ocularists. You must have a high school diploma to begin. Then, you’ll complete an internship, which can follow one of two paths:
Supervised
. You’ll train under a board-certified ocularist (BADO) for at least 10,000 hours (about five years) and complete 750 credits of coursework. You’ll also need to pass exams and attend two meetings of the American Society of Ocularists.
Unsupervised
. If you follow this path, you’ll need to complete 16,000 hours of training (about eight years) and 750 credits of coursework through the College of Ocularistry. You’ll also need to pass exams and attend two society meetings.
Training to become an ocularist is a combination of science and art. You’ll study subjects like biology, anatomy, psychology, materials science, optics and dermatology. You’ll also learn artistic skills like painting, sculpture and photography. You’ll develop effective communication skills as well.
To become a board-certified ocularist (BCO), you’ll also need to take the NEBO exam. To maintain your certification, you’ll need to earn 200 course credits every four years.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have a prosthetic eye, it’s important to feel comfortable about how it looks and feels. When you talk to someone face-to-face, you often look at each other’s eyes. Feeling comfortable with your prosthetic eye can help you feel more at ease in these situations knowing they’ll likely be looking at your eyes, too. That’s why seeing an ocularist can make a huge difference. Their job is to make sure your prosthetic looks natural, feels comfortable and lasts a long time. Regular follow-ups also help ensure everything stays in good shape.
If you’re thinking about becoming an ocularist, there’s a nationwide need for this profession. It’s a career where you can make a big difference in people’s lives, while also finding rewarding and in-demand work.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/04/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment