Hemoglobinopathy: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hemoglobinopathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hemoglobinopathy
“Hemoglobinopathy” is an umbrella term for a group of inherited blood disorders. Common symptoms are fatigue, shortness of breath, and cold hands and feet. Leaving hemoglobinopathies untreated can lead to serious complications, including death. But early detection and treatment can help manage your symptoms so you can live a long and full life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is hemoglobinopathy?
Hemoglobinopathy is a group of inherited
blood disorders
that affects your hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is a protein in your
red blood cells
. It helps carry oxygen throughout your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hemoglobinopathy runs in families. It happens because of a
genetic variation
(gene change) that your biological parents can pass down to you. It’s the most common type of inherited blood disorder, affecting millions of people worldwide. By definition, the term “hemoglobinopathy” includes all inherited hemoglobin disorders. Researchers have identified over 600 types.
When your body makes abnormal hemoglobin — or doesn’t make enough of it — it can cause symptoms like pain, fatigue and organ damage. Early detection is key. That’s one reason healthcare providers screen newborns for hemoglobinopathies immediately after birth.
Hemoglobinopathy isn’t
curable
. But you can manage symptoms and avoid complications with treatment.
Types of hemoglobinopathy
There are hundreds of types of hemoglobinopathies. Many of their names contain letters. These letters represent different variants of the hemoglobin protein (and the order in which researchers discovered them). This gives healthcare providers information about the specific genetic variation responsible for the abnormality.
Some of the most common hemoglobinopathies are:
Hemoglobin C disease
: Hemoglobin C replaces normal hemoglobin
Hemoglobin E disease
: Hemoglobin E replaces normal hemoglobin
Hemoglobin D disease
: Hemoglobin D replaces normal hemoglobin
Hemoglobin SC disease
: You inherit one sickle cell gene and one hemoglobin C gene
Hemoglobin SD disease
: You inherit one sickle cell gene and one hemoglobin D gene
Hemoglobin SE disease
: You inherit one sickle cell gene and one hemoglobin E gene
Sickle cell disease
: Your red blood cells are sickle-shaped
Thalassemias
: Your body doesn’t make enough hemoglobin
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hemoglobinopathy?
Symptoms of hemoglobinopathy include:
Cold hands
and
feet
Dark pee
Fatigue
Growth delays (in children)
Jaundice
Pale skin
Shortness of breath
Sleeping longer than usual
Swelling
in your hands and feet
Babies with severe hemoglobinopathies often have symptoms soon after they’re born. Other times, symptoms don’t appear until childhood. Adults with hemoglobinopathy may experience these symptoms during a flare-up (like a
sickle cell crisis
).
What causes hemoglobinopathy?
Hemoglobinopathy happens when you have a gene variation affecting your hemoglobin. You get the gene change from one or both of your biological parents.
Risk factors
You’re more likely to have hemoglobinopathy if you:
Are of African, Mediterranean, Southeast Asian or West Asian descent
Have a biological parent or sibling with hemoglobinopathy
Live in an area where newborn hemoglobinopathy screenings aren’t routine
If you have hemoglobinopathy, you’re more likely to have a child with the disorder.
Complications of hemoglobinopathy
Complications of hemoglobinopathy include:
Anemia
. Some forms of hemoglobinopathy can lower your red blood cell count and cause anemia.
Frequent infections
. Hemoglobinopathy can cause a compromised
immune system
, which can increase your risk for
infection
.
Organ damage
. Hemoglobinopathy reduces
oxygen levels in your blood
. Over time, a lack of oxygen-rich blood can lead to tissue and organ damage.
Pain episodes
. Some types of hemoglobinopathies, like sickle cell disease, can cause blockages in your
blood vessels
. This restricts blood flow and results in pain.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hemoglobinopathy diagnosed?
Healthcare providers use several different tests to diagnose hemoglobinopathy, including:
Complete blood count (CBC)
. This is typically the first blood test your provider will do. It tells them information about your blood cells, like how many of each type you have.
Genetic testing
. Your healthcare provider can do this test to identify specific gene variations.
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
. This test separates hemoglobin molecules from your blood sample to see if they’re abnormal.
Iron studies
. Your provider might do this test to find out if you have
iron-deficiency anemia
.
Newborn screening
. Many areas routinely test newborn babies for hemoglobinopathy, including Canada and most of the U.S.
Prenatal testing
. You can have this test done during pregnancy to see if the fetus has hemoglobinopathy.
Management and Treatment
How is hemoglobinopathy treated?
Hemoglobinopathy treatments include:
Blood transfusions
. Some hemoglobinopathies, like thalassemia and sickle cell disease, affect the amount of hemoglobin in your blood. You may need a blood transfusion so you have normal hemoglobin levels.
Folic acid
. These supplements may be able to boost red blood cell production.
Gene therapy
. Scientists take affected cells from your body, use special tools to fix them and then, put them back into your body. It’s like rewriting the instructions in your genes.
Iron chelation therapy
. If you have extra iron in your body, iron chelation therapy can remove it. You take this medication by mouth or injection.
Oxygen therapy
. Your healthcare provider may recommend oxygen therapy in combination with other treatments. The goal is to boost oxygen in your blood and reduce pain episodes.
Stem cell transplant
. This replaces abnormal red blood cells with healthy ones. This isn’t common because it can be difficult to find suitable donors. It also raises your risk of
graft vs. host disease (GvHD)
.
Advertisement
Treatments vary depending on your unique situation. You may not need treatment if you have a very mild form of hemoglobinopathy. Be sure to ask your healthcare provider what’s best based on the type of hemoglobinopathy you have.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
It depends on the type and severity of hemoglobinopathy you have. Most people feel better in a few weeks or months after starting treatment.
Hemoglobinopathy is a lifelong condition. You’ll need regular check-ups and monitoring. Your healthcare provider can help you find ways to ease your symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for people with hemoglobinopathy?
Your outlook is good with the right treatment. Over
90%
of people with hemoglobinopathy survive into adulthood.
Without treatment,
many hemoglobinopathies result in death
during the first few years of life. Early diagnosis is key and can help you avoid serious complications.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
No, you can’t prevent hemoglobinopathy because you inherit it. But you can manage your symptoms with appropriate treatment.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Living with hemoglobinopathy can be challenging. Taking care of yourself can reduce your risk for pain and other side effects.
Here are some general guidelines:
Drink lots of water
.
Be physically active, but don’t overdo it.
Eat foods that are
rich in iron
, vitamins and minerals.
Manage your
stress
with
meditation
,
yoga
or other forms of
mindfulness
.
Wash your hands
frequently to help reduce your risk of infection.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should tell a healthcare provider if you experience fatigue, shortness of breath, pale skin or other symptoms.
If you’ve already been diagnosed with hemoglobinopathy, call your provider if your symptoms come back or get worse. They may need to adjust your treatment.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you or your child have hemoglobinopathy, you might want to ask your healthcare provider:
What specific type of hemoglobinopathy do I have?
What kind of treatment do you recommend?
Will I need to see other specialists for treatment?
Should I adjust my diet or exercise routine?
What are the chances my children will get this condition?
Do you have additional resources?
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 or head to your nearest emergency room if you have:
Chest pain
Dizziness
Fever
over 103 degrees Fahrenheit (39.4 degrees Celsius)
Severe pain that doesn’t get better with medication
Signs of
stroke
, like sudden weakness or
slurred speech
Additional Common Questions
How does hemoglobinopathy affect my A1C?
Hemoglobinopathies can cause inaccurate
A1C
results. Depending on the genetic variant you have, you might get falsely low or high readings.
If you have hemoglobinopathy, your healthcare provider can recommend a testing method that minimizes this issue.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that you or your child have a lifelong blood disorder can be worrisome. It’s natural to wonder how hemoglobinopathy will affect your life. Will you have chronic pain? How will this disease affect your child? The good news is that treatment can manage symptoms so you can have the best health possible. And the best thing you can do is talk to your provider. Don’t wait. Early diagnosis and treatment are key to long-lasting health.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Living with a noncancerous blood disorder can be exhausting. But there’s hope. Cleveland Clinic’s benign hematology experts provide personalized care and support.
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/06/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials