Urethritis: Causes, Symptoms, Pain & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Urethritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Urethritis
Urethritis is a common condition that causes inflammation in your urethra. Infections are the most common cause of urethritis. But you can also get it from irritants or trauma. Treatment usually includes antibiotics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Urethritis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Urethritis?
Anyone can get urethritis, which can cause painful, itchy or uncomfortable symptoms, especially when you pee.
Urethritis (yoor-uh-THRI-tis) is inflammation in your
urethra
. Your urethra is the tube that takes pee from your
urinary bladder
to the outside of your body. Typically, a bacterial infection causes urethritis.
Sexually transmitted infections
(STIs) are the most common type of infections that cause it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Urethritis is common. Anyone can get it. About
4 million
people in the U.S. get it each year. And throughout the world, around 151 million people get it annually. These numbers may be low. It’s possible to have urethritis without having any symptoms (asymptomatic).
Types of urethritis
The different types of urethritis include:
Gonococcal urethritis
: Gonorrhea causes gonococcal urethritis. There are about 600,000 new cases of gonococcal urethritis each year in the U.S.
Nongonococcal urethritis
(NGU)
: Something other than gonorrhea causes NGU. It could be another type of STI or repeated irritation in your urethra. There are about 3 million new cases of NGU each year in the U.S.
Males
are more likely to have symptoms of NGU than females.
Nonspecific urethritis
: This type doesn’t have a known cause.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of urethritis
Signs and symptoms of urethritis include:
Blood in your pee (hematuria)
Itchiness at the tip of your urethra
Pain during sexual intercourse (dyspareunia)
Pain while peeing (dysuria)
Pelvic pain
Pus, blood or a cloudy yellow or white fluid (discharge) may leak from the tip of your
penis
. You may also have blood in your semen (hematospermia).
How do you get urethritis?
STIs are a common cause of urethritis. Besides gonorrhea, other STIs that can cause urethritis include:
Advertisement
Chlamydia
Genital herpes
Trichomoniasis
(trich)
Other urethritis causes include:
Activities that put pressure on your urethra, like riding a bicycle or some sexual acts
Irritants like spermicides, scented tampons and pads, douches, scented soaps and lubricants (lube)
Squeezing your penis tightly
Trauma to your urethra, like an injury or the use of a urinary catheter or sounds for
urethral dilation
Yeast infections
Is it a UTI?
Not always. But
urinary tract infections
(UTIs) can sometimes cause urethritis.
Is it contagious?
Urethritis itself isn’t contagious. But the infections that cause it can be contagious. If an STI causes urethritis, you should get treatment for it as soon as possible. Anyone else you have sexual intercourse with should also get treatment. If only one person gets treatment, you may keep passing the STI to each other.
Risk factors
You’re more likely to get urethritis if you:
Are between 15 and 24
Have more than one sexual partner
Have unprotected sexual intercourse
Complications of urethritis
Without treatment, urethritis can spread and affect other parts of your
urinary system
and
male
or
female
reproductive systems. You’re at a greater risk of:
Bladder infection
Cervix infection
Epididymis inflammation (epididymitis)
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Prostate infection
Testicle infection
It can also cause:
A fertilized egg to implant outside of your uterus (ectopic pregnancy)
An abscess in your urethra
Infertility
Reactive arthritis
Scar tissue in your urethra
Swelling in your penis
Swelling in the
lymph
channels of your penis
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose it
A healthcare provider will review your medical history and ask you questions about your symptoms and sexual history. They’ll also perform a physical exam of your genitals (which may include a
digital rectal exam
for males and a
pelvic exam
for females).
They’ll also recommend tests, like:
Blood tests
Gonorrhea test
or other STI tests
Pee tests (urinalysis)
These tests help confirm a urethritis diagnosis. They also help find out if a certain type of infection is the cause.
Management and Treatment
How is urethritis treated?
Antibiotics are the main treatment for urethritis. You may only need one antibiotic, or you may need a combination of different ones. Antibiotics that healthcare providers commonly prescribe to treat urethritis include:
Azithromycin (Zithromax®)
Cefixime (Suprax®)
Ceftriaxone (Ceftrisol Plus®, Rocephin®)
Doxycycline (Acticlate®, Doxal®, Morgidox®)
If they believe you have an infection, your provider may start you on antibiotics even before getting your test results back. They may also suggest taking a pain reliever.
Advertisement
Can it resolve on its own?
For most infectious causes, no. But for some noninfectious causes, it may go away on its own. Your healthcare provider may recommend that you:
Stop using products that have irritating chemicals
Avoid tight clothing
Cut back on activities that cause irritation
Recovery time
You should start to feel better a few days after taking antibiotics. Usually, you’ll need to take the medications for a week to 10 days.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of urethritis. Contact them again if you’ve already started treatment and:
Still have symptoms after a week
Feel worse
Develop new symptoms
Have a bad reaction to your medication
They may recommend additional tests or prescribe a different antibiotic.
During your appointment, you may wish to ask the following questions:
If I don’t have urethritis, what other condition could be causing my symptoms?
How long do I need to take my antibiotics?
Do I need to take my antibiotics at a particular time of day?
Are there any directions for storing my antibiotics?
When do you think I’ll feel better?
Should I schedule a follow-up appointment?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have urethritis?
With proper diagnosis and treatment, the prognosis for urethritis is good. Make sure to take all your medicine, even if you feel better. If you don’t finish your full course of antibiotics, the infection may come back and be harder to treat.
Advertisement
Tell your sexual partner(s) if you have urethritis. They must also take antibiotics. If only one of you receives treatment, you can pass the infection back and forth to each other.
Can I have sex if I have it?
Avoid having sexual intercourse until you and your partner(s) receive treatment and no longer have symptoms.
How can you soothe an irritated urethra?
If you have urethritis, you can help relieve discomfort and pain by:
Taking over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers to help with pain
Drinking lots of water
Peeing when you need to — don’t try to stop yourself, even if it hurts
Taking a
sitz bath
two to three times per day
Prevention
Can it be prevented?
You can help lower your risk of developing urethritis by:
Reducing your risk of STIs by using condoms and limiting your number of sexual partners
Getting regular STI tests if you’re sexually active
Avoiding chemicals or activities that may irritate your urethra
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be tough talking about your private areas. But if you’re having unprotected sexual intercourse and develop urethritis symptoms, you should make an appointment with a healthcare provider. They’ll ask questions about your sex life, which may feel uncomfortable. But a provider’s job is to help, not to judge. Be honest with them about your sexual activity so they can provide the best diagnosis and treatment. And if you have urethritis, tell your partner(s) so they can get treatment and avoid giving it back to you or spreading it to others.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment