Marfan Syndrome: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Marfan Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Marfan Syndrome
Marfan syndrome affects the connective tissue that holds your body together. Since the syndrome affects various parts of your body, you’ll need a team of healthcare providers to manage it. Close monitoring and treatments can help you live a healthy life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Marfan Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Marfan Syndrome?
Many people with Marfan syndrome develop changes in their heart and blood vessels.
Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a
genetic condition
that makes your
connective tissue
too loose and elastic. Connective tissue typically provides strength and flexibility to many structures in your body. Because of this, Marfan syndrome can affect several body systems, including your
heart
,
blood vessels
,
eyes
,
bones
and
joints
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers call Marfan syndrome a “variable expression” genetic condition. This means not everyone has the same symptoms. The signs and symptoms vary widely in severity and when they start.
Marfan syndrome is present at birth. But you may not get a diagnosis until you’re a teen or young adult. It’s one of the most common inherited connective tissue diseases, affecting 1 in 3,000 to 5,000 people. That’s 0.02% to 0.03% of people.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Marfan syndrome
The two main features of Marfan syndrome are
aortic root aneurysm
(widening or bulging of your
aorta
near your aortic valve) and dislocated
eye lens
(
ectopia lentis
).
These two issues can lead to symptoms like:
A heartbeat that feels like it’s skipping a beat or fluttering (
heart palpitations
)
A heartbeat that feels too hard or
too fast
Eye pain
Shortness of breath
Vision changes
, like
astigmatism
and extreme
nearsightedness
But Marfan syndrome can affect several other parts of your body, causing other symptoms. For example, physical features of Marfan syndrome may include:
A long, narrow face
Arms, legs, fingers and toes that seem too long for the rest of your body
Crowded teeth
Curved spine (
scoliosis
)
Flat feet
Joints that are weak and easily become
dislocated
Stretch marks
, even without weight changes
Sunken chest (
pectus excavatum
) or protruding chest (
pectus carinatum
)
Tall and thin body build
Advertisement
Complications of this condition
Marfan syndrome can cause several complications affecting your heart, eyes and lungs.
Cardiovascular
complications are the most common complications of Marfan syndrome (MFS). They can include:
Aortic dissection
. This is a tear in the inner layer of your aorta’s wall.
Heart valve disease
. MFS can cause valve tissue to become weak and stretch.
Enlarged heart
. Your heart muscle may enlarge and weaken over time.
Arrhythmia
. An abnormal heart rhythm in MFS is often related to
mitral valve prolapse
.
Brain aneurysms
. This is a bulge in a weak area of a blood vessel in or around your brain.
Eye complications may include:
Cataracts
Glaucoma
Retinal detachment
The changes in lung tissue that occur with MFS increase your risk for:
Asthma
Bronchitis
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Collapsed lung (pneumothorax)
Emphysema
Pneumonia
What causes Marfan syndrome?
A
genetic change
(variant) causes Marfan syndrome. More specifically, there’s a change in the gene —
fibrillin-1
or
FBN1
— that gives your cells instructions to make fibrillin. Fibrillin is a protein that’s the main component of elastic fibers in your connective tissue.
In most cases, you inherit Marfan syndrome from a biological parent. The syndrome has an
autosomal dominant inheritance
. This means you only need to receive the altered gene from one parent to inherit the condition. People with Marfan syndrome have a 50% chance of passing on the disorder to each of their children.
In 25% of Marfan syndrome cases, a new gene change occurs due to an unknown cause.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Marfan syndrome
Marfan syndrome can affect tissues all over your body. So, you may need a team of healthcare providers to confirm the diagnosis and develop a treatment plan.
To start, they’ll:
Ask about your medical history
Do a
physical exam
to look for typical signs of the syndrome
Ask about your symptoms
Ask about biological family members who may have had health problems related to MFS
Healthcare providers typically use a set of criteria to diagnose MFS called the Ghent nosology. They may recommend many tests to help confirm the diagnosis or rule out other conditions, like:
Computed tomography
(CT) scan
Chest X-ray
Electrocardiogram
Echocardiogram
Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI)
A
genetic test
(blood test) can look for changes in
FBN1
, the gene that’s responsible for most cases of Marfan syndrome. But the results of genetic tests for Marfan syndrome aren’t always clear. This test can also look for other genetic conditions, like
Loeys-Dietz syndrome
, that cause similar symptoms.
Management and Treatment
How is Marfan syndrome treated?
There’s no cure for Marfan syndrome. But various treatments and strategies can help manage your symptoms and prevent complications, like:
Medications
Routine monitoring
Physical activity guidance
Surgery
Advertisement
You’ll need a treatment plan that’s specific to your health issues.
Medications
Certain medications can help prevent or manage complications, including:
Beta-blockers
. Beta-blockers prevent or slow down the enlargement of your aorta. Healthcare providers recommend beta-blocker therapy at an early age for MFS. If you can’t take them because of asthma or side effects, your provider can prescribe a
calcium channel blocker
.
Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)
. ARBs may also slow the rate of aorta enlargement in people with MFS.
If you get
heart valve surgery
for MFS, you’ll need to be on an
anticoagulant
medication for the rest of your life.
Monitoring
You’ll need routine medical appointments to monitor your:
Heart and blood vessels — in particular, the size of your aorta
Eyes
Skeletal system
This way, your healthcare team can track changes and catch any possible complications as soon as they appear. Your team will tell you how often you need these appointments.
Monitoring for MFS usually involves imaging tests, like:
CT scans
Echocardiograms
MRI scans
Physical activity guidance
Intense physical activity can strain your aorta and other connective tissues impacted by MFS. Because of this, you’ll work closely with a
physical therapist
to find exercises and sports that are safe for you.
Advertisement
Providers generally recommend low- to moderate-intensity exercise for most people with MFS. But you may need less if you have aortic root or valve replacement.
In general, you’ll likely need to avoid:
Activities involving the
Valsalva maneuver
Contact sports
Exercise to exhaustion
Isometric exercises
, like planks and wall sits
Heart surgery
The goal of
heart surgery
for Marfan syndrome is to prevent your aorta from dissecting or rupturing and to treat valve problems. Together, you and your healthcare team will decide if surgery is right for you based on several factors.
The most common surgeries and procedures for MFS include:
Aortic valve repair
or
replacement
Ascending aortic aneurysm repair
Mitral valve repair
or
replacement
Thoracic endovascular aortic repair
If you need surgery, you should aim to choose a major health system that’s experienced in the type of surgery you’re getting. Your surgical team should be familiar with Marfan syndrome, as well.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Marfan syndrome?
If you have Marfan syndrome, you can expect a lot of medical appointments and needing to have a thorough understanding of your body. MFS affects everyone differently, so you’ll have your own journey with the syndrome. You’ll work closely with your team of healthcare providers to manage MFS as it changes.
Advertisement
Due to increased knowledge of MFS and advanced medical treatments, people with MFS live much longer than they did before the 1970s. The life expectancy of someone with MFS is now almost the same as it is for people without MFS. But life expectancy is significantly lower in
males
than in females.
Cardiovascular impairment is still the most common cause of death in MFS. This is mainly due to sudden death in undiagnosed cases of MFS. It’s also more likely to affect people who get a late MFS diagnosis.
MFS and mental health
Several aspects of living with Marfan syndrome can impact your mental health and quality of life, like:
The
chronic nature
of MFS and the need for lifelong treatment
The ways MFS affects your appearance
Chronic pain
and
fatigue
Limits on physical activity, which are often social interactions
Family planning stressors
Because of this, you may be at higher risk of:
Anxiety
Depression
Experiencing
bullying
Social isolation
Caregivers
and family members of people with MFS are also at risk of these mental health issues.
Be sure to seek help from a mental health specialist (like a
psychologist
) if you’re experiencing distress related to MFS. Your mental health is just as important as your physical health. Joining a support group may also help.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Life with Marfan syndrome may feel like spinning through a revolving door of medical appointments, treatments and lifestyle changes. But all those check-ins can help prevent complications of Marfan syndrome so you can live the healthiest life possible. Your healthcare team will be by your side through it all. Lean on them for support and guidance. If you’re becoming overwhelmed, reach out to a mental health specialist for help.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment