Prolactinoma: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Prolactinoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Prolactinoma
Prolactinoma is a noncancerous tumor that makes extra prolactin. It can cause symptoms like infertility, irregular periods and milky nipple discharge. The good news is that prolactinoma is often treatable with medication and/or surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is prolactinoma?
Prolactinoma is a generally benign (noncancerous)
tumor
that forms in your
pituitary gland
and makes more
prolactin
— a
hormone
— than you need. About 50% of pituitary tumor (
pituitary adenoma
) cases are prolactinomas, making them the most common type of pituitary tumor.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Prolactin is mainly responsible for the development of mammary glands within
breast
tissue and
lactation
. It contributes to several other bodily processes as well. Prolactinomas cause higher-than-normal levels of prolactin in your blood (
hyperprolactinemia
), resulting in
infertility
and other issues.
The thought of having a tumor so close to your brain can be unsettling. You may breathe a little easier knowing that prolactinomas aren’t life-threatening. But they can cause unwanted health issues, so it’s important to seek care if you develop symptoms.
Types of prolactinomas
There are two main types of prolactinomas based on their size:
Microprolactinomas
: These tumors are very small — less than 1 centimeter or 3/8 of an inch in diameter. They represent at least half of prolactinoma cases and more commonly affect
females
.
Macroprolactinomas
: These tumors are larger than 3/8 of an inch or 1 centimeter in diameter. They’re more common in males and tend to occur at an older age.
Among people with prolactinomas, as many as 60% of males have macroprolactinomas, while 90% of females have microprolactinomas.
Symptoms and Causes
Anyone can develop prolactinoma. But females typically recognize the symptoms sooner than males..
What are the symptoms of prolactinoma?
The symptoms of prolactinoma can vary depending on how much prolactin it produces and its size.
Symptoms of prolactinoma in adults include:
Advertisement
Changes in
menstruation
that aren’t related to
menopause
, like
irregular periods
or no periods (
amenorrhea
)
Milky nipple discharge when not
pregnant
or
breastfeeding
(
galactorrhea
)
Vaginal dryness
, which can make penetrative sex
painful
Male infertility
or
female infertility
Low libido (sex drive)
Weight gain
Erectile dysfunction
(ED)
Enlarged breast tissue (
gynecomastia
) in males
Left untreated, high prolactin levels can also lead to
osteopenia
and/or
osteoporosis
.
If the prolactinoma is large (macroprolactinoma), it may also cause the following symptoms:
Headaches
Nausea and/or vomiting
Vision
changes, like
double vision
or decreased
peripheral vision
Sinus pain or pressure
Problems with your sense of smell (
dysosmia
)
Females often notice symptoms earlier due to changes in their periods or milky nipple discharge. But if you're hormonal medications — like
birth control pills
or
hormone replacement therapy
— you may not experience these symptoms.
Females who've reached menopause and males often have a delayed diagnosis.
Prolactinoma symptoms in children
It’s very rare for children to develop a prolactinoma. But if they do, prolactinomas typically cause delayed
puberty
.
What causes prolactinomas?
Researchers don’t know the exact cause of prolactinoma. Many cases happen randomly (sporadically). But certain genetic conditions can increase your risk for prolactinoma, including:
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)
type 1
MEN type 4
Familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA)
Diagnosis and Tests
How is prolactinoma diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history and do a
physical exam
. If you have milky nipple discharge, they may do a breast exam. They’ll likely recommend one or more of the following tests to diagnose prolactinoma:
Prolactin blood test
: If your
blood test
result reveals that you have higher-than-normal prolactin levels, your provider will likely recommend image testing to confirm or rule out a prolactinoma diagnosis.
MRI scan
or
CT scan
: These imaging tests can help your provider locate the tumor and determine its size. Providers prefer using MRI scans to diagnose prolactinomas, but a CT scan is the next option if an MRI scan isn’t safe for you.
Testosterone level blood test
: If you’re male, your provider will likely want to test your testosterone levels.
If you receive a prolactinoma diagnosis, your provider may recommend additional blood tests to check the levels of other pituitary hormones. If you have a large prolactinoma, your provider may recommend an
eye exam
to see if it’s affecting your vision.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for prolactinoma?
Prolactinomas are often highly treatable. Healthcare providers usually prescribe medication to treat them. In rare cases, your provider may recommend surgery or radiation therapy.
Advertisement
Prolactinoma medication
Medications called
dopamine agonists
are often very effective in shrinking prolactinoma tumors. They can also return your prolactin level to a healthy range.
The two dopamine agonists that healthcare providers prescribe to treat prolactinomas are
cabergoline
and
bromocriptine
. Cabergoline is often the first-choice medication because it’s more effective than bromocriptine and has fewer side effects.
Common side effects of dopamine agonists include nausea, vomiting and
dizziness
.
You’ll likely have to take either of these medications for at least two years to prevent the tumor from growing back, especially if it’s large. After two years, your provider may slowly reduce your dosage and then stop the medication if your prolactin levels are normal and the tumor is no longer visible.
Surgery for prolactinomas
Although it’s rare, you may need to have surgery to treat prolactinoma for any of the following reasons:
You’re having negative reactions to dopamine agonists.
The dopamine agonists aren’t working to shrink the tumor.
You take
antipsychotic medications
that interact with dopamine agonists.
You have a large prolactinoma and want to surgically remove it before trying to become pregnant.
Together, you and your healthcare provider will decide if surgery is the best option for you. Surgeons use two types of surgeries to remove prolactinomas, including:
Advertisement
Transsphenoidal surgery
: This is the most common surgery for prolactinomas. A surgeon makes an incision (small cut) at the back of your nasal cavity or under your upper lip to access your pituitary gland and the tumor.
Transcranial surgery
: For this surgery, a surgeon removes the tumor through an opening in your skull. They typically only use this type of surgery if the tumor is very large.
As with all surgeries, there are possible complications and risks associated with prolactinoma surgery. Your provider will go over these risks with you.
Radiation therapy for prolactinomas
Radiation therapy
is a rare third option for treating prolactinomas if medications and/or surgery don’t work to reduce your prolactin levels. Depending on the size and location of the tumor, you may receive one radiation dose or multiple doses over several weeks.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with prolactinoma?
The prognosis (outlook) for someone with prolactinoma is generally good. Medication (dopamine agonists) shrinks small prolactinoma tumors and brings prolactin levels back to normal for 4 out of 5 people receiving this treatment.
Prolactinoma surgery is also often successful. When an experienced surgeon performs the surgery, it corrects prolactin levels in about 90% of people with small tumors and in 50% of those who have large tumors. If you have a large tumor that can only be partially removed, medications can often return your prolactin levels to a normal range after surgery.
Advertisement
Prevention
Is prolactinoma preventable?
Unfortunately, there’s nothing you can do to prevent developing prolactinoma. A known risk factor is having an inherited (passed through your biological family) condition called multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1.
If you have a first-degree relative (biological sibling or parent) who has this condition, you may want to get
genetic counseling
to check if you have it as well. This may help screen for and catch prolactinoma in its early phases.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re taking medication to treat prolactinoma, you’ll likely be on it for a long time — typically, at least two years. If you’re taking medication, you’ll likely need to see your healthcare provider regularly to monitor the tumor and your prolactin levels.
If you experience concerning symptoms after starting medication, contact your provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out you have a tumor can be scary. The good news is that prolactinomas are almost always benign (noncancerous) and highly treatable — usually with medication. Know that your healthcare team will be by your side to answer any questions and ease any concerns.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hormonal conditions can be tricky to find and complicated to treat. The experts in endocrinology at Cleveland Clinic are here to provide the best care.
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/26/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes