Choroid Plexus Carcinoma: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Choroid Plexus Carcinoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Choroid Plexus Carcinoma
Choroid plexus carcinoma is a rare, aggressive brain cancer that most often affects infants and children. Treatments include surgery to remove the tumor and other treatments — like chemotherapy and radiation — to shrink any bits of tumor that couldn’t be removed or to help prevent it from coming back.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is choroid plexus carcinoma?
Choroid plexus carcinoma is a cancerous (malignant)
brain tumor
that forms in choroid plexus tissue. This tissue lines the fluid-filled spaces (ventricles) in your brain. It helps make cerebrospinal fluid, which cushions and protects your
brain
and
spinal cord
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Choroid plexus carcinoma is also known as a grade 3 choroid plexus tumor. These fast-growing
tumors
often spread in cerebrospinal fluid throughout the central
nervous system
, making them difficult to treat.
How common is choroid plexus carcinoma?
Choroid plexus carcinoma is rare. There are three types of choroid plexus tumors and, in general, they account for less than 1% of all brain tumors. Of the three types of choroid plexus tumors, choroid plexus carcinomas are the rarest and the only kind that’s
cancerous
. These tumors are more likely to affect infants and children.
Symptoms and Causes
What are choroid plexus carcinoma symptoms?
Signs and symptoms of choroid plexus carcinoma vary depending on the size and location of the tumor, but may include:
Extreme
fatigue
or sleepiness (lethargy).
Headaches
.
Irritability or fussiness.
Nausea
and
vomiting
.
Numbness or weakness.
Seizures
.
Vision problems like
blurred
or
double vision
(diplopia).
What causes choroid plexus carcinoma?
Medical experts aren’t sure why some people develop choroid plexus carcinoma. Cancers, in general, occur when a gene changes or
mutates
. This change causes diseased cells to rapidly grow and spread.
Risk factors
Anyone can develop choroid plexus carcinoma. But these factors may increase your risk:
Aicardi syndrome:
Children born with Aicardi syndrome have unusual brain changes that may increase their risk of choroid plexus tumors. An unknown gene change (mutation) causes this condition. It isn’t a condition passed down through families (inherited).
Li-Fraumeni syndrome:
People who have a rare genetic condition called Li-Fraumeni syndrome are more prone to developing cancers. Most people inherit a gene change from a biological parent that causes this condition.
Biological sex:
For unknown reasons,
women
are slightly more at risk.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose choroid plexus carcinoma?
Your healthcare provider will evaluate your symptoms and perform different tests to diagnose choroid plexus carcinoma.
Depending on your age or your child’s age, these tests may include:
Cognitive test
to assess brain function.
Neurological exam
to check vision,
hearing
,
balance issues
, reflexes and coordination.
Brain MRI
or other imaging tests to look for tumors and signs of
hydrocephalus
.
DNA test (genetic test)
to look for gene changes linked to conditions like Li-Fraumeni or Aicardi syndrome.
Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
to examine cerebrospinal fluid for cancer cells.
Management and Treatment
How is choroid plexus carcinoma treated?
Neurosurgeons
perform
brain surgery
to remove cancerous and noncancerous (benign) choroid plexus tumors. After surgery, a lab examines tissue samples from the tumor (
biopsy
) to check for cancer cells.
If a biopsy indicates choroid plexus carcinoma, you or your child may also need:
Chemotherapy
.
Radiation therapy
.
What complications can occur after surgery for choroid plexus carcinoma?
Common complications of brain surgery include:
Brain bleed
or swelling.
Confusion or
delirium
.
Headaches.
Infection.
Memory loss
or speech problems.
What new treatments are in development for choroid plexus carcinoma?
You or your child may benefit from promising new therapies under development (a clinical trial). These therapies include:
Immunotherapy
drugs that help your
immune system
find and destroy cancer cells.
Targeted therapy
drugs that target genetic changes that cause cancer.
What is recovery like after treatment for choroid plexus carcinoma?
Your recovery, including how quickly you can return to work, school and your usual activities, depends on several factors, like:
Your age and overall health.
Location and number of tumors.
Follow-up treatments like chemotherapy.
You should follow your healthcare provider’s recommendations to ensure a safe recovery. You or your child may get frequent brain imaging tests to watch the healing process.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook (prognosis) for someone with choroid plexus carcinoma?
The outlook (prognosis) for someone with choroid plexus carcinoma depends on:
Age.
Overall health.
Whether the surgeon can remove the whole tumor or only part of it.
Your outlook also depends on whether:
The tumor grows back after surgery (recurrence).
The cancer spreads (
metastasize
s) from the original tumor to other parts of your body.
Everyone is different. So, it’s best to ask your cancer care team what to expect in your specific case.
What is the survival rate for someone with choroid plexus carcinoma?
The five-year survival rate for people with choroid plexus carcinoma is
40% to 60%
. This means as many as 6 in 10 people are still alive five years after receiving the diagnosis. That rate decreases to 30% if you also have Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if you or your child experience:
Behavioral changes, like confusion or extreme irritability or fussiness.
Breathing problems.
Difficulty walking.
Seizures.
Severe headaches.
Vision or speech changes.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask?
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of brain tumor do I or does my child have?
What is the best treatment?
How often do I or does my child need imaging scans?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When your child gets a diagnosis of choroid plexus carcinoma, things will start to move very fast. You’ll meet a new team of neurologists and oncologists. Your calendar will fill with appointments, tests and procedures. And after the initial flurry of tests and surgery, there’s a whole lot of waiting.
And this waiting can be really hard. Try to find ways to be in the moment with your child, whether it’s learning a new song to sing as you snuggle them off to sleep, watching favorite movies together or finding a new activity you can both enjoy.
Being present in the moment can be difficult when you’re worried about the next scan, but no matter what that scan finds, you’ll be glad you took some time to push worry aside and just be together.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/01/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials