Microdontia (Small Teeth): Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Microdontia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Microdontia
Microdontia means “small teeth.” It’s a rare dental condition that can occur due to genetic or environmental factors. Microdontia doesn’t always require treatment. But if small teeth interfere with eating, speaking or other daily routines, a dentist can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Microdontia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Microdontia?
Microdontia causes one or more teeth to appear smaller than normal, often affecting dental alignment.
If you have one or more unusually small teeth, you might have microdontia (mahy-kruh-DON-shuh). Microdontia is a condition that can happen when something disrupts tooth development. Sometimes, small teeth are related to another condition. Other times, they’re just a different version of normal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Microdontia can affect any tooth, but some more commonly than others. The condition occurs in both baby (primary) and adult (permanent) teeth.
Microdontia is rare overall. Researchers estimate that it affects
1.5% to 2%
of the general population. It’s a bit more common in
females
.
Types of microdontia
Microdontia might involve one tooth, several teeth or all your
teeth
. It depends on the type of microdontia you have:
Localized microdontia
affects one to two teeth — most likely your upper lateral incisors. (Your lateral incisors are on either side of your two front teeth.) Most people with small teeth have this type of microdontia.
Relative microdontia
is when you have normal-sized teeth but an oversized jaw. Your larger jaw size makes your teeth appear smaller than they really are.
True microdontia
is when all your teeth are small. It’s the rarest type of microdontia.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of microdontia
Unusually small teeth are the main symptom of microdontia. Additional signs and symptoms may include:
Difficulty eating
Gaps between your teeth
Misaligned bite
Pronunciation difficulties
What are tiny teeth a symptom of?
Sometimes, microdontia is a stand-alone condition. But in some cases, it may be a symptom of:
Crouzon syndrome
Down syndrome
Ectodermal dysplasia
Hypopituitarism
Incontinentia pigmenti
Advertisement
Microdontia causes
Several things can cause microdontia, including:
Environmental factors
: Exposure to certain substances during
pregnancy
can affect
fetal development
, resulting in small teeth.
Genetics
: Microdontia can run in families. It’s also more common in people with certain
genetic conditions
, including certain types of
dwarfism
.
Hormonal factors
: Conditions like
hypothyroidism
and hypopituitarism can have an impact on tooth size and development.
Infections
: Getting a severe infection during pregnancy may interfere with tooth development in the fetus.
Nutritional deficiencies
: A lack of vitamins A, C and D may affect tooth development and result in microdontia.
Preterm birth
: Babies who are born early may have small teeth due to incomplete dental development.
Even if one or more of the above applies to you, it doesn’t necessarily mean that you (or your child) have microdontia. To get a better understanding of your situation, talk to your healthcare provider.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose microdontia
Healthcare providers can diagnose microdontia during a
physical examination
or
dental cleaning
. They may also need to take
X-rays
to check the health of your tooth roots.
Management and Treatment
How is microdontia treated?
Common microdontia treatments include dental procedures to make your small teeth appear larger. These treatments may include:
Bonding
: A dentist applies a tooth-colored material to the affected areas. This “bulks up” your teeth.
Crowns
: A dental crown (cap) covers your entire tooth. A dentist bonds it into place.
Veneers
: A dental veneer is similar to a crown, but it covers the front surface of your tooth.
Dentists
may use a combination of procedures to treat small teeth. Ask what they recommend in your situation.
Can braces fix microdontia?
Braces
can’t fix microdontia directly, but they may be part of your treatment plan. For example, if your small teeth cause crowding, braces might be used to create space before other treatments. Ask your dentist if braces are right for you.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Tell your dentist if you develop
jaw pain
or notice signs of
wear or tear
on your teeth. If you don’t already have a dentist, ask your
primary care physician
for recommendations.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have microdontia?
Microdontia doesn’t always need to be fixed. If you only have one or two small teeth, you might not need treatment at all. But if the condition disrupts your quality of life, consider talking to your provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having smaller-than-normal teeth isn’t something that always requires treatment. But if you have difficulty eating or speaking — or if you simply want your teeth to appear larger — talk to your dentist. They can discuss options with you and come up with a plan that fits your goals.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Dentistry plays an important role in oral health. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can design a personalized plan that will keep you smiling for the long haul.
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment