Who Is On Your Care Team?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Clinical Care Team
Advertisement
Advertisement
Clinical Care Team
A clinical care team manages every aspect of your hospital care. It includes doctors, nurses and other providers depending on your medical needs. Keep in mind that no matter who’s on your team, you’re the most important member. The team comes together around you and your needs. Don’t be afraid to speak up, ask questions and share your preferences.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What is a clinical care team?
Your clinical care team is a group of healthcare providers who work together to care for you at a hospital. Each provider brings unique knowledge and skills to the team. You may see some providers often — like the main doctor who leads the team (attending physician) or your nurses. Others you may only see once or twice. But they all contribute toward giving you the best possible care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is the role of the care team?
The purpose of a clinical care team is to diagnose and treat conditions that put your health or life at risk. Hospital care teams are prepared to manage everything from
seasonal infections
to long-term (
chronic
) conditions. If you’re having surgery, you can trust that a care team is ready to get you from prep to recovery. Each member of the team plays an instrumental part to help speed up your recovery, maintain your health and improve your well-being.
Whether it’s for one night or many months, a hospital stay can feel scary. You might not know what to expect. Your loved ones may be worried and anxiously awaiting news. Your care team knows this isn’t easy. They’ll tend to your medical
and
emotional needs and also be there for your loved ones.
For example, a
psychologist
helps you work through the emotions you’re feeling. A
social worker
connects you with resources as you prepare to return home. A
dietitian
makes sure you’re getting the right nutrition. Let’s take a closer look at all these different types of providers and how they help you.
Who’s on my clinical care team?
Exactly who’s on your team varies according to your medical needs. Also, different hospitals have different ways of organizing their teams. In general, you’ll have doctors,
nurses
, therapists, techs, aides and other experts who each play a role in your care.
Advertisement
Hospital patient care personnel
Your clinical care team may include:
Attending physicians
You’ll typically have one attending physician who leads the team and makes sure everyone’s on the same page. This is often a doctor with special training in caring for people in hospitals (hospitalist). In some cases, your attending physician might be your
primary care provider
, a surgeon or another type of specialist.
Specialist physicians
These are doctors with expertise in a certain area of medicine. They help with diagnosis and treatment. The types of specialists on your team depend on your needs. Common examples include heart doctors (
cardiologists
), kidney doctors (
nephrologists
), cancer specialists (
oncologists
) and various types of surgeons.
Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs)
NPs
and
PAs
are often called advanced practice providers. They work with your attending physician to make sure you get the care you need from day to day.
Registered nurses (RNs) and licensed practical nurses (LPNs)
These nurses quickly become familiar faces because they interact with you often.
RNs
give you medications and keep a close eye on how you’re doing.
LPNs
check your
vital signs
and help with daily tasks like getting dressed or using the bathroom.
Certified nursing assistants (CNAs)
These providers are sometimes called patient care technicians or nurses’ aides. They work closely with nurses to make sure all your needs are met. They might bring you a blanket if you’re cold or help you with eating or moving. They’re often the ones holding your hand and reassuring you in some of the scariest moments.
Speech-language pathologists
Some conditions affect your ability to
swallow
and/or speak.
Speech-language pathologists
(SLPs) can teach you techniques for safe swallowing. They can also help you form words and produce sounds so you can talk with others. If speaking isn’t possible, they’ll teach you how to use
assistive devices
to communicate.
Occupational and physical therapists
Occupational therapists
help you do activities of daily living (
ADLs
) as independently as possible.
Physical therapists
help you move safely during and after your hospital stay. For example, they can help you regain your strength after surgery or bed rest.
Respiratory therapists
You may need a
respiratory therapist
on your team to help maintain or restore your
lung
function. If you’re in the intensive care unit (ICU), a respiratory therapist may connect you to
mechanical ventilation
or do other procedures to help you breathe.
Pharmacists
A clinical
pharmacist
works with your attending physician and other members of your care team. They make sure the medicines you’re taking are safe for you and won’t
interact
with each other. They may also teach you about your medicines and answer your questions.
Dietitians
Your dietitian makes sure you get the nutrition you need in the form that’s right for you. They plan meals you chew and swallow, as well as nutrition you get through a
tube
or
IV
.
Advertisement
Mental health professionals
A psychologist or another type of
mental health
professional may be part of your team. They help you and your loved ones process the emotions you’re feeling.
Some research
shows that working with a psychologist while you’re in an intensive care unit (ICU) can lower your risk of depression, anxiety and
post-traumatic stress
.
Social workers
Your social worker helps you plan for life after your hospital stay. They connect you with resources and services that support your recovery. They also help arrange for things you might need when you’re back home, like special beds or mobility devices.
Nonclinical staff
Besides these healthcare providers, your care team might also include nonclinical staff. This is an umbrella category for people like:
Interpreters
, who support communication between you and your providers
Clergy
, who offer spiritual support
Patient advocates
(sometimes called
ombudsmen
), who are available to discuss any concerns you might have about the care you’re receiving
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When you need a hospital stay, it’s natural to want to know exactly who’s part of your care and what they can do to help. The same holds true when your loved one is in a hospital. Your clinical care team will introduce themselves to you, and you may get to know them better throughout your stay. If you have any questions about someone’s role, don’t hesitate to ask. Your team wants you to feel comfortable with your care — and confident in those providing it.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider