Panniculitis: What It Is, Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Panniculitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Panniculitis
Panniculitis is a group of conditions that cause inflammation in the fat under your skin. You may have painful lumps and skin discoloration, usually on your legs. There are a lot of different types and causes, which means there are several treatment options available to help you manage symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is panniculitis?
“Panniculitis” is a term for a group of conditions that cause
inflammation
in the layer of fat beneath your skin. As a result, painful lumps (nodules) form. They look like small bruises. These are most common on your lower legs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Inflammation happens in the panniculus adiposus. This is fatty tissue within the layer of
subcutaneous fat
under your
skin
and above your
muscle
. It helps keep your body warm.
When symptoms happen, the pain may be so intense that it takes you out of the everyday activities that you once enjoyed. It may even affect your mental health and make you feel self-conscious, as the nodules cause visible
skin discoloration
.
There are a lot of reasons why inflammation occurs in this area of your body. A healthcare provider can help you find the right treatment to help you manage symptoms.
What are the types of panniculitis?
There are several types of panniculitis. Some of the most common include:
Cold panniculitis
. Cold temperature exposure causes symptoms.
Erythema induratum
. It affects your calves, sometimes after a
tuberculosis
diagnosis.
Erythema nodosum
. Symptoms usually affect your shins, and inflammation is occasionally chronic.
Infectious panniculitis
. A
fungal
or
bacterial
infection causes inflammation.
Lupus panniculitis
.
Lupus erythematosus
causes symptoms.
Mesenteric panniculitis
. It targets adipose tissue folds (mesentery) of your
small intestine
and colon.
Necrotizing panniculitis
. Severe infections usually cause fat
tissue death
.
Pancreatic panniculitis
. An underlying
pancreatic
condition causes it.
Advertisement
Your provider may classify panniculitis as lobular or septal. Inflammation targets clusters of fat cells (lobules) in lobular panniculitis or the connective tissue structures around fat (fat septa) in septal panniculitis. Most types can be classified as either or both.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of panniculitis?
Symptoms of panniculitis range in severity for each person but could include:
Lumps (nodules) under your skin
Nodules that are painful or tender to the touch
Red to purple, brown or darker than your natural skin tone skin discoloration that looks like spotted
bruising
Additional symptoms could include:
Fever
Joint
and
muscle pain
Fatigue
Nausea
or
vomiting
While there are many different types of panniculitis, most have similar symptoms but affect different locations on your body.
Where do symptoms of panniculitis affect my body?
Symptoms of panniculitis target the layer of fat under the skin. The most common places where you’ll notice symptoms include your:
Legs
Shins
Arms
What causes panniculitis?
There are several possible causes of panniculitis. These vary by type and may include, but aren’t limited to, the following:
Viral or bacterial infections (like
HIV
, tuberculosis or
pneumonia
)
Physical trauma or an injury
Cold temperature exposure
Reaction to a medication (
contraceptive pills
,
penicillin
)
An
autoimmune condition
(like lupus,
Crohn’s disease
or
sarcoidosis
)
An underlying condition (like
inflammatory bowel disease
or pancreatic conditions)
What are the risk factors for panniculitis?
Panniculitis can affect anyone at any age — from babies to adults. The condition isn’t common, but some age groups are more at risk of experiencing symptoms. For example, infants and young children often receive a cold panniculitis diagnosis.
What are the side effects of panniculitis?
Side effects or complications of panniculitis vary by type but may include:
Sores (lesions)
Cracks on the surface of your skin (ulcerations)
Thinning skin
Skin hardening
These may lead to open wounds with the possibility of
infections
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is panniculitis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose panniculitis after a
physical exam
. They’ll take a look at your skin to learn more about your symptoms. Your provider will also ask you questions about your medical history.
A skin biopsy confirms a diagnosis. For a
skin biopsy
, your provider will remove a small sample of your skin tissue and examine your skin cells under a microscope.
Additional testing might be necessary to determine the cause.
Management and Treatment
How is panniculitis treated?
Treatment varies based on the type and could include:
Treating or managing any underlying condition that causes symptoms
Taking medications to reduce symptoms
In addition, you can take care of yourself at home by:
Elevating your legs (or the affected area of your body) to reduce swelling
Avoiding strenuous physical activities while you have symptoms
Wearing compression garments (socks or stockings) to help with pain or swelling
Eating
anti-inflammatory foods
(
Mediterranean diet
) like whole grains, fruits and vegetables
Not drinking large amounts of alcohol (it may trigger symptoms)
Advertisement
What medications treat panniculitis?
Your provider might recommend you take certain medications to relieve symptoms. Some medications that treat panniculitis include:
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs
)
Antibiotics
or
antiviral
medications
Immunosuppressants
(like
corticosteroids
)
Dapsone
or
thalidomide
Chemotherapy
drugs (for severe symptoms)
Before starting a new medication, talk to your provider about the drugs and supplements you currently take. Let them know if you have any
allergies
. This helps your provider prescribe the right medication to prevent drug interactions. Ask them about the side effects of each medication before you start taking it.
What antibiotic is used for panniculitis?
The type of antibiotic varies based on the type of bacteria that caused the infection. For example,
tetracycline
may treat pneumonia. A broad-spectrum antibiotic like
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
may help if the cause isn’t well known.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have panniculitis?
Panniculitis is a chronic condition. This means you could have symptoms that come and go throughout your life. There isn’t a cure, but treatment is available to reduce symptoms and flare-ups. Your healthcare provider can help you manage any underlying conditions or triggers.
Does panniculitis affect the way my skin looks?
Panniculitis temporarily changes the way your skin looks, as symptoms create discolored lumps on your skin. These may go away with treatment and usually don’t leave any long-term marks on your skin.
Advertisement
But certain types may cause long-term changes to your skin. You might notice a dimple or dent on the affected area of your skin after it heals. Panniculitis doesn’t usually cause scarring, but scarring could happen if you injure the affected area of your skin.
How long does panniculitis last?
Your body will need time to heal after treatment begins. There’s no exact timeframe as to when you’ll feel better. But on average, symptoms usually clear up six weeks after starting treatment. You could notice symptoms of pain and swelling improve as soon as 24 hours after onset. But you might still have bumps or discolored areas of skin for several weeks.
Symptoms may come and go throughout your life. Your provider can help you manage flare-ups.
Prevention
Can panniculitis be prevented?
You can’t prevent all cases of panniculitis. But you can reduce your risk of having a flare-up by:
Avoiding extremely cold temperatures
Treating any underlying conditions that increase your risk of symptoms
Taking care of yourself to prevent infections
Wearing protective gear, like a helmet or knee pads, to prevent injury when performing physical activities
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have panniculitis, visit your provider if:
Your symptoms don’t improve after a couple of weeks
You have a fever that doesn’t go away after 24 hours
Treatment makes your symptoms worse
The lump on your skin turns into a wound, is very painful and leaks a white to yellow pus
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
What type of panniculitis caused my symptoms?
What treatments do you recommend?
Are there side effects of treatment?
What should I do if I have pain?
How can I manage my symptoms at home?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Panniculitis can be a challenging condition to manage. Symptoms can flare up unexpectedly and pain can take you out of your routine. An unexpected wind chill or injury may trigger symptoms, for example.
Instead of lugging around extra layers and protective equipment everywhere you go, talk to a healthcare provider about different treatment options. They may have suggestions about taking a new medication or making changes to your routine, like eating anti-inflammatory foods, to keep symptoms at bay. Let your provider know if you have any questions.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment