EGD Procedure (Upper Endoscopy): What It Is & What To Expect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Procedures
/
EGD Procedure (Upper Endoscopy)
Advertisement
Advertisement
EGD Procedure (Upper Endoscopy)
During an EGD procedure (upper endoscopy), a digestive tract specialist (gastroenterologist) uses a scope to view the inside of your esophagus, stomach and duodenum (the upper part of your small intestine). Providers use the procedure to diagnose and treat acid reflux, stomach ulcers, celiac disease and other digestive tract problems.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endoscopy Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
An esophagogastroduodenoscopy is an exam of your upper GI tract. The endoscope projects images onto a screen as it passes through your esophagus and stomach.
What is an EGD?
An EGD, or upper endoscopy, is a procedure to examine the upper part of your
digestive tract
. EGD stands for “esophagogastroduodenoscopy.” Phew! Let’s break that down.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Working backward through the word, “-scopy” means an examination with a visual instrument. A “scope” is that instrument (as in “telescope” or “microscope”). During an EGD procedure, a gastrointestinal (GI) doctor (
gastroenterologist
) uses an instrument called an endoscope to examine the inside of your body. The endoscope is a small, lighted camera on the end of a long, flexible tube.
After a healthcare provider gives you medication to make you comfortable, your gastroenterologist passes the endoscope down your mouth, then your
throat
, through your
esophagus
(swallowing tube), into your
stomach
and then into your
duodenum
(the upper part of your small intestine). The camera sends images to a computer screen showing your esophagus, stomach and duodenum. Similarly, your gastroenterologist can visually examine these areas of your body.
That’s where the rest of the word comes from. “Duodeno-” means duodenum, “gastro-” means stomach and “esophago-” means esophagus.
Who might need an upper endoscopy?
You may need an upper endoscopy if you have unexplained symptoms like:
Abdominal pain
Nausea
and
vomiting
Swallowing problems
Weight loss
Heartburn
Non-cardiac chest pain
Vomiting blood
Anemia
Functional indigestion
What conditions can an EGD diagnosis?
An upper endoscopy allows for a direct view into your upper digestive system. It can be more accurate than X-rays in diagnosing problems. These problems include:
Advertisement
Acid reflux (
gastroesophageal reflux disease
or GERD)
Inflammation, like
esophagitis
,
gastritis
and duodenitis
Gastrointestinal disorders
, like
celiac disease
and
Crohn’s disease
Stomach (peptic) ulcers
Swallowing disorders
Intestinal metaplasia
Barrett’s esophagus
Hiatal hernia
Cirrhosis of the liver
Portal hypertension
Cancerous
and noncancerous
tumors
What does an upper endoscopy treat?
Healthcare providers can also do treatments with an endoscope. They might want to take a tissue sample to examine in the lab (
biopsy
). They can do these things with the endoscope.
By attaching tiny tools to the endoscope, EGD technicians can often fix small problems on the spot. For example:
Repair holes
Drain
abscesses
Open narrowed passages
Insert medical devices for therapy
Manage upper digestive tract bleeding
Remove polyps (growths), tumors or swallowed objects
Procedure Details
How should I prepare for an EGD?
EGD is a simple outpatient procedure that shouldn’t take more than an hour of your day. But you’ll have to prepare in a few ways ahead of the appointment:
Screening
. Since the test involves
sedation
and sometimes general
anesthesia
, your healthcare provider will want to screen you in advance for any health conditions that might make these unsafe for you.
Fasting
. You’ll need to avoid eating anything within eight hours of the procedure. That’s to avoid complications from food that may still be in your stomach during the procedure. You can drink
clear liquids
up to two hours before the test.
Medications
. You may need to stop taking
blood thinners
and adjust your
diabetes medications
the day before the test. Your healthcare provider will instruct you.
Driver
. Because most people require sedation for the procedure, a provider will ask you to have a responsible adult accompany you and take you home afterward. You can’t drive or operate heavy machinery after you receive the medications.
What should I expect before an upper endoscopy?
When you arrive for your EGD, a provider will lead you to the endoscopy suite. A nurse will check your
vital signs
to make sure you’re in good condition for the procedure. Then, your nurse will install an intravenous (IV) catheter into a vein in your arm to deliver your medicine.
If you have general anesthesia, the medication will put you completely to sleep. You won’t feel anything. But most people will have conscious sedation instead. A provider who specializes in anesthesia (
anesthesiologist
) will give you a sedative to make you feel sleepy and relaxed, but you may not be completely asleep. With the sedative, a provider will also spray a local anesthetic spray into your mouth and throat. This has a numbing effect.
Your nurse will place a
mouthguard
in your mouth to protect your teeth, tongue and the scope. They’ll position you on your left side on the procedure table.
How is an upper endoscopy performed?
To perform the procedure, your provider:
Guides the endoscope through your mouth and down into your esophagus, stomach and duodenum
Pumps air through the endoscope into your stomach and duodenum to make it easier to see your organs
Views images from the endoscope on a video monitor while looking for problems or performing treatments
Removes small pieces of tissue to biopsy (examine in a lab), if necessary
Performs treatments, if needed
Advertisement
An upper endoscopy is typically an outpatient procedure, meaning you go home the same day. The procedure may be uncomfortable, but it shouldn’t be painful.
How long does an EGD take?
The procedure takes about 30 to 60 minutes.
What happens after an EGD?
Your provider will suction the air out of your stomach after withdrawing the endoscope. But there may be some gas left in there. This will pass over the next day or so. Side effects may include bloating and passing
gas
(burping and farting).
You may also have a
sore throat
for a day or two as the numbing agent wears off. Cold foods and drinks can help soothe your throat. Your healthcare provider may recommend some more specific food-related guidelines for the days following the test.
You may not remember the test afterward. You’ll need to stay at the medical office until you’re alert enough to be discharged. In some cases, your healthcare provider may be able to discuss the test results with you right away. In other cases, you may need to make a separate appointment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endoscopy Care
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of this procedure?
An EGD is a minimally invasive procedure that allows a healthcare provider to examine the inside of your upper digestive tract. They’re able to diagnose, biopsy or treat conditions without the risks of traditional surgery. The procedure is painless, and you can go home the same day.
Advertisement
What are the risks or complications of this procedure?
An upper endoscopy is a relatively low-risk procedure. Potential complications include:
Allergic reactions to the sedative, like
low blood pressure
and
low blood oxygen
Digestive tract bleeding or infection
Tear (perforation) in your digestive tract lining
Recovery and Outlook
When should I know the results of the test?
If you don’t have results immediately after the test, it might be because your healthcare provider needs to wait for biopsy results. This can take up to two weeks. As soon as your healthcare provider has results to share, they’ll be able to discuss what they found, what it means and what comes next.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if you experience:
Chronic cough
or coughing up or vomiting blood
Difficulty swallowing
Fever
and
chills
Rectal bleeding
(black, tarry stool)
Severe throat pain,
chest pain
or abdominal pain
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between an EGD and an endoscopy?
There are many
types of endoscopy procedures
. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is just one of them. All endoscopies use the same tool — the endoscope — to examine different parts of your body. The exams have different names to describe the different parts they’re looking at.
An EGD test looks at what healthcare providers sometimes call the upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract: your esophagus, stomach and duodenum. This is the part of your digestive system that the endoscope can reach from the top down. Sometimes, providers call an EGD an upper endoscopy.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy may have a whopper of a name, but it’s a simple procedure. It’s normal to worry about it, but you should know that it’s short and painless. Healthcare providers appreciate how well the endoscope visualizes your internal organs, and even allows them to take samples and make quick repairs. You and your healthcare provider can learn a lot from an EGD about what’s going on in your body, and sometimes even fix it.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having an endoscopy can be lifesaving. Cleveland Clinic’s providers will help you feel comfortable with the process so you can get the care you need.
Endoscopy Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/27/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us