Dense Deposit Disease (DDD): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Dense Deposit Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dense Deposit Disease
Dense deposit disease (DDD) is a rare condition that affects your kidneys and eyes. It usually occurs in children and young adults. In about 50% of all cases, DDD leads to kidney (renal) failure. It can also increase your risk of age-related macular degeneration. DDD has no cure, but treatments can help slow its progress and ease your symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Dense Deposit Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Dense Deposit Disease?
Dense deposit disease (DDD) is a rare and serious condition that mainly affects your
kidneys
and
eyes
. DDD belongs to a group of kidney conditions known as
complement 3 glomerulopathies (C3G)
that affect your
immune system
and kidneys. Experts think fewer than 5,000 people in the U.S. have this disease. Overall, C3G conditions affect an estimated 2 or 3 people out of every 1 million. Anyone can get DDD, but it most often occurs in children and young adults.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
DDD damages the millions of tiny kidney filters (glomeruli) that take out fluids and waste from your blood to produce urine (pee). This
glomerular disease
can also damage your eyes and increase your risk of developing age-related
macular degeneration
(AMD).
In about half of all cases, dense deposit disease leads to
kidney (renal) failure
. DDD has no cure, but early diagnosis and treatment can help slow its progression. In severe cases, when your kidneys stop working, you may need
dialysis
or a
kidney transplant
.
It may also be called:
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type 2
Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis type 2
MPGN 2
Why is it called dense deposit disease?
In dense deposit disease, immune system proteins attach to your glomeruli in ways they shouldn’t. They form deposits — thick, sausage-shaped patches. Over time, these deposits affect your kidneys’ ability to work as they should.
Dense deposit disease can also cause whitish-yellow deposits (drusen) on an inner layer of your eye called Bruch’s membrane. This membrane divides the colored part of your
retina
from your choroid. The choroid is a layer of tissue between your retina and the white part of your eye (
sclera
). These deposits can affect your vision.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of dense deposit disease
Dense deposit disease affects your kidneys first. These symptoms may include:
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
)
Change in your peeing habits, especially peeing less frequently than usual (
oliguria
)
Confusion or unusual fatigue
High blood pressure
High levels of protein in your pee (
proteinuria
)
Kidney inflammation (acute nephritis)
Loss of appetite
Swelling (edema)
If DDD affects your eyes, you may experience:
Color blindness
Loss of vision
Night blindness
(nyctalopia)
Dense deposit disease causes
Healthcare providers don’t know the exact cause of dense deposit disease. They suspect it occurs due to a combination of genetic and immune system problems.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose it
A
kidney biopsy
is the only way to diagnose dense deposit disease. Your kidney specialist (
nephrologist
) removes a small amount of kidney tissue and uses an electron microscope to look for unusual deposits.
What other tests can help with a diagnosis?
You may receive
blood tests
or
antibody tests
to figure out if your immune system is working properly. Your provider may also recommend
genetic testing
to provide more information that can help guide your treatment.
Management and Treatment
Is there a cure for dense deposit disease?
DDD has no cure, but treatments may slow the disease and treat kidney failure.
What treatments are used for it?
Your treatment for dense deposit disease depends on the severity of the disease and how it affects your kidneys. You may receive:
ACE inhibitors
Blood pressure medication
Plasmapheresis or plasma exchange
Eculizumab
and other complement inhibitors
About half of all people with DDD experience end-stage kidney failure. This life-threatening condition is the last stage of kidney disease. When your kidneys stop working, specialists typically recommend:
Dialysis
Kidney transplant
Eye and vision problems often develop later in the disease. If this occurs, an eye care specialist (
ophthalmologist
) can help treat and manage symptoms.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Alert your provider if you develop new or worsening symptoms.
You may wish to ask the following questions during your appointments:
Do you think I’ll have end-stage kidney failure?
Do you think I’ll develop eye and vision problems?
What are the side effects of your recommended treatments?
Are there any clinical trials for DDD that I may qualify for?
Can you recommend any support groups?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have dense deposit disease?
The outlook for dense deposit disease is typically poor. Kidney failure is common, usually within 10 years after diagnosis. Even in those who receive kidney transplants, DDD often comes back.
How do I take care of myself or my loved one with this condition?
Keep all medical appointments and closely follow your provider’s instructions. Your care team can support you in your health journey.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between dense deposit disease and C3 glomerulonephritis?
Dense deposit disease and C3 glomerulonephritis (C3GN) are both types of C3 glomerulopathies. But they look different under an electron microscope.
DDD has dense deposits that look like ribbons in the glomerular basement membrane. C3GN doesn’t have dense deposits in the glomerular basement membrane.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
While dense deposit disease (DDD) can be a daunting diagnosis, treatments can help. Your care team will work closely with you to manage your symptoms and maintain your health as long as possible. Talk to your provider about any concerns or questions you have so you feel comfortable and confident in your care.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your kidneys, you want experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work with you to craft a personalized treatment plan.
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment