Dilated Cardiomyopathy: Symptoms and Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy causes tissue in your heart’s main pumping chamber to expand (dilate) and thin out. This makes it unable to pump as strongly as it should. Genetics or heart attack damage can cause this, but often, the cause is unknown. This condition can affect several chambers of your heart and lead to complications like heart failure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
With dilated cardiomyopathy, muscle in your main pumping chamber stretches and weakens.
What is dilated cardiomyopathy?
Dilated cardiomyopathy is an issue with your
heart
muscle stretching out and becoming larger than usual. It starts in your heart’s main pumping
chamber
(left ventricle). In severe cases, it affects more areas of your heart.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
With increased wall stress, the tissue in your left ventricle becomes enlarged and then thins. This causes it to pump with less force than it should. After each beat, more
blood
remains in your heart. This makes it increasingly difficult to keep up with your body’s needs.
Researchers estimate that
36 people per 100,000
in the general population have dilated cardiomyopathy.
Fortunately, treatments are available for this heart condition. And there are things you can do to help manage this condition.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms?
Many people with dilated cardiomyopathy don’t have any symptoms, especially in the early stages. But as heart function worsens, you may notice symptoms more and more.
Dilated cardiomyopathy symptoms may include:
Chest pain
Cough
and congestion
Dizziness
or lightheadedness
Fainting
Fatigue
(unusual tiredness)
Palpitations
or fluttering in your chest
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
Swelling in your belly, legs, ankles and feet (
edema
)
Unexpected weight gain from fluid retention
What causes dilated cardiomyopathy?
In many cases, experts don’t know the cause. In others, dilated cardiomyopathy causes may include:
Abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmia
)
Alcohol use disorder
Certain
chemotherapy drugs
that are toxic to your heart (
cardiotoxic
)
Complications in the late stages of
pregnancy
or shortly after childbirth
Congenital heart disease
Coronary artery disease
Diabetes
Genes
you get from a biological parent (familial dilated cardiomyopathy), which may account for more than 50% of cases
Heart attack
Heart valve disease
High blood pressure
HIV
Infection like
myocarditis
Recreational drugs like cocaine
Thyroid disease
Viral hepatitis
Advertisement
Some people have more than one cause. For example, you can be at risk because of genetics and then get a medical condition that leads to dilated cardiomyopathy.
What are the risk factors?
You may be more at risk for dilated cardiomyopathy if you:
Are younger than 50
Are Black
Are
male
Have dilated cardiomyopathy in your biological family
What are the complications of dilated cardiomyopathy?
In advanced stages, dilated cardiomyopathy can lead to complications.
These complications may include:
Abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmia)
Angina (chest pain)
Blood clots
in your heart, which can also travel to a lung and become a
pulmonary embolism
Cardiac arrest
Heart attack
Heart failure
Heart valve disease
Stroke
Diagnosis and Tests
How is dilated cardiomyopathy diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will start by taking your medical history and family history. They’ll perform a
physical exam
that may include listening to your lungs to check for fluid build-up. Your provider may hear a
heart murmur
before you even have symptoms.
Testing will determine the severity and help healthcare providers plan your dilated cardiomyopathy treatment.
What tests will be done to diagnose dilated cardiomyopathy?
Tests you may need include:
Angiogram
to look for narrow areas in your
coronary arteries
, which send blood to your heart
Blood tests
like one that
checks for heart damage
Chest X-ray
to see if your heart looks larger than a typical heart
Echocardiogram
to show how well your heart works
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
to check for abnormal heart rhythms
Exercise stress test
to see the impact of physical activity on your heart
Genetic testing
to find out if you inherited cardiomyopathy
Heart MRI
to show your ventricles’ size and function
Endomyocardial biopsy
(rarely used to examine a tissue sample)
Management and Treatment
How is dilated cardiomyopathy treated?
You may need a variety of dilated cardiomyopathy treatments. In most cases, they won’t cure the disease, but they can help you manage the symptoms and live longer. Treating dilated cardiomyopathy may involve medicines, changes to your lifestyle or surgeries. The earlier you start treatment, the better your prognosis (outcome). Your
cardiologist
or heart failure specialist will work with you to find the right combination of these medicines.
Medicines
Medications that improve your heart function with dilated cardiomyopathy include:
ACE inhibitors
Aldosterone antagonists
Angiotensin receptor/neprilysin inhibitors (
ARNI
)
Antiarrhythmics
to treat abnormal heart rhythms
Beta-blockers
Blood thinners (
anticoagulants
) for people with atrial fibrillation
Diuretics
Changes in daily habits
Changes to your daily routine can improve how well medications work and possibly help you delay or avoid the need for a procedure.
These changes include:
Protecting your body
: You can improve your health by limiting how many alcohol-containing drinks you have, avoiding recreational drugs and protecting yourself from viral hepatitis and HIV.
Eating heart-healthy foods
: Lean proteins, like chicken and fish, and plenty of fruits and vegetables are good for your heart. Low-salt foods can prevent fluid build-up that strains your heart.
Increasing physical activity
: Gentle exercises can improve heart function. A
cardiac rehabilitation
program provides a safe environment for getting started.
Advertisement
Surgery and minimally invasive procedures
You may need a procedure or surgery if you have advanced dilated cardiomyopathy and limited heart function. Procedures for dilated cardiomyopathy treatment include:
Biventricular pacemaker
to help your heart pump more regularly
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
to send a shock that returns your heart rhythm to normal when you need it
Heart failure surgery
or
heart valve surgery
to improve your heart function
Left ventricular assist device (LVAD)
to help your weakened heart muscle pump blood
Heart transplant
(a rare option for when other treatments don’t work)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have dilated cardiomyopathy?
Your prognosis depends on the cause and severity of the disease. With ongoing care, you may return to work and your usual daily activities. But you may have symptoms that get worse with time. Advanced dilated cardiomyopathy or complications can make you severely ill. You may need to stay in the hospital until symptoms improve.
Dilated cardiomyopathy can get worse for many people and lead to long-term heart failure. This means your heart can’t keep up with the demands on it.
Kidney failure
and severe heart failure are signs of a poor prognosis (outcome). People who have symptoms at rest or can’t do physical activity tend to have the worst prognosis.
Advertisement
Still, the prognosis for people with dilated cardiomyopathy has improved in recent years. This is due to the treatments available and early diagnosis and treatment. Today, more than
80% of people
with this condition are alive at their eight-year follow-up visit and don’t need a heart transplant.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
It’s not always possible to prevent this condition. It may run in your biological family or be a side effect of a treatment like
chemotherapy
.
But you may be able to prevent dilated cardiomyopathy by:
Avoiding cocaine
Consuming alcohol-containing beverages in moderation
Managing conditions like diabetes and high blood pressure
Taking good care of your heart to prevent a heart attack
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
You can care for yourself by following your provider’s instructions. These include:
Checking daily for signs of potential complications like sudden weight gain
Committing to changes your provider suggests, like
eating low-salt foods
Seeing your healthcare provider a few times a year for follow-up visits
Taking medications as prescribed
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Because your condition can change over time, your best game plan is to have regular visits with your provider. These visits should continue for the rest of your life. Contact your provider if the symptoms get worse. They can offer treatments that help you manage symptoms.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may have lots of questions about a condition that’s new to you, like:
Does my family need to get genetic testing?
Do I need to avoid strenuous activity?
Is there a support group I can join locally or online?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
No one wants to learn that their heart isn’t working as well as it should. But today, healthcare providers can offer various treatments to help your heart work better if you have dilated cardiomyopathy. And there are simple changes you can make to improve your situation, too. Don’t be afraid to ask questions so you can understand your options. You can work with your provider to find a way forward.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic offers personalized diagnosis and the latest treatments for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/05/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment