What Is a Chronic Illness? How To Cope
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Chronic Illness
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chronic Illness
Chronic conditions come in many different forms. And their impact can vary. The same illness can look very different from person to person. But living with chronic conditions comes with challenges. And it’s best not to face them alone. Healthcare providers and loved ones alike can be a big help as you live your life with a chronic illness.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is A Chronic Illness?
Additional Common Questions
What Is A Chronic Illness?
Chronic illnesses are medical conditions that last a long time, typically a year or longer. Other terms like chronic disease, chronic condition or chronic disorder all roughly refer to the same thing. These illnesses are often incurable and lifelong. Having one might mean you also need ongoing — or even daily — medical care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Chronic illnesses also commonly interfere with
activities of daily living
. Those are things that seem ordinary — like using the toilet, dressing or feeding yourself. But not being able to do them on your own can have a serious impact on your quality of life.
Chronic illness examples
The 10 most common chronic diseases in the U.S. are:
Obesity
High blood pressure
High cholesterol
Coronary heart disease
COPD
or emphysema
Asthma
Chronic kidney disease
Cancer (not counting skin cancer)
Depression
About 6 in 10 people in the U.S. have at least one chronic disease. And about 4 in 10 have two or more.
What are the symptoms of chronic illnesses?
Chronic illnesses can have a wide range of symptoms, depending on which chronic illness (or illnesses) you have. Some common symptoms and effects include:
Pain
: Even low levels of
chronic pain
can feel exhausting. And living with chronic pain can permanently disrupt your nervous system and lead to other issues, like
central pain syndrome
.
Physical limitations
: You might have trouble with muscle strength, balance or coordination.
Fatigue
: The effects of chronic illnesses can take a toll on your stamina.
Body changes
: Many chronic conditions affect the way your body looks. Depending on the effect, that can be a source of discomfort, embarrassment or even shame.
Risks of other issues
: Many chronic conditions raise your risk of developing other conditions. High blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes are examples. Having one of these raises your risk of developing the other two.
Mental health effects
: Chronic conditions can be very stressful. People who have them have a higher risk of
mood disorders
like depression or anxiety.
Advertisement
How chronic illness can affect your life
Chronic illness can be very disruptive to your life. That often happens in ways other people don’t see. Just a few examples include:
Time demands
: Chronic illnesses can take up a lot of your time. That includes appointments to get a diagnosis, follow-up visits or needing care unexpectedly. It also includes when you feel too sick for your usual routine or activities.
Financial strain
: Chronic conditions can be expensive. They can make it harder to work, earn money or keep insurance.
Strained relationships:
Chronic illnesses can be very isolating. You might be afraid to make plans with people because you’re afraid your illness might interfere or force you to cancel. They can also make it difficult to date and form romantic connections.
Loss of hobbies
: Depending on the condition or its effects, you might not be able to do certain things. Or you might have to stop doing the activities you once enjoyed.
Tough choices
: Having a chronic illness might force you to choose some important activities and miss others. That’s because you might
run out of energy
if you try to do too much.
What are the risk factors for developing a chronic disease?
Some chronic disease risk factors that you can manage include:
Using tobacco (including smokeless tobacco, snuff or
vaping
)
Poor nutrition
Not getting enough physical activity
Excessive alcohol use (over two drinks a day for
males
, over one drink a day for females)
The factors you can manage aren’t the only ones that can contribute to chronic illnesses. The biggest one you can’t control is your age. Some diseases are more likely to happen the longer you live. Your family history and genetics also influence your risk. And
factors like where you live
also play a big role.
Can a chronic illness be cured?
It’s possible to
cure
a few chronic illnesses. Those are mainly chronic infectious diseases like tuberculosis or hepatitis C. Some types of cancer are also curable with early detection and treatment.
For most chronic diseases, healthcare providers will try to help you:
Manage the symptoms
Slow the disease’s progress
Minimize the disease’s effect on your quality of life
Are chronic illnesses preventable?
Yes, many chronic illnesses are preventable. Some key
things you can do
include:
Reach and maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Manage your diet.
Stay physically active.
Avoid tobacco and nonmedical drug use, and only use alcohol in moderation.
Manage
stress
and make your mental health a priority.
Make time for sleep.
Stay socially connected, like with friends, family or other loved ones.
It’s also important to see your primary care provider for an annual checkup. Routine checkups can often find warning signs that mean you’re at risk of a chronic disease.
Advertisement
What can I do to manage a chronic condition?
Your healthcare provider can guide you in managing chronic conditions. That can include:
Seeing them for appointments or treatments as scheduled
Taking medications as prescribed
Avoiding things that could make your condition worse
Managing stress and your mental health
Seeking out support groups or communities (online and in-person) of people with the same or similar issues
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What do I do if I think I have a chronic disease?
If you’re concerned you have a chronic disease, the first step to getting answers is to talk to a primary care provider. They can screen you for common signs and symptoms. If they find something, they can refer you to a specialist who can investigate further. And if they don’t find anything, they can work with you on next steps, including referring you to a specialist if needed.
It’s OK to seek a
second opinion
if your provider doesn’t find anything. You know your body best. If you really think something’s not right, advocating for yourself and seeking answers can make a difference.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with a chronic illness can look very different from one person to the next. Some chronic illnesses are plain to see. But they can also be invisible, causing symptoms or effects that only you know about.
But no matter what chronic illness you have, it’s best to seek support for yourself along the way. Talk to your healthcare provider about what you’re going through and ask them for help. And staying close with loved ones can make a huge difference. Chronic conditions may affect your life, but you can take steps to make sure they don’t define it.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider