Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Leak: Symptoms, Types & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Leak
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Leak
A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak happens when a tear in the membrane around your brain or spinal cord lets fluid escape. Cranial leaks can cause headaches and nasal drainage. Spinal leaks may lead to headaches, neck stiffness or back pain. A healthcare provider can diagnose and treat it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Leak?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Leak?
A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak is when the fluid surrounding your brain and spinal cord leaks out from where it’s supposed to be. It happens when there’s a tear or hole in the dura mater. This is the outer layer of the protective membrane (meninges) that surrounds your
central nervous system
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The most common symptom is a headache. You may also have other symptoms that can vary depending on whether the tear is near your brain or spinal cord.
CSF
cushions and protects your brain and spinal cord. Too much fluid loss can be dangerous. It may lead to brain injuries or infections. Some complications can be life-threatening.
Types of CSF leaks
There are two types of cerebrospinal fluid leaks based on location:
Cranial CSF leak
: This leak happens in your
skull
near your brain.
Spinal CSF leak
: This leak happens in your
spine
near your spinal cord.
Symptoms and Causes
A cerebrospinal fluid leak can affect many body systems.
CSF leak symptoms
CSF leak symptoms vary based on where they are and how severe they are. In some cases, if you have a small leak, you may not notice any symptoms or you might mistake the symptoms for something else. If anything doesn’t seem right, contact a healthcare provider. CSF leaks can be serious.
Cranial CSF leak symptoms
Common symptoms of a leak near your brain may include:
Ear drainage
Headache
Limb weakness
Loss of sense of smell
Neck pain
or
stiffness
Nose drainage
(clear and wet, not like mucus)
Spinal CSF leak symptoms
Common symptoms of a leak near your spinal cord may include:
Blurred vision
or
double vision
Brain fog
Dizziness
Headache that gets worse when you stand up but improves when lying down (positional headache)
Memory
issues (severe cases)
Muscle weakness
Nausea
Neck pain or stiffness
Pain radiating from your spine
Ringing in your ears
Advertisement
CSF leak causes
Most cerebrospinal fluid leaks happen after an injury. Common injuries may include:
Crushing injuries
Twisting or severe
whiplash
Puncture, stab or gunshot wounds
Some leaks may happen after:
Brain surgery
or spine surgery
Ear, nose or throat procedures
Spinal tests or procedures (
lumbar puncture
or
epidural
)
In fewer cases, a leak may happen without an injury. Sometimes, it’s linked to health conditions you’re born with that affect the membrane that holds CSF.
Risk factors
Anyone can develop a CSF leak, especially if you have had a recent injury. You may be more at risk if you have:
A connective tissue condition like Marfan syndrome or
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
High pressure in your skull (
intracranial hypertension
)
Structural issues with your nose, sinuses or skull
Spontaneous leaks, those that happen without an injury, are
more common
in
women
between age 33 and 52.
Is a CSF leak life-threatening?
Yes, some severe leaks can be life-threatening. CSF cushions your brain and spinal cord. It protects them from injury. When you lose too much fluid, your brain can sag or shift inside your skull. This increases your risk of injury, potentially leading to permanent brain damage.
A leak also raises your risk of serious infections like
meningitis
. This is a dangerous infection of the protective layers around your brain and spinal cord. Meningitis is a medical emergency that requires immediate treatment.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose a CSF leak
A healthcare provider can diagnose a cerebrospinal fluid leak using a
physical examination
, along with gathering information about your symptoms. They’ll also ask you questions about your medical history.
Testing confirms a diagnosis. The type of testing may vary based on the location of the leak.
Cranial CSF leak
: Fluid testing from your nose or ear (beta-2 transferrin test) and imaging tests of your head, like a CT scan,
MRI
,
cisternogram scan
and/or
fundoscopy
Spinal CSF leak
: Imaging tests, like a brain and spine MRI and/or a
myelogram
Special diagnostic tests like DSM (digital subtraction myelography) or DSA (digital subtraction angiography) may be required in complex cases.
How to test for a CSF leak at home
A CSF leak isn’t something you can diagnose or treat on your own. If you suspect you have this condition, you should talk to a healthcare provider as soon as possible.
Management and Treatment
CSF leak treatment
Your provider will give you specific instructions to follow if you have a cerebrospinal fluid leak. These can vary based on the location and severity.
In some cases, they may recommend bed rest. This is to let the cranial or spinal leak injury heal on its own. Your provider may also recommend that you stay hydrated, avoid caffeine and take either over-the-counter medications or prescribed medications to relieve symptoms.
Advertisement
Your provider may also recommend avoiding pressure triggers, like sneezing or coughing. This can be easier said than done, we realize. But you can lower your risk by staying away from dust, allergens or high-pollen areas, especially if you know you’re sensitive to them.
Cranial CSF leak treatments
Minimally invasive procedures to treat CSF leaks near your brain may include:
External
ventricular drain
: A drain placed in your brain’s ventricles to help relieve pressure
Lumbar drain
: A tube inserted in your lower back to reduce CSF pressure in your head
Nasal packing
: Absorbent material placed in your nose to prevent leaks
Shunt
: A shunt redirects fluid from your brain to another part of your body to relieve pressure
Some cranial CSF leaks need surgery to stop problems from happening. These may include:
Bone grafting
: Your surgeon may use bone from another part of your body or a synthetic material to improve a structural abnormality.
Endoscopic endonasal repair
: This is a procedure performed through your nose that seals the leak.
Open surgery
: This is an invasive procedure where a surgeon opens your skull to repair the leak.
Spinal CSF leak treatments
Your provider may recommend one of the following treatments for a CSF leak around your spinal cord:
Advertisement
Epidural blood patch
: Your provider will inject a small amount of your blood into the space around your spinal cord to seal the leak.
Lumbar drain
: A temporary tube drains excess fluid to reduce pressure and help the leak heal.
Dural repair surgery
: This is a surgical procedure to directly seal the tear in the protective covering.
CSF leak recovery time
Your provider will give you the best advice on what your recovery time looks like. You may need a few days of rest to feel better. If you had surgery, you may need several weeks to months to fully heal.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should talk to or see a healthcare provider if you think you have a leak. The first symptom is usually a headache (for cranial and spinal types) and a runny nose that doesn’t produce mucus (for the cranial type), among other symptoms.
If you have a known leak and you’re receiving treatment, let your provider know if you have new or worsening symptoms.
When should I go to the ER?
If you have a cranial CSF leak and you notice the following sudden symptoms, visit the emergency room:
Severe headache
Slurred speech
Facial drooping
Vision loss
Difficulty swallowing
Trouble thinking clearly
One-sided weakness or
paralysis
The following sudden spinal CSF leak symptoms may require emergency medical attention:
Advertisement
Tingling or numbness in your hands, arms, feet or legs
Difficulty standing
One-sided weakness or paralysis
Muscle weakness
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a CSF leak?
Most CSF leaks get better with rest or surgery. But they can come back, even after healing.
Cerebrospinal fluid leaks are unpredictable and can’t always be prevented. Still, you may be able to lower your risk of injury-related causes. Wearing protective gear is the best way to do this. Head, neck, back or facial trauma may lead to a leak. Use personal protective or safety equipment at work and during daily activities when applicable.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Your body is made of a lot of fluid, so it might be surprising to learn that losing a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can cause such uncomfortable symptoms. Fortunately, your provider can help find the leak and recommend the best treatment. You may only need bed rest to heal. Or in some cases, surgery may be the safest option. Your care team will guide you toward the right approach so your body can recover and you can start feeling better.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment