Ulnar Nerve Entrapment: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ulnar Nerve Entrapment
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ulnar Nerve Entrapment
Ulnar nerve entrapment affects your ulnar nerve in your arm. Cubital tunnel syndrome occurs in your elbow, while Guyon’s canal syndrome affects your wrist. Overuse injuries, cysts and other problems can stretch or put pressure on the ulnar nerve. You may have hand and finger weakness, numbness, pain or tingling. At-home treatments can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Wrist and Elbow Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is ulnar nerve entrapment?
Ulnar nerve entrapment is the most common ulnar nerve problem. Ulnar nerve entrapment occurs when something puts pressure on your ulnar nerve in your elbow or wrist. Nerve entrapment is a type of nerve compression syndrome.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Compression (a
pinched nerve
) may lead to inflammation causing nerve (neuropathic) pain and neuropathy (nerve damage). In some cases, this may affect your grip strength, making it difficult for you to grasp items.
What is the ulnar nerve?
Your
ulnar nerve
is a single nerve in a network known as the
peripheral nervous system
, which carries information to and from your brain by route of your
spinal
cord.
Your ulnar nerve helps you bend and straighten your pinky and ring fingers so you can grasp items. The nerve also sends sensory information about touch, pain and temperature. If you bump your ulnar nerve in your elbow, you may experience a tingling “funny bone” sensation. Each arm has an ulnar nerve.
What are the types of ulnar nerve entrapment?
Ulnar nerve entrapment can occur at your elbow or wrist. Types include:
Cubital tunnel syndrome:
Pressure or pulling and stretching of your ulnar nerve in your elbow region.
Guyon’s canal syndrome:
Pressure on your ulnar nerve in your wrist region.
How common is ulnar nerve entrapment?
Cubital tunnel syndrome is the second-most common
peripheral neuropathy
that affects your upper limbs. (
Carpal tunnel syndrome
, a pinched
median nerve
in your wrist, is the most common.) Guyon’s canal syndrome is rare.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes ulnar nerve entrapment?
Activities that stretch your ulnar nerve at your elbow, or put a lot of pressure on your elbow, can lead to cubital tunnel syndrome. Sleeping with your elbows bent for long periods can cause or worsen symptoms of ulnar nerve entrapment.
Advertisement
Ganglion cysts
are noncancerous fluid-filled sacs that form near your wrist joint. These cysts cause up to 40% of Guyon’s canal syndrome. Another 45% of Guyon’s canal syndrome diagnoses occur for no apparent reason (idiopathic). Less commonly, cysts can also cause pressure on the ulnar nerve within your elbow.
Other causes of ulnar nerve entrapment and damage include:
Accidents and trauma.
Arthritis
.
Broken bones
and
bone spurs
.
Complications from surgeries to treat carpal tunnel or
shoulder fractures
.
Diabetes
.
Dislocated elbow
.
Pressure from
casts or splints
or using
crutches
.
Tumors
or cysts.
What are the risk factors for ulnar nerve entrapment?
Ulnar nerve entrapment affects more men than women. People who do jobs or activities that require a lot of elbow or wrist pressure or stretching are most at risk, such as:
Baseball players, golfers and tennis players.
Bicyclists.
Construction workers.
People who
smoke
.
Typists, writers and others who use a keyboard frequently.
Weightlifters.
What are the symptoms of ulnar nerve entrapment and damage?
Signs come on gradually and may come and go. Symptoms may get worse at night or when you do activities that stretch or put pressure on your elbow or wrist.
Symptoms of ulnar nerve entrapment and damage include:
Curving pinky and ring fingers (like a claw).
Elbow pain (cubital tunnel syndrome) or
wrist pain
(Guyon’s canal syndrome).
Numbness and tingling in your pinky and ring fingers.
Hand weakness that makes it hard to hold onto or pick up items or perform tasks like writing or buttoning a shirt.
Muscle loss in your ring or pinky fingers (a rare symptom).
Diagnosis and Tests
What physical exams can diagnose ulnar nerve entrapment?
Your healthcare provider may perform several tests during your physical exam to evaluate your symptoms. These tests seem simple, but they help your healthcare provider assess finger and hand strength. They include:
Froment’s test:
Your health provider observes how you hold a piece of paper between your thumb and index finger. Flexing at the interphalangeal joint at the tip of the thumb may indicate a nerve problem.
Tinel’s test:
Your healthcare provider gently taps your elbow’s funny bone (ulnar nerve). An extreme shock-like sensation in your pinky or ring finger may suggest a nerve problem.
Wartenberg’s sign:
Your healthcare provider watches as you spread your fingers apart and then bring them back together while resting your hand on a flat surface. You may have a nerve problem if you can’t bring your pinky finger in to meet with the others.
What diagnostic tests can detect ulnar nerve entrapment?
These tests can confirm or rule out ulnar nerve entrapment:
Electromyography
(EMG),
including nerve conduction studies, measure how well signals travel through nerves to stimulate muscles.
MRI
,
neuromuscular ultrasound
or X-rays
can show signs of nerve compression and help rule out problems like arthritis, ligament injuries and fractures.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What are nonsurgical treatments for ulnar nerve entrapment?
Nonsurgical treatments for ulnar nerve entrapment include:
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
to relieve
nerve (neuropathic) pain
and swelling.
Physical and occupational therapy
to help you improve flexibility and learn to perform tasks in new ways that are less likely to irritate your ulnar nerve. You may learn nerve-gliding exercises to help your ulnar nerve move more smoothly through ulnar tunnels.
Splints or braces
to support your wrist or elbow.
What are surgical treatments for ulnar nerve entrapment?
If nonsurgical treatments don’t help, you may need surgery. Depending on the cause of the nerve entrapment, surgery can:
“Release” your pinched ulnar nerve at the point of entrapment.
Remove tumors or cysts.
Move your ulnar nerve to the front of your bony elbow joint.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Wrist and Elbow Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What are the complications of ulnar nerve entrapment?
Ulnar nerve entrapment in your elbow or wrist that’s severe can cause muscle loss in your hand. This damage may be permanent in some cases, which is why it’s important to see your healthcare provider early about symptoms.
What’s the prognosis for people with ulnar nerve entrapments?
About half of all people with ulnar nerve entrapment get symptom relief through nonsurgical means.
When needed, surgery may eliminate nerve pain and other symptoms. But for about 1 in 8 people with cubital tunnel syndrome, symptoms may return if the procedure doesn’t fully treat the underlying cause. There’s also a risk of surgical damage to your median nerve, ulnar artery or ligaments in your elbow or wrist.
Advertisement
Prevention
How can I prevent ulnar nerve entrapment?
These steps can lower your risk of developing ulnar nerve entrapment, or ease symptoms:
Extend and stretch your arms throughout the day if you’re involved in activities that keep your elbows bent for an extended time.
Don’t rest your elbows on an office chair or desk while typing or working on a computer.
Secure a towel around your straightened arm at night to keep from sleeping on a bent elbow. Or you can wear an elbow brace backward on the elbow joint.
Living With
When should I call my doctor?
You should call your healthcare provider if you experience:
Difficulty picking up or holding onto items.
Elbow or wrist pain.
Hand or finger numbness or tingling.
Problems doing daily tasks like buttoning a shirt or holding a pen.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ulnar nerve entrapment occurs when something irritates or puts pressure on your ulnar nerve that runs down your arm. Cubital tunnel syndrome affects your ulnar nerve in your elbow. It’s the most common type of ulnar nerve entrapment. Guyon’s canal syndrome, which affects the nerve in your wrist, is a rare peripheral neuropathy. Talk to your healthcare provider if you experience numbness, pain or tingling in your hands or fingers. You can take steps to prevent nerve damage.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
We diagnose and treat conditions that cause wrist pain and elbow pain. Learn how Cleveland Clinic experts use minimally invasive treatments to relieve your discomfort.
Wrist and Elbow Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/05/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment