Stiff Person Syndrome (SPS): What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Stiff Person Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Stiff Person Syndrome
Stiff person syndrome is a rare, chronic condition that causes muscle stiffness and painful muscle spasms. The severity of symptoms varies from person to person. There’s no cure for stiff person syndrome, but treatment can help manage symptoms and slow the progression of the condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stiff Person Syndrome Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is stiff person syndrome?
Stiff person syndrome (SPS) is a rare autoimmune neurological disorder that causes
muscle stiffness
in your trunk and abdomen (the middle part of your body). Over time, you may also develop stiffness (rigidity) and spasms in your legs and other muscles. Walking may be difficult, and you may become more prone to falls and injury.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Understanding and managing your stiff person syndrome diagnosis can be overwhelming. Your healthcare team will create a treatment plan that’s unique to you and your symptoms, as they vary from person to person. It’s important to make sure you’re getting the support you need to stay healthy by scheduling regular visits with your providers throughout your life.
Stiff person syndrome used to be called “stiff man syndrome,” but the name was updated to reflect that it can affect anyone, regardless of age or sex.
Symptoms and Causes
The triggers of stiff person syndrome symptoms can influence how you go about your daily routine.
What are the symptoms of stiff person syndrome?
The two main symptoms of stiff person syndrome are:
Muscle stiffness or rigidity.
Painful
muscle spasms
.
Symptoms can develop at any age, but they most often begin in your 30s and 40s.
Stiff person syndrome symptoms can spread to other areas of your body and/or get worse over time. Symptoms can take several months to a few years to develop. Some people’s symptoms remain the same for years. Others experience slowly worsening symptoms, including more severe spasticity/rigidity, which can limit their ability to perform activities of daily living.
Muscle stiffness
In most cases of stiff person syndrome, the first symptom you’ll experience is muscle stiffness in your trunk (abdomen, chest and
back muscles
). The rigidity causes pain and an aching discomfort. These symptoms can fluctuate (swing) in severity without a clear reason or trigger. They can also affect your arms and legs. As stiffness increases, some people develop an abnormal
posture
that can make it difficult to walk or move.
Advertisement
Muscle spasms
Painful muscle spasms are another symptom of stiff person syndrome. They can involve your entire body or only a specific area. These spasms can last a few seconds, minutes or, occasionally, a few hours.
What triggers stiff person syndrome?
Symptoms of stiff person syndrome, like muscle spasms, can trigger (happen) after:
Unexpected or loud noises.
Physical touch or stimulation.
Changes in temperature, including cold environments.
Stressful events.
Due to the unpredictable triggers of muscle spasms, some people with SPS develop
anxiety
and
agoraphobia
— an extreme fear of entering open or crowded places or of leaving their homes. This is because it’s more difficult to avoid the triggers of muscle spasms out in public.
What causes stiff person syndrome?
Researchers don’t know the exact cause of stiff person syndrome. But they think it’s an
autoimmune condition
. This is a condition in which your
immune system
attacks healthy cells for unknown reasons.
Studies suggest antibodies may play a role in SPS. Many people with stiff person syndrome make
antibodies
against glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD). GAD makes a
neurotransmitter
called
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
, which helps control muscle movement.
Researchers don’t yet understand the exact role that GAD plays in the development and worsening of stiff person syndrome. It’s important to note that the presence of GAD antibodies doesn’t mean that you have stiff person syndrome. In fact, a small portion of the general population has GAD antibodies without any adverse effects.
There are other antibodies associated with stiff person syndrome, including glycine receptor, amphiphysin and DPPX (dipeptidyl peptidase-like protein 6) antibodies. There are also some people with this condition who have no detectable known antibodies. Research is ongoing to discover if other potential antibodies may also cause symptoms.
What are the risk factors for stiff person syndrome?
Stiff person syndrome is twice as common in
females
. It may also happen with other autoimmune conditions, like:
Type 1 diabetes
.
Autoimmune thyroid disease.
Vitiligo
.
Pernicious anemia
.
Celiac disease
.
How common is stiff person syndrome?
Stiff person syndrome is very rare. About 1 out of every 1 million people have this condition.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is stiff person syndrome diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose stiff person syndrome by looking for specific signs of the condition with exams and testing. They’ll ask you questions about your symptoms during a
physical exam
and
neurological exam
.
If your provider suspects stiff person syndrome, they may offer tests, which could include:
Antibody blood test
: A blood test can check for the presence of antibodies to GAD (or other relevant antibodies) and for other signs that might indicate or rule out other diseases.
Electromyography (EMG)
: This test measures electrical activity in your muscles and can help rule out other causes of your symptoms.
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
: During a lumbar puncture, a healthcare provider uses a needle to draw fluid from your spinal canal to check for the presence of antibodies to GAD. They’ll also look for other signs that might indicate or rule out other conditions.
Advertisement
Stiff person syndrome can be difficult to diagnose, as it’s rare and its symptoms are similar to other conditions, like
ankylosing spondylitis
,
multiple sclerosis
or other autoimmune conditions.
Types of stiff person syndrome
There are several different subtypes or classifications for stiff person syndrome, including:
Classic stiff person syndrome
: This is the most common form. It’s associated with GAD (glutamic acid decarboxylase) antibodies, though studies have reported other antibody associations.
Stiff person syndrome variants
: There are several variants of stiff person syndrome that can involve specific parts of your body or involve more prominent incoordination (
ataxia
).
Progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and
myoclonus
(PERM)
: PERM is a more severe variant of stiff person syndrome, causing decreased consciousness, eye movement issues, ataxia and
autonomic dysfunction
. PERM commonly requires management in a hospital due to
autonomic
dysfunction.
Management and Treatment
How is stiff person syndrome treated?
The two main treatment strategies for stiff person syndrome include:
Medications and therapies for symptom management.
Immunotherapy, or disease-modifying treatment.
Treatment for stiff person syndrome varies based on your symptoms. Treatment aims to manage how symptoms affect you and improve your mobility and comfort.
Advertisement
Your healthcare team may include several specialists, including:
Neurologists
, specifically, neuroimmunologists.
Occupational
and
physical therapists
.
Physical medicine and rehabilitation specialists.
Speech therapists
.
Mental health specialists, like
psychologists
.
Medications and therapies for stiff person syndrome
Medications can help decrease stiffness, rigidity and painful muscle spasms, including:
Benzodiazepines
:
Benzodiazepines
are a class of drugs that treat a variety of conditions, like anxiety, seizures and insomnia. They affect GABA signals. Healthcare providers often prescribe
diazepam
as a first-line treatment for stiff person syndrome.
Muscle relaxants
:
Baclofen
can help treat muscle spasms. It works by relaxing your muscles, which reduces muscle stiffness.
Neuropathic pain medications
: Medications like
gabapentin
and
pregabalin
also affect GABA signals and can help with stiff person syndrome symptoms.
Therapies that may also help manage symptoms include:
Physical therapy
or
occupational therapy
.
Massage.
Hydrotherapy
(water therapy).
Heat therapy.
Acupuncture
.
Immunotherapy for stiff person syndrome
There’s some evidence to suggest that intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) treatment (a type of
immunotherapy
) can improve stiff person syndrome symptoms.
Advertisement
IVIg contains immunoglobulins (natural antibodies your immune system produces) donated by thousands of people with healthy immune systems.
Can stiff person syndrome be cured?
There’s currently no cure for stiff person syndrome. Treatment can help you manage symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stiff Person Syndrome Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis for stiff person syndrome?
Stiff person syndrome is a chronic (lifelong) condition. The prognosis (outlook) varies from person to person based on a few factors, including:
Symptom severity.
How quickly the condition progresses.
How well treatment helps.
Starting treatment soon after symptoms begin is essential to prevent or lessen the syndrome’s progression and avoid long-term complications. Most people with stiff person syndrome improve with medications, but it can still be difficult to manage triggers that cause muscle spasms.
Over time, walking can become more and more difficult. Your ability to perform daily routine tasks may also decline over time. The increased risk of falls also becomes a growing concern as the condition worsens. You may need to use a cane, walker or wheelchair for assistance.
Prevention
Can stiff person syndrome be prevented?
As stiff person syndrome is an autoimmune-related condition, there isn’t anything you can do to prevent it.
Living With
How do I take care of myself if I have stiff person syndrome?
If possible, try to find a healthcare provider who specializes in researching and treating stiff person syndrome. Because the syndrome is rare, this could be difficult. You may have to advocate for yourself to ensure you get the best medical care that can help you have the best quality of life.
It’s common for people with stiff person syndrome to experience anxiety or
depression
related to the condition. If you’re experiencing mental health symptoms, it’s important to talk to your provider or a mental health specialist, like a therapist or psychologist.
You and your family may also want to consider joining a support group to meet others who can relate to your experiences.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
If you have stiff person syndrome, you’ll need to see your healthcare team regularly to check if your treatment is working and to monitor the progression of your symptoms.
If you notice new symptoms or side effects of your medications, talk to your provider.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you have stiff person syndrome, it may help to ask your healthcare provider the following questions:
What treatment do you recommend based on my symptoms?
What can I do at home to help my symptoms?
What signs of complications should I look out for?
What can I expect to happen to my health in the future?
Are there any clinical trials for stiff person syndrome?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It isn’t easy learning that you have a rare condition like stiff person syndrome. You may feel overwhelmed and unsure of what your future may look like. But you don’t have to face this alone. Your care team will be with you to answer any questions and help you manage symptoms as they arise.
While your care may focus on your physical health, make sure to monitor your mental health as well. Symptoms affect each person differently. But living with pain, discomfort and unpredictable muscle spasms can take a toll on your emotional well-being. Stiff person syndrome may make going out in public or performing everyday tasks more difficult, so don’t hesitate to contact a healthcare provider in addition to loved ones if you need support.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
There are ways to manage the pain, rigidity and spasms that come with stiff person syndrome. Cleveland Clinic’s expert providers are here to help.
Stiff Person Syndrome Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/10/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment