Reye’s Syndrome Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Reye’s Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Reye’s Syndrome
Reye’s syndrome is a rare childhood illness that can affect children who receive aspirin (salicylate) to treat a viral illness like the flu or chickenpox. Reye’s syndrome causes brain damage because their livers stop filtering toxic ammonia out of their blood. To prevent it, don’t give aspirin or aspirin-containing products to children under 16.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Reye’s Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Reye’s Syndrome?
Reye’s syndrome is a rare childhood condition that makes your brain swell. It happens when your liver can’t filter ammonia out of your blood. It’s most common among children who take aspirin for a viral infection or illness. The condition usually develops within a week after the onset of a viral illness but can happen anywhere between 12 hours and three weeks after one.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Today, in the U.S., there are only a handful of Reye’s syndrome cases each year. But it’s still a serious condition. Experts estimate that it’s fatal in up to 2 out of 5 cases.
Symptoms and Causes
Recognizing stage 1 and 2 symptoms of Reye’s syndrome is key because this condition needs timely treatment.
Reye’s syndrome symptoms
Reye’s syndrome symptoms happen in five stages.
Stage 1 symptoms:
Severe, repeated vomiting
Lethargy or being sleepier than usual
Confusion
Nightmares
Stage 2 symptoms:
Disorientation,
delirium
or combativeness
Stronger-than-usual reflexes (
hyperreflexia
) and showing the
Babinski reflex
Dilated pupils
Hyperventilation
Fast heartbeat (
tachycardia
)
Stage 3 symptoms:
Coma
Decorticate posture
(a pose your body takes on due to brain injury)
Stage 4 symptoms:
Deeper coma with
decerebrate posturing
Wide
pupils
with minimal or no response to light
Stage 5 symptoms:
Seizures
Paralysis
and no deep tendon reflexes
No pupil reaction
Respiratory arrest
Death
Reye’s syndrome causes
Experts don’t fully understand how or why Reye’s syndrome happens. Research previously linked it to children taking aspirin because of viral infections, like the
flu
or
chickenpox
. But newer research suggests that aspirin and viral illnesses might not be the only factors.
Another key factor could be undiagnosed
inborn errors of metabolism (IEM)
that affect mitochondria in your
liver
cells. Mitochondria are the powerhouses of your cells, like engines that burn fuel to work. But having an IEM can make it harder for liver cells to process a drug like aspirin. That, plus the added strain of a viral illness, might cause your liver to stop working properly.
Advertisement
One of your liver’s key jobs is to filter ammonia out of your blood. If it builds up in your blood, that’s called
hyperammonemia
. Disruptions in your liver can make it harder for your blood to clot, too.
Ammonia is extremely toxic to your brain, causing
hepatic encephalopathy
. That makes your brain swell (
cerebral edema
). But there isn’t a lot of extra room inside your skull, so the pressure from the swelling damages your brain.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Reye’s syndrome
Healthcare providers can diagnose Reye’s syndrome using a combination of methods. They’ll start by asking you about your child’s recent illnesses or symptoms. They’ll also do physical and neurological exams.
Lab tests are also an essential part of diagnosing Reye’s syndrome. The likely tests include:
Blood tests
to check
ammonia levels
or
prothrombin time
(clotting time)
Brain imaging
CT scan
or
MRI
Spinal tap (
lumbar puncture
) to rule out other conditions
Liver biopsy
(to check for liver damage)
Management and Treatment
How is Reye’s syndrome treated?
There’s no direct treatment for Reye’s syndrome. Healthcare providers will try to manage the effects and symptoms so they don’t cause serious or permanent damage. Some treatments they’ll use include:
Intubation
and
mechanical ventilation
: These ensure you keep getting oxygen even when you can’t breathe on your own.
Medications
: There are many medications that might help Reye’s syndrome. Some lower ammonia levels in your blood. Others treat or prevent symptoms like seizures, or reverse decreases in your blood’s clotting ability.
Intravenous (IV) fluids
: These keep you hydrated. They can also include glucose to keep your blood sugar steady.
Dialysis
: If ammonia levels in your blood are dangerously high, dialysis can help lower them quickly.
Managing pressure inside your head
: Providers may keep your head elevated. They can also use medications or other means to minimize or prevent brain swelling.
Recovery time
The recovery time for Reye’s syndrome can take days or weeks. It varies depending on many factors. Your child’s healthcare provider is the best one to ask for more information. They can tailor the information to the specifics of your child’s case.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has Reye’s syndrome?
The outlook for Reye’s syndrome is best with early diagnosis and treatment. If your child is given or takes aspirin, call their pediatrician right away. And if your child has taken aspirin and starts showing the early symptoms of Reye’s syndrome, they need immediate care. Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) or take them to the nearest hospital right away.
Reye’s syndrome can cause complications, especially when it’s severe. Some of these can be long-term or permanent effects. The possible complications include:
Aspiration pneumonia
Brain damage
Diabetes insipidus
Digestive tract bleeding
Epilepsy
Intellectual disability
Kidney failure
Muscle weakness
Nerve damage
Sepsis
Prevention
Can Reye’s syndrome be prevented?
Yes, Reye’s syndrome is preventable. The most effective way to prevent it is to not give children aspirin unless their pediatrician or healthcare provider recommends it.
One key thing to know is that many over-the-counter medications include aspirin as an ingredient. That means it’s critical that you read medication labels.
Advertisement
If you have questions about what to give your child, ask their pediatrician. They can recommend products that are effective and safe for your child to take.
Some conditions, like
Kawasaki disease
, still have aspirin as a key part of their treatment. If your child has Kawasaki disease, their pediatrician will take extra steps to catch and treat Reye’s syndrome early.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When your child doesn’t feel well, nobody could blame you for wanting to make them feel better. One key way to avoid an even more serious illness, Reye’s syndrome, is to not give them anything containing aspirin. Make sure you read medication labels for their ingredients. And if you have any questions about what to give your child, don’t hesitate to ask their pediatrician or a pharmacist. They can help you make sense of the labels and find remedies that won’t put your child at risk of Reye’s syndrome.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us