Bulimia Nervosa: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bulimia Nervosa
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is an eating disorder that causes you to eat large amounts of food at one time (binge) and then get rid of it (purge). It can cause serious complications. But recovery is possible.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is Bulimia Nervosa?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What is Bulimia Nervosa?
Bulimia nervosa, also called bulimia, is a serious type of
eating disorder
. It’s characterized by eating a large amount of food in a short amount of time (binging), followed by getting rid of the food (purging).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You may feel like you have no control over what you eat. You might eat large amounts in one sitting, sometimes in secret, leading to guilt or shame. To cope, you may try to compensate by
vomiting
, using
laxatives
or exercising excessively.
This condition also affects how you see yourself. You may judge your worth based on your appearance and feel like the only thing you can manage is how food leaves your body. This cycle is unhealthy and can lead to serious, even life-threatening, consequences. But you’re not alone. Help is available.
Types of bulimia
There are two types based on the ways you may try to clear food from your system or reduce weight gain:
Purging
. You may make yourself vomit, use laxatives, diuretics, enemas or other medicines to remove food from your body.
Nonpurging
. You may over-exercise or fast (not eat) in a way that interferes with your daily routine or general health.
Symptoms and Causes
Bulimia has common signs and symptoms but it may look and feel different for each person who experiences it.
Bulimia nervosa symptoms
Symptoms of bulimia include:
Eating large amounts of food in one sitting (binging)
Getting rid of the food you just ate by purging
A fear of gaining weight and a willingness to do whatever it takes to lose weight
A loss of control when it comes to eating
Low self-esteem and low self-worth
Shame or guilt after eating
Depression
,
anxiety
, extreme
mood swings
or
substance use
Fainting
Constipation
Irregular menstrual periods
Muscle weakness
Bloodshot eyes
Facial swelling (chipmunk cheeks)
Advertisement
This condition can look different for each person. For example, you might not eat a large amount of food before purging. Sometimes, any amount of food can trigger negative feelings that may make you want to purge. The method for purging may also vary.
Bulimia causes
The exact cause of bulimia nervosa isn’t known. But researchers think it may be a combination of
genetics
and learned behaviors.
Popular culture and the media may put pressure on you to have a certain body type. These outside influences can affect your body image and self-esteem. Also, feeling
stressed
, upset or out of control may all lead to the development of this eating disorder.
Risk factors of bulimia
Bulimia nervosa can affect anyone. You’re more at risk of the condition if you’re:
An
adolescent
or young adult
Biologically related to someone diagnosed with an eating disorder
Diagnosed with a mental health condition like anxiety or depression
Female
Complications of bulimia
This eating disorder comes with many health risks. These are dangerous and many can be life-threatening. Complications may include:
Abnormal heart rhythm (
arrhythmia
)
Damage to your intestines and
stomach
Dental issues (
tooth erosion
, translucent teeth or
decay
)
Esophagus
inflammation (
esophagitis
) and tears
GERD
Heart failure
Irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS)
Increased risk of
suicide
Malnutrition
and
dehydration
Swollen cheeks
Throat and
stomach ulcers
Type 2 diabetes
Treating bulimia early may prevent complications and any long-term effects that the condition may cause.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose bulimia
To diagnose this condition, your healthcare provider will perform a
physical examination
. They’ll ask you about your medical history and symptoms. It’s OK to be nervous when talking with your provider. But they want to help you get better and won’t judge you. So, it’s important to be honest about your eating habits and behaviors.
Your provider will review your symptoms with the criteria in the American Psychiatric Association’s
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
(DSM-5-TR)
. They may ask you the following questions:
Do you have repeated episodes of binge eating?
Do you feel a lack of control over your eating?
Do you engage in purging behaviors?
Have you experienced binge eating at least once a week for three months?
Does your body weight or shape have a strong influence on your self-image?
There aren’t any tests to specifically diagnose this eating disorder. Your provider may order tests to see how it affects your health. These tests may include:
Blood tests
Electrocardiogram
(EKG)
Kidney function test
Urinalysis
Management and Treatment
Dr. Susan Albers explains the treatment options for bulimia nervosa.
How is bulimia treated?
A healthcare provider may recommend the following treatment options:
Therapy
.
Cognitive behavioral therapy
is a type of
talk therapy
. You’ll meet with a therapist and set goals to adjust how your thoughts affect your behaviors.
Nutritional counseling
. You’ll work with a registered
dietitian
or counselor to build a healthier relationship with the foods you eat.
Medication
.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
are a type of
antidepressant
. They may reduce binge eating and vomiting episodes. They may also treat anxiety and depression.
Support groups
. Support groups can be a helpful addition to other treatments. Connecting with others who share similar experiences may be beneficial to your recovery.
Advertisement
There isn’t one treatment that works best for everyone. You may need to try different techniques or paths to reach your goals.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If your relationship with food causes you stress or gets in the way of your everyday life, you should talk to a healthcare provider.
Seek immediate treatment if you also have any of the following symptoms:
Chest pain
Dizziness
Fainting
Heart palpitations
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
)
Severe
sore throat
If you’re
thinking about suicide
, someone is available to help you 24/7. Call or text
988
. This is the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline (U.S.). Don’t hesitate to reach out, even if you’re not in a crisis.
If you’re in immediate danger, call 911 or your local emergency services number.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Bulimia recovery
Recovery is possible. It takes time to get there. Your healthcare providers will work with you to create a treatment plan that’s right for you and your symptoms. Your therapist will help you set realistic goals and work with you to achieve them.
It’s important to know that relapses are possible. A relapse is when you go back to unhealthy behaviors after a period of practicing healthy ones. It’ll be easy to see a relapse as a failure, but it’s not a judgment of who you are. Recovery is challenging and hard work. But remember, you’re never alone. Your care team can help you get back on track. They’ll make adjustments to your treatment plan as needed.
Advertisement
If untreated, you may develop serious, often life-threatening complications. It’s important to seek treatment if you haven’t already.
Additional Common Questions
What is it like living with bulimia?
Everyone’s experience with this eating disorder is different. Here are some examples of what it might feel like to live with bulimia:
I worry about going out to eat in public because I don’t want to eat too much too fast and not have access to a restroom.
I avoid looking at myself in mirrors because I don’t like the way I look.
I feel like the only control I have in my life is purging.
Binging is comforting when I’m stressed, but I eat so fast that I don’t even taste the food.
I feel so guilty (like I committed a crime) after eating. I feel like purging is the only way I can undo the damage.
If these thoughts sound familiar, it’s time to reach out to a healthcare provider or mental health professional. They can help you build a better relationship with food and your self-image.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s common to worry about what you eat and your body size. But bulimia is much more than that. It’s an intense preoccupation that can lead to many health complications. If you think you have this condition, don’t hesitate to seek help. With the right medical care and mental health support, recovery is possible. Take the first step toward protecting your well-being by talking to a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment