Salpingitis: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Salpingitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Salpingitis
Salpingitis is a bacterial infection of your fallopian tubes. STIs like gonorrhea and chlamydia cause most cases. Antibiotics can treat salpingitis. Left untreated, it can cause permanent damage to your fallopian tubes and result in infertility.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is salpingitis?
Salpingitis is inflammation of your
fallopian tubes
due to an infection. It’s a type of
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
. Salpingitis can affect one or both fallopian tubes.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
like
gonorrhea
and
chlamydia
are the most common causes of salpingitis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Left untreated, salpingitis can cause long-term damage to your fallopian tubes. A healthcare provider treats salpingitis with
antibiotics
and in severe cases, the tube(s) may need to be removed when it continues to cause pain.
Salpingitis affects up to
1 in 10
females
. Often, people aren’t aware that they have salpingitis until their healthcare provider looks for causes of
infertility
or
pelvic pain
.
Types of salpingitis
Salpingitis can be either chronic or acute:
Acute salpingitis
: This type happens many times with PID. Common symptoms are yellow and foul-smelling
vaginal discharge
and pain during
menstruation
or with sexual intercourse.
Chronic salpingitis
: Symptoms tend to be mild, but they linger and last longer. Sometimes, chronic salpingitis occurs after acute salpingitis.
What is the difference between pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) and salpingitis?
Salpingitis is a type of PID. “PID” is a general term that refers to infections of your
reproductive organs
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of salpingitis?
You may not have any symptoms of salpingitis. But if you do, some of the most common symptoms are:
Smelly and/or yellow vaginal discharge.
Pain during sex, menstruation or
ovulation
.
Spotting between periods.
Pelvic, abdominal or lower back pain.
Fever
.
Nausea or vomiting
.
Needing to
pee more often
.
What are the most common causes of salpingitis?
The causes of salpingitis are:
Advertisement
Infection
: Salpingitis develops most often from a bacterial infection you get through sexual intercourse. The bacteria
Chlamydia trachomatis
(chlamydia) and
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(gonorrhea) cause most cases of salpingitis. Other bacteria like
Mycoplasma
,
Staphylococcus
and
Streptococcus
can also cause it. The bacteria enter your body through sexual contact and spread to your fallopian tubes. There are other atypical causes like tuberculosis.
Procedures or prior surgery
: While rare, it’s possible to get salpingitis after surgical procedures, as bacteria can enter your
vagina
, move upward into your uterus and then to your fallopian tubes. This could include procedures like a uterine
biopsy
, laparoscopy,
hysteroscopy
or during
IUD insertion
. It can also happen after a
C-section
.
It may be possible to develop salpingitis due to a
congenital malformation
of your fallopian tube or from an overgrowth of tissue inside your fallopian tube. Experts agree this is rare and that most cases of salpingitis occur due to STIs.
How does salpingitis spread?
Salpingitis most commonly happens because of a bacterial infection that spreads through sexual activity. Having unprotected sex increases your risk of spreading infection. While salpingitis can affect just one fallopian tube, it’s common for the infection to spread to the other fallopian tube, too.
What are the risk factors for salpingitis?
As STIs are the most common causes of salpingitis, anything that increases your risk of STIs can increase your risk of salpingitis. People who are sexually active, especially those who have many partners or don’t use protection (like
condoms
) are more likely to get bacterial infections.
What are the complications of salpingitis?
Salpingitis can cause
scars
and adhesions to develop in your fallopian tubes. This can lead to blockages, which will prevent an egg from traveling through your fallopian tube. When this happens, two complications may occur:
Ectopic pregnancy
: This is when a fertilized egg implants in your fallopian tube because it can’t travel down to your
uterus
due to the scarring. A fertilized egg implanting in your fallopian tube is a medical emergency.
Infertility
: The scarring in your fallopian tube can prevent sperm from reaching an egg, which makes it impossible to become pregnant naturally.
An infection in your fallopian tube can spread to other reproductive organs like your uterus and
ovaries
. This can make the infection worse and cause more painful symptoms.
To avoid permanent damage to your fallopian tubes, it’s best to contact a healthcare provider if you have any symptoms of salpingitis.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is salpingitis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose salpingitis with a
physical examination
, including a
pelvic exam
. This gives a general diagnosis of PID. Definitive diagnosis of salpingitis needs imaging tests or, sometimes,
laparoscopy
.
Advertisement
A provider may also order one or more of the following tests:
Urine
and
blood tests
: These tests can help determine if you have an infection.
Vaginal culture
: A culture involves your healthcare provider taking a sample of your vaginal discharge and testing it for specific bacteria.
Ultrasound
: An ultrasound can help your provider get a better look at your pelvic organs to identify potential problems.
Hysterosalpingogram
: This is a special type of
X-ray
that uses contrast dye to identify blockages in your fallopian tubes.
Laparoscopy
: A laparoscopy is a surgical procedure that gives your provider the best view of your fallopian tubes. It’s an outpatient surgery, which means you can go home the same day.
Management and Treatment
How is salpingitis treated?
Treatment for salpingitis involves taking antibiotics to kill the infection. A healthcare provider usually prescribes pills that you swallow for 14 days. Severe forms of salpingitis may require antibiotics through an intravenous (IV) line. An IV is a soft tube that delivers medication directly into your vein.
If the bacteria cause an
abscess
to form, your provider may recommend draining it. If blockages or adhesions develop, your provider may want to surgically remove the scar tissue to repair your fallopian tubes. This is especially helpful if you plan to become pregnant.
IVF (in-vitro fertilization)
can also be an option for people with salpingitis who wish to become pregnant.
Advertisement
Your sexual partners may also need treatment. Urge them to get tested for STIs to prevent the spread of infection. It’s important to refrain from sexual activity until you finish antibiotic treatment for salpingitis.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have salpingitis?
Early detection and treatment of salpingitis will always lead to the best outcomes. That’s why it’s important to contact a healthcare provider if you notice unusual vaginal discharge or have pelvic pain. Antibiotics will successfully treat most cases of salpingitis, but it’s important to begin antibiotics before the infection gets too severe. If you don’t receive treatment, your risk for long-term complications, like infertility, increases.
Prevention
Can I prevent salpingitis?
No, you can’t prevent salpingitis, but you can take steps to lower your risk. This mostly involves practicing safe sex, like using condoms or dental dams and limiting your sexual partners.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a provider if you notice any of the following symptoms:
A foul-smelling odor from your vagina.
Pelvic or abdominal pain, especially pain that gets worse during your period or after sex.
Irregular periods or spotting between periods.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your provider include:
What kind of bacteria caused this infection?
Should my sexual partners get tested, too?
Will antibiotics completely cure the infection?
How long should I wait to have sex?
Will my fertility be affected?
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Salpingitis is a type of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) that gonorrhea or chlamydia can cause. Receiving treatment for salpingitis is important. Left untreated, salpingitis can cause long-term damage to your fallopian tubes and lead to the infection spreading to other reproductive organs. Damage to your fallopian tubes can make getting pregnant difficult. As STIs cause most cases of salpingitis, practicing safe sex and limiting your sexual partners can help reduce your risk.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/01/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment