Dyspareunia (Painful Intercourse): Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Dyspareunia (Painful Intercourse)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dyspareunia (Painful Intercourse)
Dyspareunia is genital pain during or after sexual intercourse. You may feel pain externally on your vulva or internally in your vagina, uterus or pelvis. Factors like underlying medical conditions or infections can cause painful sex. Treatment involves identifying the underlying cause of the pain.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is dyspareunia?
Pain during sex, or dyspareunia, is persistent or recurring pain just before, during or after sex. Dyspareunia is more common in
women
, but anyone can experience painful sex.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Women can feel pain externally in their
vulva
— like in their labia (lips of the vagina) or at the opening of their
vagina
. Some feel the pain internally in places like their:
Pelvic floor muscles
.
Skin of the vaginal canal.
Uterus
.
Ligaments supporting their uterus.
Lower abdomen
.
Men can feel pain on the head of their
penis
, on the shaft, in their
testicles
or in their
pelvis
.
Dyspareunia is a common condition that can have negative emotional and psychological effects. In addition to the physical pain, couples may experience a loss of intimacy or strain in their relationships.
Your healthcare provider may refer you to a
gynecologist
or a provider who specializes in sexual health. They can determine appropriate treatment based on your symptoms and the underlying condition causing you pain.
Are there different types of dyspareunia?
The location of your pain can help determine what type of dyspareunia you’re experiencing. Types include:
Entry pain (intraoital
or superficial dyspareunia).
This pain is felt at the entrance to your vagina during initial penetration. Causes could include changes in
hormones
, vulvar or
vagina dryness
, chronic irritation, infection or injury.
Positional pain
: This type of pain is usually related to your pelvic floor muscles, vaginal dryness or infection.
Deep pain (collision dyspareunia)
: This is pain that occurs in deep penetration. It may feel worse in certain sexual positions. This type can happen due to conditions affecting your
bladder
or bowel, pelvic floor dysfunction, endometriosis or
pelvic congestion syndrome
.
Advertisement
Pain during intercourse can also be described as primary, secondary, complete or situational:
Primary pain is pain you’ve had since becoming sexually active.
Secondary pain develops after experiencing pain-free sex.
Complete pain means you feel pain every time you have sex.
Situational pain is when the pain only happens at certain times.
How common is dyspareunia?
Pain during sex is more common in females, affecting 3 out of 4 at some point in their lives.
Up to 28% of all people in the United States will experience painful sex at least once. This estimate may be low, as many people don’t seek help for painful sex because it’s a sensitive topic.
What age is it most likely to occur?
Anyone of any age can experience painful sex. But it’s more likely to affect women who are past
menopause
(the average age of menopause is 51). This is mainly due to a decrease in
estrogen
, a hormone that helps with lubrication and other aspects of your vaginal health.
Don’t assume painful sex is just part of getting older, though, because that’s not always the case.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of dyspareunia?
If you have pain during sex, you may feel:
Sharp pain during penetration or at entry (or even when using a tampon).
Deep pain during thrusting.
Throbbing or aching after intercourse.
Pelvic cramping.
Muscle tightness or
spasms
.
Bladder pain.
What does dyspareunia feel like?
The most common symptom is pain with intercourse that occurs at your vaginal opening or deep in your pelvis. It can be a distinct pain in one area, or it may affect your entire genital region. There can be feelings of discomfort, burning or piercing pain.
Does dyspareunia cause bleeding?
Dyspareunia doesn’t necessarily cause bleeding. Any bleeding that occurs during sexual intercourse is likely due to an underlying medical issue, which may or may not be related to the pain. Seek an appointment with a provider if you’re having bleeding with sex. It could be normal, or it could be sign of an infection or underlying condition. Rarely, bleeding after sex is related to
cancer
.
What causes dyspareunia?
In many cases, you can experience pain during sex if you don't have enough vaginal lubrication. But you can also have painful intercourse because of an infection, trauma, injury or medical condition.
Medical conditions
Endometriosis
: A condition in which tissue similar to the lining of your uterus is in the wrong place (like your fallopian tubes or abdomen).
Skin disorders affecting your genitalia:
Any type of itchy skin disorder like
dermatitis
can make sex painful.
Pelvic floor dysfunction
:
Problems with the muscles and ligaments in your pelvic floor can lead to pain during sex.
Bowel problems:
Conditions that cause inflammation in your bowels can make sex painful. These include conditions like
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
,
ulcerative colitis
and
Crohn’s disease
.
Bladder problems:
Conditions that affect your bladder, like
chronic UTIs
,
urinary frequency
and
interstitial cystitis (IC)
, can make sex painful.
Hormonal changes:
Hormonal changes, especially those that come during
perimenopause
, can make sex painful.
Nervous system concerns:
Things like a pinched nerve in your back,
pudendal nerve
issues and
nerve
inflammation can cause pain during sex.
Breastfeeding:
Hormonal changes associated with
breastfeeding
can lead to painful sex.
Vulvodynia
:
A condition that causes chronic pain in the vulvar area.
Genitourinary syndrome of menopause (GSM)
: Your vaginal lining can lose its normal moisture and thickness and become dry, thin and inflamed.
Vaginismus
: Involuntary spasms of your vaginal muscles, often caused by fear of being hurt or prior trauma.
Advertisement
Trauma or injury
Intercourse too soon after surgery or
childbirth
.
Injury to the vulva or vagina.
Injuries may include a
tear from childbirth
or from a cut (
episiotomy
) in your
perineum
(the area of skin between your vagina and the anus) during a
vaginal delivery
, or a straddle injury.
Infection
Vaginal infections
: These are common and include
yeast infections
or
bacterial vaginosis
.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
: These may include
genital warts
,
herpes
or other
STIs
.
Who is at risk for dyspareunia?
Pain during sex is more common in women, especially those who have reached
menopause
. But it can affect men, too. It happens to people of all ages and backgrounds. The pain is often due to physical factors or medical conditions, but it can also be psychological or due to a
mental health condition
.
What are the complications of this condition?
The possible complications of painful sex are:
Relationship problems
: Lack of intimacy with your partner can lead to stress or strain in your relationship, leaving one or both of you feeling frustrated or disconnected. You may also find yourself not looking forward to sex or intimacy due to fear of the pain.
Anxiety or depression
: Chronic pain and being unable to do what you want to do can make you feel sad, depressed or anxious.
Unresolved medical conditions
: If an underlying condition is causing painful sex, not treating that issue could lead to complications. For example, if your pain is due to an STI,
infertility
can be a serious complication of untreated STIs.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is dyspareunia diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider can diagnose the underlying cause of pain during sex with a thorough health history and
physical examination
. The physical exam could include checking your pelvis, abdomen, vagina or uterus.
What tests are done to diagnose dyspareunia?
To locate the source of the pain and diagnose any medical conditions, healthcare providers may perform the following:
Pelvic exam
: Your healthcare provider may also collect samples of vaginal fluid and pee to test for signs of infection. Sometimes, your provider will perform a
rectal exam
.
Ultrasounds
:
Transvaginal ultrasound
can get a better view of your
reproductive system
.
Laparoscopy
: In rare cases, laparoscopy is used if other tests are inconclusive.
How do I talk to my doctor about painful sex?
Talk openly with your healthcare provider about any pain during sexual intercourse. It’s normal to feel slightly embarrassed about discussing a sensitive topic like sex. But know that your provider has heard it before and is there to help you.
Some questions your healthcare provider may ask you are:
Where’s the pain occurring?
How often does the pain occur?
How long have you been having painful intercourse?
What does the pain feel like?
What medications are you taking?
Have you had any prior surgeries in the area?
Have you been treated for any conditions that affect your genitals?
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is dyspareunia treated?
There are many approaches your healthcare provider can use to treat your symptoms, but it depends on the cause. For example, if pelvic floor dysfunction is causing the pain,
physical therapy
may be the first treatment your provider suggests.
Are there medications to take for dyspareunia?
Some treatments for sexual pain require prescription medication. If vaginal dryness due to
low estrogen
is the cause of your painful sex, topical estrogens can be applied to your vagina. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a drug called
ospemifene
for dyspareunia due to menopause. Your provider can also prescribe medication to treat pain due to infection or other medical conditions.
How can you treat dyspareunia naturally?
Applying a water- or silicone-based lubricant to your vagina, vulva and labia is helpful when dryness is the main cause. Those who have pain during sex should stop using vaginal perfumes, bubble baths, scented sanitary pads and fragranced toilet paper or wipes.
How do I manage symptoms of dyspareunia?
There are some things you can do on your own to manage the pain you feel during or after sex:
Use a water- or silicone-based lubricant to help with vaginal dryness.
Try different sexual activities or positions that don’t cause pain.
Take an over-the-counter (OTC) pain reliever before sex.
Find time to relax and de-stress before having sex.
Apply ice packs to your vulva after sexual intercourse.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long can dyspareunia last?
How long dyspareunia lasts varies depending on the underlying cause of the pain and the treatment. The treatment may work well right away, or it may be trial and error until you find the right treatment. All of this can affect how long you live with painful sex.
The good news is that you can often find relief and recover. Whether it’s medication, pelvic floor therapy, surgery or using lubrication — your healthcare provider can find a treatment that can improve or eliminate dyspareunia.
Prevention
Is there anything I can do to reduce my risk of dyspareunia?
There’s usually not much you can do to reduce your risk of dyspareunia. It’s often something you have no control over. Some of the factors within your control are having safe and protected sex and maintaining good hygiene.
Living With
When should I contact my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you have symptoms like:
New or worsening pain during sex.
Bleeding.
Genital lesions.
Irregular periods
.
Abnormal
vaginal discharge
.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Painful sexual intercourse can be physically and emotionally difficult. Some questions you may ask your healthcare provider are:
What’s causing my pain?
What treatments are available?
Is there anything I can do to decrease my pain?
How long will it take to feel better?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Pain during sex can lead to physical discomfort, emotional distress and loss of intimacy. You don’t have to live with the pain. Dyspareunia isn’t just part of life or a part of getting older. If having sex hurts you, contact your healthcare provider. It might be an uncomfortable topic, but knowing the underlying cause of your pain is important. Your provider can recommend treatment so you can enjoy a fulfilling sex life again.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/25/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment