Open-Angle Glaucoma: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Open-Angle Glaucoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Open-Angle Glaucoma
Open-angle glaucoma is an eye disease that causes slow, symptomless vision loss. You might not notice it until irreversible damage has been done. Fortunately, once you’ve discovered it, you can treat it, preventing further vision loss. Treatments include eye drop medications and surgery, which may be minimally invasive.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Glaucoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
In open-angle glaucoma eye fluids fail to drain properly through the trabecular meshwork, causing pressure to build.
What is open-angle glaucoma?
Open-angle glaucoma (OAG) is the most common type of
glaucoma
— an
eye disease
that damages the
optic nerve
in your
eye
. In open-angle glaucoma, your eye’s drainage system starts to back up — usually, so slowly that you don’t notice. This prevents your
eye fluids
from draining normally. As fluids build up, they raise the
pressure inside your eye
, causing
ocular hypertension
. This damages your optic nerve.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
OAG is a sneaky condition that starts without any obvious symptoms or causes and continues to worsen, causing gradual vision loss. You might not realize it’s happening until your
vision
is significantly impaired. This damage is irreversible. Treatment focuses on improving drainage and reducing the pressure in your eyes to stop the condition from progressing. Without treatment, OAG can progress to
blindness
.
Symptoms and Causes
How does open-angle glaucoma affect your vision?
Vision loss from open-angle glaucoma starts at the edges of your visual field (your
peripheral vision
) and slowly closes in on the center. Most people have vision loss in both eyes, but it’s usually more advanced in one eye. This makes it harder to notice, because the stronger eye compensates for the weaker one.
What are the symptoms of open-angle glaucoma?
Most people don’t notice symptoms until they have significant vision loss.
Signs might include:
Missing a stair when walking downstairs
Missing some of the letters in the word you’re reading
Having trouble reading road signs while driving
Having trouble seeing contrast in low light
You or your eye care provider may also notice specific visual field defects during testing, like:
Nasal step defect:
A blind spot on the side of your visual field close to your nose
Arcuate scotoma:
An arc-shaped blind spot on the top or bottom of your visual field
Paracentral scotoma:
A small, roundish blind spot just off the center of your visual field
Temporal wedge defect:
A wedge-shaped dark area on the temple side of your visual field
Advertisement
As OAG advances, it leads to gradually worsening
tunnel vision
.
How serious is open-angle glaucoma?
Open-angle glaucoma progresses slowly, but surely. It’s serious because it can affect your vision before you realize it. With treatment, you can stop or slow the progression. But without it, it can lead to
low vision
or blindness. Vision loss from OAG is usually painless. But some people develop a complication called
retinal venous occlusion
that causes
eye pain
with blindness. This can be more difficult to treat.
What causes open-angle glaucoma?
Your eyes have a built-in drainage system for the fluid that they produce. Glaucoma happens when something interferes with this drainage system and the fluid builds up inside. As this happens, it raises the pressure inside your eye. If your eye has elevated pressure for a long period of time, it can damage your optic nerve. This is the nerve that carries messages from your eye to your brain so you can “see.”
Sometimes, the problem in your eye’s drainage system is clearly visible, and sometimes it isn’t. In open-angle glaucoma, your eye’s drainage angle appears to be open and functioning normally. But somehow, resistance seems to build up within it. Experts believe the issue is in the trabecular meshwork — a spongy tissue inside the drainage angle that fluids drain through. Most treatments target this tissue.
Primary OAG vs. secondary OAG
The problem is similar to what happens to the trabecular meshwork
with aging
. It loses cells, changes form and becomes less functional. It’s almost like something has sped up the aging process in these tissues. Most of the time, there’s no obvious reason for this. In this case, healthcare providers call it primary open-angle glaucoma. But sometimes, another condition causes it, and then it’s called secondary open-angle glaucoma.
In secondary OAG, another condition clogs the pipes in your eye drainage system. Examples include swelling, protein deposits or cellular debris. Primary OAG is harder to explain. There’s often evidence of ocular hypertension, but not always. Sometimes, the pressure in your eye can still be normal, but you still have signs of damage to your optic nerve. Certain risk factors may increase your risk of primary OAG, including:
Older age
Biological family history of glaucoma
African racial heritage
Diagnosis and Tests
How is open-angle glaucoma diagnosed?
It’s tricky to get a glaucoma diagnosis if you don’t notice symptoms or vision changes. Seeing your
eye care specialist
for regular
eye exams
can help catch it sooner. If your provider has a record of your previous exams and your eye health history, they’ll be more likely to notice small changes and risk factors that could suggest glaucoma. This could lead to further testing and an earlier diagnosis.
Advertisement
Specialists diagnose OAG when you have evidence of:
Visual field changes
Optic nerve damage and/or high intraocular pressure (IOP)
An open drainage angle
Tests to diagnose glaucoma
may include:
Visual field test
Optical coherence tomography
Gonioscopy
Tonometry
Management and Treatment
What’s the best treatment for open-angle glaucoma?
Treatments for open-angle glaucoma include medications and procedures. Which treatment will work best for you will depend on your condition and how it responds. Most treatments aim to reduce the intraocular pressure (IOP) in your eye. Even if your IOP doesn’t seem especially high, studies show that reducing it slows the progression of glaucoma. This helps to preserve as much of your vision as possible.
Medications for OAG
Healthcare providers often start by prescribing medications to treat open-angle glaucoma. These are usually topical
eye drops
that either increase the outflow or decrease the production of the fluid building up in your eye. This reduces pressure. Don’t worry: this fluid (aqueous humor) is different from the tears that lubricate your eye. Adjusting these fluid levels won’t make your eyes too dry.
Common medications for OAG include:
Prostaglandins
. These synthetic hormones increase the outflow of your eye fluid through an alternative pathway. Examples include
travoprost
,
bimatoprost
and
latanoprost
.
Beta-blockers
. These medications, which commonly treat cardiovascular diseases, can also treat glaucoma by reducing eye fluid production. Examples include
betaxolol
and
timolol
.
Rho-kinase inhibitors
. ROCK inhibitors like
netarsudil
block the action of certain enzymes, causing the trabecular meshwork in your eye to relax and let more fluids through.
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
. These block the action of an enzyme involved in eye fluid production, reducing fluid production. Examples include
brinzolamide
and
dorzolamide
.
Alpha-adrenergic agonists
. These drugs stimulate certain nerve receptors in your eye to both decrease fluid production and increase outflow. They include
brimonidine
and
apraclonidine
.
Advertisement
Procedures for OAG
Your eye care provider might recommend
eye surgery
for OAG if medications aren’t helping enough, or you don’t want to continue using them. In some cases, they might recommend
minimally invasive surgery
as a frontline treatment to avoid medications. There are many types of
glaucoma surgery
. Procedures for open-angle glaucoma tend to focus on improving drainage in the trabecular meshwork.
Common procedures for OAG include:
Laser trabeculoplasty
. This eye surgery selectively targets parts of your trabecular meshwork with lasers. It provokes chemical changes in the tissue that allow fluid to drain from your eye.
Goniotomy
. This minimally invasive glaucoma surgery is performed in the operating room and removes the faulty/clogged trabecular meshwork, opening up the drainage system of the eye.
Tube shunt surgery
. This procedure implants a small device in your eye to drain fluid, bypassing the trabecular meshwork. When possible,
surgeons
use minimally invasive techniques.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Glaucoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis for open-angle glaucoma?
With treatment, most people can stop OAG from progressing, or at least slow it down. But the vision loss you have before you start treatment is irreversible. Without noticeable symptoms, some people don’t realize they’re slowly losing their vision until it’s too late. While most people won’t progress to blindness, glaucoma is the second-leading cause of blindness worldwide. And most glaucoma is OAG.
Advertisement
For unclear reasons, glaucoma affects people with African racial heritage more severely than others. African American, Afro-Caribbean and West African people are
four times more likely
to develop it. They tend to develop it decades younger, and they’re six times more likely to be diagnosed with advanced vision loss. After cataracts, glaucoma (usually, OAG) is the leading cause of blindness in Black people.
Prevention
Is open-angle glaucoma preventable?
Most of the time, there’s no obvious cause for open-angle glaucoma, so there’s no way to prevent it. But catching it and treating it earlier can prevent some of the damage it does. The best way to do this is to see your eye care provider regularly for routine eye exams. If you have a higher risk of developing OAG, your provider might recommend more frequent testing, or in some cases, preventive treatment.
Living With
How should I take care of myself while living with open-angle glaucoma?
If you’re treating OAG with medications, it’s important to take them consistently. Unlike procedures, medications aren’t a long-term fix for OAG. You have to take them every day, possibly forever. This may be difficult if they cause symptoms or side effects, or if you don’t notice the difference when you stop. If your current treatment plan isn’t working, be sure to revisit your options with your provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Open-angle glaucoma, the most common type of glaucoma, develops slowly, without warning and often without symptoms. It can cause vision loss before you’ve had any reason to suspect it. This can be a heavy and bewildering diagnosis to receive. But once you’ve received it, you can begin to treat it. Many people successfully manage OAG with medications and/or with a minimally invasive procedure.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Glaucoma can cause vision loss if left untreated. Cleveland Clinic can quickly diagnose glaucoma and give you the ongoing expert treatment you need.
Glaucoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/09/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment