Tick Bites: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tick Bites
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tick Bites
Ticks are small bugs that can be hard to spot when they’re crawling on you. Tick bites can sometimes spread dangerous diseases, like Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. You can reduce your risk of tick bites by wearing bug spray, covering your skin and checking yourself and your pets for ticks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Tick Bites?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Are Tick Bites?
Ticks bury their head into your skin and can feed off your blood for hours or days. You often won’t feel them biting you.
Tick bites are areas on your skin where a tick has latched onto you with its mouthparts. This can sometimes leave a mark or rash. But often, the bite isn’t noticeable at all, unless you catch the tick while it’s still attached. Tick bites can be dangerous because they can spread potentially serious
diseases
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Ticks are small, wingless bugs that usually live in the woods or tall grass. They bite people and animals to feed off of their
blood
. They’re tiny — sometimes as small as a poppy seed — and hard to see on your skin. And you probably won’t feel them bite you, either.
Unlike mosquitoes, ticks don’t just bite and run. They bury their heads into your
skin
. Then, they feed off your blood for hours or even days. As they fill with blood, they go from flat to rounded. The bites aren’t always harmful on their own. But while a tick is feeding on you, they can transmit
bacteria
,
parasites
and
viruses
into your blood.
Types of tick-borne illnesses
Tick bites can cause:
Alpha-gal syndrome
, a reaction to tick spit that causes an allergy to red meat
Anaplasmosis
Babesiosis
Colorado tick fever
, a
viral infection
that can cause a fever, muscle aches and
brain inflammation
Ehrlichiosis
Heartland virus disease
Lyme disease
, the most common tick-borne illness in the U.S.
Powassan virus
Relapsing fever
, a
bacterial infection
that causes recurring fevers and other symptoms
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI)
, a condition with symptoms similar to Lyme disease
Tick
paralysis
, a nerve condition caused by neurotoxins in the tick’s spit
Tick-borne encephalitis
(TBE)
Tularemia
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of tick-borne illnesses
Symptoms of conditions caused by tick bites could include:
Fever
Chills
Muscle pain
Headaches
Tiredness
Itchiness
or irritation
Nausea and vomiting
Swollen lymph nodes
Allergic reaction
to eating red meat
Skin rash
The rash might look like a circle or a bullseye. Or it might be small, red or purplish spots that are actually spots of blood under your skin (
petechiae
).
What does a tick bite look like?
Tick bites themselves often don’t cause noticeable symptoms like
mosquito bites
do. Sometimes, they might cause a bump, swelling or itching. You most often know you were bitten by a tick because you catch them attached to you.
Where on your body do ticks bite?
Ticks can climb onto any part of your body. But they often move to warm, moist areas to latch on. Common places on your body to find ticks include:
On your scalp and neck
In your groin
Behind your knees
In your belly button
In or around your
ears
In your armpits
Around your waist
Why do ticks bite?
Ticks bite because blood is their source of food. Young ticks (nymphs) hatch in spring and find an animal or person to feed off of. They mature into adults and take another meal in the fall. Tick bites are most common in spring, early summer and fall, but you can get bitten anytime.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose tick bites
Healthcare providers don’t usually diagnose tick bites directly. You might not have any markings on your skin or remember being bitten. But if you begin to have symptoms of a tick-borne illness, your provider may be able to use
blood tests
to check for diseases. Tests can sometimes take a few weeks. So, your provider may start treating you before the results come back.
If you found a tick biting you, be sure to take a photo or write down notes about what the tick looked like (any markings it had or if it was flat or rounded). This can help your provider treat you if you get sick. If you have symptoms of a tick-borne illness, make sure to tell your provider if you’ve been in an area that could have ticks, even if you don’t remember being bitten.
Management and Treatment
What should you do about a tick bite?
If you notice a tick biting you, you can remove it with these steps:
Gently clean the area around the tick with a cotton ball soaked in rubbing alcohol or warm, soapy water.
Use rounded-end tweezers to gently but firmly pinch the tick near its head, as close to your skin as possible. Don’t crush the tick’s body (this can push more germs into your body) or touch it with your hands.
Take note (or a good photo) of what the tick looks like. Is it flat or rounded (engorged)? Does it have markings on its back? Save it in a container if you can. This can help your provider know how long the tick was biting you and how likely it is that it transmitted diseases.
Wash the bite area thoroughly with soap and water.
If you’re unsure how long the tick was attached or if you develop symptoms, contact your provider.
Don’t use kerosene, petroleum jelly (like Vaseline®) or a lit match to remove the tick.
Advertisement
Tick-borne disease treatment
Certain tick-borne illnesses are treated with
antibiotics
or
antiparasitics
. For others, there are no specific treatments.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
When should I worry about a tick bite?
See a healthcare provider if:
You think a tick was attached to you for several hours (or longer) or if it looks like it’s taken a meal (rounded)
You develop a rash
You develop
flu-like symptoms
(fevers, chills, aches, pains)
The bite is painful or blistering
Prevention
Can tick bites be prevented?
You can reduce your risk of tick bites by:
Avoiding long grass and woods
: Keep your grass cut shorter than 5 inches. Stay near the center of cleared paths while in wooded areas.
Using bug spray
: Check to make sure it contains DEET, picaridin, IR3535 or other ingredients approved to keep ticks away. Sources like the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have guides that can help you find the repellent that’s right for you.
Covering your skin
: Cover as much of your skin as possible with clothing when you’re in areas that might have ticks. This includes long pants, long sleeves and socks.
Checking yourself for ticks
: Pay special attention to areas where ticks like to hide on your body. If possible, have someone else check you in places you can’t see yourself (like your back and scalp). Do this every morning and evening to limit the amount of time a tick might be attached to you.
Checking your pets, too
: Pets can bring ticks into your house. Check your pets for ticks often, especially after they’ve been outside. You can also ask your veterinarian about the best way to protect your pets from ticks.
Preparing for travel
: Before traveling, talk to your travel healthcare clinic or provider, or check with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Consider getting
vaccinated
against tick-borne encephalitis if you’re planning on traveling to an area where it spreads.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What are the different kinds of ticks?
Some of the most common ticks in the U.S. include:
Blacklegged tick (deer tick)
. Deer ticks are usually black with areas of reddish-brown or white on their backs, depending on whether they’re adults or nymphs.
Dog tick (wood tick)
. Dog ticks have whitish markings on their backs. Adults are slightly larger than deer ticks.
Lone Star tick
. Adult female Lone Star ticks have a distinctive white dot on their backs. Males and nymphs are brown or reddish with black markings.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
There are lots of things to like about spring and summer: The weather, vacations, flowers blooming. Tick bites don’t make anyone’s list. Fortunately, there are simple habits that can prevent tick bites or catch them early. If you find a tick on yourself, don’t panic. Remove it carefully and contact your provider if you have any questions about whether you need treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment