Glioblastoma (GBM): What It Is, Symptoms & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Glioblastoma (GBM)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Glioblastoma (GBM)
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a grade IV brain tumor. It starts in a type of glial cell called astrocytes. These are in your brain and spinal cord. Glioblastoma cancer cells grow and multiply quickly. The cancer invades and destroys healthy surrounding tissue. There isn’t a cure, but treatment may improve your quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Glioma and Glioblastoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is Glioblastoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What is Glioblastoma?
A glioblastoma is a fast-growing brain tumor that affects adults.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common type of malignant (cancerous)
brain tumor
in adults. It starts in a type of glial cell in your
brain
and
spinal cord
called astrocytes. Cancer cells rapidly grow and multiply. They can spread into other areas of your brain and spinal cord. Rarely,
cancer
spreads beyond these areas.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Glial cells, including astrocytes, are vital to help
nerve
cells function. GBMs are the fastest-growing
astrocytoma
(a tumor that forms in astrocytes).
Glioblastoma, formerly known as glioblastoma multiforme, is a devastating type of cancer that can result in
death
in fewer than six months without treatment. More than 13,000 Americans are diagnosed with GBM every year.
If you notice any symptoms like vision changes, memory problems, headaches or seizures, visit a healthcare provider as soon as possible.
Symptoms and Causes
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common type of malignant (cancerous) brain tumor in adults.
Symptoms of glioblastoma
Glioblastoma symptoms may include:
Blurred
or
double vision
Headaches
Loss of appetite
Memory problems
Mood or personality changes
Muscle weakness or
balance issues
Nausea
and
vomiting
Seizures
Speech problems
Changes in sensation,
numbness
or tingling
Glioblastoma symptoms tend to come on quickly. The growing tumor puts pressure on your brain and can destroy healthy brain tissue.
Glioblastoma causes
Researchers don’t know the exact cause. Like other
gliomas
(tumors that form in your brain and spinal cord), researchers suggest that changes in your DNA lead to the development of glioblastoma brain tumors. Your
genes
contain DNA. They give instructions to your cells about how to grow and multiply.
Mutations
, or changes, to the DNA in your genes can cause cells to multiply out of control.
Advertisement
Is glioblastoma hereditary?
It’s possible to inherit genetic variations from your biological parents. But inherited GBMs are rare. Most commonly, these mutations happen randomly during your lifetime.
Risk factors of glioblastoma
Glioblastoma most often affects people ages 45 to 70. The average age at diagnosis is 64.
These factors may increase your risk:
Exposure to chemicals, like pesticides, petroleum, synthetic rubber and vinyl chloride
Genetic, tumor-causing conditions, like
neurofibromatosis
,
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
and
Turcot syndrome
Previous radiation therapy to your head
Complications of glioblastoma
Glioblastoma and its treatments may affect brain function. You could experience mood changes and
memory
problems. Most people with GBM eventually have to stop working and driving. You may need full-time care. These changes could lead to
anxiety disorders
or
depression
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose glioblastoma
A healthcare provider will evaluate your symptoms and perform a
neurological exam
. If they suspect you may have a brain tumor, you may have these tests:
MRI
or
CT scan
to look for brain tumors
Biopsy
to get a sample of a tumor and examine the tissue for cancer cells
What are the grades of glioblastoma?
Healthcare providers use a grading system from I (1) to IV (4) to indicate brain tumor behavior. Grade I brain tumors grow slowly and are the least aggressive. Grade IV tumors grow rapidly and are more aggressive. Glioblastoma tumors are grade IV.
Glioblastoma can be either primary or secondary:
Primary GBM
. It develops directly from glial cells.
Secondary GBM
. Grade I glial tumors progress to become GBMs.
Management and Treatment
How is glioblastoma treated?
Treatment may include tumor removal surgery (
craniotomy
), radiation and chemotherapy. If surgery isn’t a safe option, your care team may suggest radiation and chemotherapy to try to manage the tumor.
Glioblastoma treatment options include:
Radiation therapy
. Uses X-rays to damage cancer cells. You may need up to 30 daily treatments over six weeks.
Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)
. Delivers radiation to the tumor while sparing healthy brain tissue.
Stereotactic radiosurgery (Gamma Knife)
. Uses focused energy beams to target the tumor with minimal damage to healthy tissue. Often used if GBM returns after IMRT.
Chemotherapy
. Circulates medication in your bloodstream to kill cancer cells. Often combined with radiation and continued afterward.
Laser interstitial thermal therapy (LITT)
. Uses laser energy to destroy the tumor.
Targeted therapy
. Targets certain cell changes that fuel cancer growth. It’s an alternative to chemotherapy.
Tumor treatment fields (TTF)
. Sends low-intensity electric fields to the tumor via scalp electrodes that disrupt cancer cell growth. Often used after chemo-radiation.
Immunotherapy
. Uses your body’s
immune system
to fight the GBM cells.
Palliative care
. Provides symptom relief and emotional support.
Advertisement
There isn’t a cure for glioblastoma.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if you experience:
Memory problems
Seizures
Severe headaches or vision issues
Unexplained weight loss or nausea and vomiting
Change in personality
Progressively worsening weakness, numbness or speech problems
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Glioma and Glioblastoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Glioblastoma prognosis
Glioblastoma may result in early death shortly after a diagnosis without treatment. But treatments are available. They may help you ease symptoms and stay comfortable or prolong your life.
Clinical trials
are underway to find new treatments. And therapies that target specific cancer cell genes show promise. Researchers are also looking at ways to deliver chemotherapy directly to the brain tumor. Your provider will let you know if a clinical trial is right for you.
Most people
live
an average of 12 to 18 months after diagnosis. The five-year survival rate for glioblastoma is only about 5%. That means about 5% of people with GBM are still alive five years after their diagnosis.
Prevention
Can glioblastoma be prevented?
Genetic mutations that cause glioblastoma aren’t preventable. But early detection and treatment may slow the progression of a tumor.
If brain tumors run in your biological family, you may want to consider
genetic testing
. Talk to a healthcare provider or a
genetic counselor
about the risks and benefits of genetic testing.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out you have glioblastoma (GBM) can be difficult. The tumor grows quickly and treatment is challenging. Researchers continue to look for new ways to treat GBM. For now, treatments can minimize symptoms and improve your quality of life. Your provider can guide you through the next steps and help you find the care and support you need.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A brain tumor diagnosis can change your life. At Cleveland Clinic, we know what it takes to treat glioma and glioblastoma and give you the support you need.
Glioma and Glioblastoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment