Radiation Proctitis: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Radiation Proctitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Radiation Proctitis
Radiation proctitis is inflammation in your rectum that develops after radiation therapy. Symptoms generally affect your bathroom habits, including diarrhea, sudden urges to poop and rectal bleeding. But they can be more severe and last a long time. Medications can treat mild cases. But more serious cases may include different therapies or surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Colorectal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is radiation proctitis?
Radiation proctitis is
inflammation
that occurs in your
rectum
after
radiation therapy
to treat
cancer
in your pelvic area. This may include:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cervical cancer
Prostate cancer
Rectal cancer
Urinary bladder cancer
Uterine cancer
Anal cancer
“Procto-” means “rectum” and “-itis” means “inflammation.” The inflammation can cause many symptoms, including discomfort and changes to your bathroom habits.
When does radiation proctitis occur?
It depends. There are two different types of radiation proctitis, and they develop at different times. They include:
Acute radiation proctitis
. This type develops suddenly. It may develop during radiation therapy or shortly after completing it.
Chronic radiation proctitis
. This type takes longer to develop. It can occur three months or even two or more years after radiation therapy.
Chronic radiation proctitis affects up to 20% of people who go through radiation therapy in their pelvic regions.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of radiation proctitis?
It depends on the type of radiation proctitis you have.
Acute radiation proctitis symptoms are generally milder. They may include:
Diarrhea
, which may be bloody
Nausea and vomiting
Abdominal cramping
A strong, sudden need to poop (rectal or fecal urgency)
Frequent urge to poop but you can’t go (
tenesmus
)
Mild
rectal bleeding
Mucus-like discharge from your
anus
(mucoid discharge)
Chronic radiation proctitis symptoms are often the same as acute radiation proctitis symptoms. But they may last longer and be more severe than acute radiation proctitis symptoms. They may also include:
Advertisement
Narrowing of your rectum (rectal stricture)
Sores (ulcers) in your rectum
An opening or tunnel that develops between two body parts that don’t usually connect (
fistula
)
What causes radiation proctitis?
Radiation proctitis may develop as a complication of radiation therapy in your pelvic area. Before you start treatment, a healthcare provider will review the benefits of radiation therapy and weigh them against the potential risks so you can make an informed decision.
What causes late radiation proctitis?
Late radiation proctitis usually develops because radiation therapy causes:
Scar
-like tissue to build up in your rectum or the surrounding tissues (fibrosis)
Wide blood vessels (telangiectasia)
Narrow
arterioles
Who does radiation proctitis affect?
You may be at a greater risk of developing radiation proctitis if you:
Receive a dose of radiation to your rectum greater than 45 gray (Gy)
Have
HIV/AIDS
Have
inflammatory bowel disease
Diagnosis and Tests
How is radiation proctitis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will review your medical history, ask questions about your symptoms and perform a
physical exam
. They’ll also recommend testing to make sure it isn’t a
gastrointestinal disease
that has similar symptoms. These tests may include:
Blood tests
. A provider takes a blood sample to look for signs of
infection
.
Stool tests
. A provider examines a sample of your poop for the presence of
blood
or
bacteria
.
Proctoscopy
. A provider gently inserts a straight, hollow tube with a camera and light at the end (proctoscope) to examine your rectum and anus (butthole).
Flexible sigmoidoscopy
. A healthcare provider gently inserts a long, flexible tube with a camera and light at the end (
endoscope
) to examine the lower part of your
large intestine
(colon).
Management and Treatment
What is the first-line treatment for radiation proctitis?
It depends on the severity of your radiation proctitis. Mild radiation proctitis may heal on its own without treatment. But you can help alleviate discomfort with:
Drinking a formula of water, sugar (glucose) and
electrolytes
(sodium, chloride, potassium and bicarbonate) to rehydrate your body (rehydration therapy)
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs)
Analgesics
(painkillers)
Stool softeners
.
Antispasmodics
For more severe radiation proctitis, a healthcare provider may recommend:
Enema
with
sucralfate
Applying a low concentration of formaldehyde (formalin) to your affected areas
Inserting a type of
corticosteroid
(glucocorticoid) into your rectum (rectal suppository)
Argon plasma coagulation
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
Surgically changing the way poop exits your body (
ileostomy
or
colostomy
)
Surgically removing the affected areas
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
It depends on several factors, including:
How much radiation therapy you need
The severity of your symptoms
Your body’s response to treatment
A healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Colorectal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have radiation proctitis?
It depends on the severity of your symptoms and whether you have acute or chronic radiation proctitis. Your symptoms may be mild or severe. You may only have them during treatment, or they may go away and come back or last a long time.
Advertisement
A healthcare provider will give you a better idea of your outlook and what exactly you should expect according to your unique situation.
Does radiation proctitis ever go away?
It depends. For some people, radiation proctitis symptoms go away after completing radiation therapy. But chronic radiation proctitis may be a long-term condition that causes persistent symptoms. Talk to a healthcare provider. They’ll explain how they plan on detecting radiation proctitis and what they’ll do to monitor and treat it to reduce your risk of long-term symptoms.
Prevention
Can radiation proctitis be prevented?
Healthcare providers try to minimize or prevent radiation proctitis by using modern radiation therapy techniques, such as
image-guided radiation therapy
and
intensity-modulated radiation therapy
. These techniques destroy cancer cells while minimizing radiation exposure to your rectal tissue and other tissues in the surrounding area.
They may also try to minimize radiation exposure to healthy tissue by:
Placing you face-up (supine) during your radiation therapy treatments
Injecting
collagen
between your rectum and prostate to provide protection
Gently inserting a water-filled balloon (endorectal balloon) into your rectum to keep your prostate in place
Living With
What is the best diet for radiation proctitis?
A healthcare provider may recommend changes to your eating patterns to reduce any gastrointestinal symptoms that can further irritate inflamed tissue. They may recommend:
Advertisement
Cutting back on dairy products, including milk, cheese, butter and yogurt
Restricting foods high in saturated fats, including eggs, high-fat meats (fatty cuts of beef and pork and poultry with skin) and oils (coconut oil, palm oil and palm kernel oil)
Eating more high-fiber foods, including fruit, vegetables, beans, lentils, seeds and nuts
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Call a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of radiation proctitis. You should also reach out to a provider if they diagnose you with radiation proctitis and your symptoms don’t go away after treatment.
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your provider include:
What are the chances that I develop radiation proctitis?
Do I have acute radiation proctitis or chronic radiation proctitis?
Why does chronic radiation proctitis take so long to develop?
Is my case mild or severe?
What treatment do you recommend?
Will treatment cure my symptoms, or will they come back?
Additional Common Questions
What is the new name for radiation proctitis?
Another name for radiation proctitis is radiation proctopathy.
Another name for chronic radiation proctitis is radiation-associated vascular ectasias (RAVE).
What vitamins are good for radiation proctitis?
Vitamin C
and
vitamin E
may help reduce radiation proctitis symptoms such as diarrhea, rectal bleeding and rectal urgency.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Going through cancer treatment can be stressful, and dealing with issues that affect your bathroom habits can make it even more challenging. Radiation proctitis may develop during your treatment. But it can also appear months or even years later. It’s important to let your healthcare team know if you notice any symptoms that affect your bathroom routine. They can diagnose whether radiation proctitis is the cause and recommend the most effective treatments.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Some conditions like rectal and colon cancer, Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis may require colorectal surgery. Cleveland Clinic has the expert care you need.
Schedule Colorectal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us