Birth Injury Types & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Birth Injury
Advertisement
Advertisement
Birth Injury
Birth injuries are uncommon, but they can still happen even during otherwise uneventful births. Most birth injuries aren’t serious and need little or no care. But it’s understandable if you’re worried or anxious. In situations like that, it’s important to lean on your and your baby’s healthcare teams. They can tell you more and offer support.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Birth Injuries?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Are Birth Injuries?
Birth injuries, also known as neonatal birth trauma, are injuries that happen to a baby during
birth
. They’re not common, and they’re usually minor. But in rare cases, they can be serious enough to need further treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The healthcare providers caring for you will do everything they can to prevent birth injuries or minimize how severe they are. You may want to keep in mind that it’s impossible to control exactly how your labor and delivery will go. And you should also remember that birth injuries aren’t your fault.
But that doesn’t mean you’re powerless. If you have questions or concerns about your upcoming delivery, you can ask your
Ob/Gyn
provider. They can offer guidance on ways you can help yourself and possibly reduce the risk of having a difficult labor and delivery.
Birth injuries tend to fall into the following types:
Scalp injuries
Bone fractures
Eye injuries
Bleeding inside the skull
Nerve damage
Brain injuries
Birth injuries overall are uncommon. A
2021 analysis
found that about 29 birth injuries happen for every 1,000 live births. It also found that about 23 of those 29 are scalp injuries.
Common birth injuries
Some of the most common birth injuries include:
Broken collarbones
(clavicles)
Caput succedaneum
(pronounced KAP-ut sux-ud-DAY-nee-um), swelling of a newborn’s scalp
Cephalohematoma
(pooling of blood under a newborn’s scalp)
Erb’s palsy
(arm weakness or paralysis) from a
brachial plexus injury
Eyelid
swelling
Subcutaneous fat necrosis of the newborn
Facial nerve
paralysis
Fractured upper arm bone
(humerus)
Fractured upper leg bone
(femur)
Intracranial hemorrhage
(brain bleeds) like
subdural
bleeds
Lacerations of the face or scalp
Nose injuries like a
deviated septum
Retinal
or
subconjunctival hemorrhages
(eye injuries)
Skull fractures
Advertisement
Uncommon and rare birth injuries
Some less common or rare birth injuries include:
Certain types of brain bleeds like
epidural
or
subarachnoid
bleeding
Brain damage from lack of oxygen (
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
)
Internal organ injuries like
liver
or
spleen
hemorrhage
Rib fractures
Spinal cord injuries
Subgaleal hemorrhage
Some of these uncommon and rare injuries can be more serious. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about injury severity in your particular case.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of birth injuries?
Birth injuries can cause a wide range of symptoms. The symptoms mainly depend on the specific injury. Some examples of birth injury symptoms include:
Visible changes like bruising (
ecchymosis
), swelling (
edema
) or discolored spots on your skin (
petechiae
)
Not moving certain body parts (either because of fractures or nerve injuries)
Difficulty feeding
Crying, fussiness or other behavior changes
Hoarseness
or
noisy breathing (stridor)
while crying
What causes birth injuries?
There are a few main causes of birth injuries:
If the baby has difficulty moving through the birth canal (like with
shoulder dystocia
and
macrocephaly
)
From attempts to move or reposition the baby during labor or delivery
From the force of the birth canal’s muscle
contractions
Assistive devices or tools, like
vacuum extraction delivery
,
forceps delivery
or
C-section surgery
What are the risk factors for birth injuries?
There are several risk factors for birth injuries. They include:
High birth weight
. Babies with
fetal macrosomia
are more likely to experience birth injuries. Fetal macrosomia means they weigh more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces (4 kilograms).
Low birth weight or being born very early
.
Babies born prematurely
or who are very small at birth also have a higher risk of birth injuries.
Positioning
. Babies have a higher risk of birth injury if they aren’t oriented the right way, like with
breech positioning
.
Head size
.
This can happen to babies who just happen to have a large head. But certain medical conditions can also cause a larger head size.
Difficult births
. Birth injuries are more likely when labor and delivery are harder or take longer.
Precipitous births
. These are births that happen much faster than usual.
Diabetes
. Babies being delivered by birthing parents with diabetes have a higher risk of birth injuries. Research indicates blood sugar level management may help limit the risk.
Maternal body characteristics
. Birth injuries are more likely when a mother has body traits that contribute to a difficult delivery. One example is
pelvis shape
. The
size comparison
between your baby’s head and your pelvis’s shape can also be a factor.
Advertisement
What are the complications of birth injuries?
Research
links birth injuries to a wide range of complications. They include:
Cerebral palsy
Fetal distress
High bilirubin levels (hyperbilirubinemia) leading to
newborn jaundice
Meconium aspiration syndrome
Respiratory distress syndrome
Needing
mechanical ventilation
or continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) ventilation
Seizures
Sepsis
Transient
tachypnea
(temporary fast breathing)
Diagnosis and Tests
How are birth injuries diagnosed?
Ob/Gyns,
neonatologists
or
perinatologists
can diagnose birth injuries. They’ll use a combination of methods to do that, including:
A physical exam
. It’s standard procedure for a provider to do a physical exam on your baby shortly after birth. They do that to check for congenital conditions and birth injuries.
Diagnostic imaging
. Brain
ultrasound
,
CT scans
or
X-rays
can detect various injuries inside your baby’s body. Less commonly,
MRIs
may also help.
Blood tests
. Lab analysis can help providers diagnose certain birth injuries or related complications.
Other tests are possible, depending on the situation. Your baby’s healthcare provider can tell you more about the tests and why they might help.
Management and Treatment
How are birth injuries treated?
The treatment for birth injuries mainly depends on the specific injury. Some examples of common treatments include:
Advertisement
Monitoring and waiting
. Many birth injuries heal on their own. Examples include minor collarbone breaks, caput succedaneum and minor brachial plexus injuries.
Immobilization
. Broken arm or leg bones usually need to be held in place for several weeks until they heal. Your baby may need to wear a specially made splint or harness to help with this.
Physical therapy
. Brachial plexus injuries can benefit from physical therapy. It can help prevent complications from further nerve damage or loss of muscle strength.
Surgery
. In some cases, surgery might be necessary to repair injuries like lacerations. Surgery can also stop blood from accumulating inside your baby’s skull and pressing on their brain. Surgery may also help reroute nerve signals around an injury, restoring function.
Your healthcare team may recommend other treatments, depending on the situation. Your baby’s healthcare provider can tell you more and recommend treatment options.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook if my baby has a birth injury?
The outlook for birth injuries depends strongly on the type of injury they have and how severe it is. But in general, the outlook for most birth injuries — especially the most common ones — is excellent. Over the past several decades, experts have worked on ways to reduce the risk of birth injuries and improve the ways of treating them. Severe birth injuries are much less common now than they were 30 years ago. In 1993, birth injuries ranked 11th among causes of newborn deaths. But birth injuries haven’t made that list since 2007.
Advertisement
What should I expect if my baby has a birth injury?
If your baby has a birth injury, your healthcare team will do everything they can to manage that injury and talk to you about what’s happening. Most birth injuries are minor and won’t need a lot of care. But in some cases, your provider may recommend you and/or your baby stay in the hospital until your baby recovers enough to go home.
When you do go home, your provider will talk to you about how to care for your baby, things to watch for and more. It may help to write out these instructions or ask for a printed copy. Dealing with sleep deprivation after delivery can make it very easy to forget things.
If you have any questions or aren’t sure you understand, don’t hesitate to tell your provider. Making sure you understand and feel comfortable with their instructions won’t annoy them because they want the best for you and your baby.
Prevention
Can birth injuries be prevented?
Birth injuries aren’t totally preventable. But there are a few things you can do while you’re pregnant that may lower the risk of them happening. They include:
Talking to your Ob/Gyn as soon as possible
. They can help you prepare before you even become pregnant. And they can refer you to specialists like perinatologists, if necessary.
Managing chronic conditions
. Your Ob/Gyn or perinatologist can guide you on how to manage your conditions. That may limit the risk of having birth injuries from conditions like diabetes.
Having a birthing plan
. Your Ob/Gyn or other provider can advise you on specific procedures or approaches that may limit the risk of a birth injury. They can also advise you on backup plans, like when a C-section is a better option for the safety of you and your baby.
Your care team will also do everything they can to help reduce the risk of birth injuries. Everyone, including physicians, nurses and other clinical staff, will work together to prepare and help you and your baby.
Living With
What questions should I ask my baby’s provider?
You may want to ask your baby’s provider the following:
What kind of birth injury does my baby have?
How severe is it?
Does it need treatment?
What treatments (if any) do you recommend?
When can my baby go home?
What should I watch for once I take my baby home?
When should I call your office or bring my baby to the hospital?
When should I take my baby to see their healthcare provider?
Your baby’s provider will set up a follow-up schedule or refer you to a pediatrician who can continue to manage your baby’s care. They’ll schedule regular visits to monitor your baby’s recovery and ensure everything is going well. Those visits will also let them adjust the care plan if necessary.
When should I take my baby to the hospital?
Your baby’s provider will tell you things to watch for that need emergency care. Examples include (but aren’t limited to) your baby being or having the following:
Short of breath
Decreased activity (
lethargy
)
Skin that’s cold, pale or discolored
Dry diapers for 12 or more hours
Unusual irritability or sleepiness
Not taking feeds
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might have imagined your baby’s birth as being a happy, perfect occasion. Learning that your baby has a birth injury is something no new parent wants to hear. Birth injuries aren’t very common. But they can still happen even when you and everyone caring for you and your baby do everything right. Fortunately, most birth injuries are minor and will get better with little or no assistance. In more serious cases, your baby’s healthcare providers will be there to start treatment as soon as possible.
If you don’t understand or you’re worried or anxious about what’s happening, talk to your baby’s provider. They can explain things to you and connect you with other experts who can help you manage and cope with what you’re experiencing.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider