Vesicovaginal Fistula (VVF): Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vesicovaginal Fistula
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vesicovaginal Fistula
A vesicovaginal fistula (VVF) causes pee to leak out of your vagina instead of going through your urethra. It can develop after a pelvic surgery or complications during childbirth. Surgery is the main treatment for VVFs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Vesicovaginal Fistula?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Vesicovaginal Fistula?
A vesicovaginal fistula (VVF) is a small hole that develops between your
bladder
and the wall of your
vagina
. This can make pee leak out of your vagina. It may dribble out lightly or be a steady stream.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A VVF happens when damage to tissue between your vagina and bladder causes the
tissue to die
. A hole (
fistula
) then forms, connecting your bladder to your vagina. You’ll still pee through your urethra. But the fistula lets some pee take a “shortcut” into your vagina.
This condition is a physical health problem. But it can cause emotional distress, too. The good news is that VVFs are treatable, often with surgery. Your healthcare team will help you get the treatments and resources you need.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of vesicovaginal fistula
Vesicovaginal fistula symptoms can include:
Leaking pee from your vagina (
urinary incontinence
)
Thin and/or foul-smelling
vaginal discharge
Painful intercourse
Irritation in your vagina or
vulva
Constant wetness in your underwear, even when you just went to the bathroom
Leaking that starts one to two weeks after pelvic surgery
Your symptoms may vary based on how large the opening is and other factors. Tell a healthcare provider as soon as possible if you have these symptoms.
Vesicovaginal fistula causes
In general, a vesicovaginal fistula forms when there’s damage to tissue between your vagina and bladder that results in the death of that tissue. This forms a hole, or a fistula.
In the U.S. and other high-resource settings, the most common cause of VVF is pelvic surgery that results in accidental tissue damage. Examples include
bladder surgery
and
hysterectomy
.
Advertisement
In many parts of the world with fewer resources, a long, difficult labor
(obstructed childbirth
) is the most common cause.
Less commonly,
bladder cancer
or
cervical cancer
, or treatment like radiation, can lead to a VVF.
Complications of this condition
Complications of a vesicovaginal fistula can include:
An
abscess
or infection, which could become life-threatening if untreated
Fistula recurrence (it comes back) after treatment
Recurrent
urinary tract infections
(UTIs) or
vaginal infections
Living with a vesicovaginal fistula can also affect your mental health and quality of life. It’s important to see a mental health specialist if VVF is causing distress or resulting in social isolation.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
To start, a healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll likely do a
physical exam
and
pelvic exam
. Your provider will also check that the leak isn’t coming from a ureter (the tube from your kidney to your bladder). Ureter leaks need a different plan.
Your provider will then recommend specific tests to diagnose a vesicovaginal fistula. These tests can also help your provider plan for surgery. Tests may include:
Dye test
: Your provider may fill your bladder with blue fluid. They might also give you medicine that turns your pee orange. You’ll insert a tampon into your vagina. A tampon that turns blue suggests a bladder-to-vagina fistula. Orange without blue suggests a ureter-to-vagina fistula.
Cystoscopy
: A urologist uses a lighted device to look inside your bladder.
CT urogram
: This imaging test uses a contrast dye to take detailed images of your bladder and the rest of your urinary system.
Other tests
: Sometimes, a pelvic MRI or a speculum exam under anesthesia helps map the fistula
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
A few small, very new fistulas may close with continuous bladder drainage (a Foley catheter) for several weeks. But most need surgery. The main treatment for a vesicovaginal fistula is surgery to close the opening.
Your surgeon may operate through your vagina or abdomen (sometimes, with laparoscopy or a robot). Together, you’ll decide on the type of surgery that’s best for you.
After surgery, you’ll need a
Foley catheter
for two to three weeks to drain your pee. Your healthcare provider will want to make sure the fistula has healed before removing the catheter.
Recovery time
It can take six to eight weeks to recover from vesicovaginal fistula surgery. Your healthcare provider will give you specific instructions for recovery. In general, they may recommend you avoid the following for six to eight weeks:
Sexual intercourse
Strenuous activity
Heavy lifting
Avoiding these activities gives the fistula time to heal.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll need follow-up visits after surgery to make sure the fistula is healing. Let your healthcare provider know if your symptoms get worse or if you develop new ones.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
At centers that do these repairs often, most people (about 85% to 95%) don’t have leakage after one surgery. Some need a second surgery.
Advertisement
Your outlook depends on several factors, like:
The size and severity of the VVF
The cause of it
Your overall health
The type of surgery you get
In general, complex VVFs are harder to treat than simple ones. Your healthcare provider can give you a better idea of what to expect.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe you’ve never heard of a fistula before. But ever since you got a vesicovaginal fistula diagnosis (VVF), it’s all you can think about. VVFs can disrupt your daily routine and even your sense of self. Thankfully, treatment can help you regain control over the parts of your body that seem to have a mind of their own. Still, recovery may take time. Lean on your healthcare provider for guidance and support.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your urinary system, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment