Ruptured Testicle: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ruptured Testicle
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ruptured Testicle
A ruptured testicle is a medical emergency that happens when the membrane around your testicle breaks. It can occur after blunt force to your scrotum or a penetrating injury. It often requires surgical repair. Sometimes, a healthcare provider may need to remove your testicle. You can still have biological children with only one healthy testicle.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Ruptured Testicle?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Is a Ruptured Testicle?
A ruptured testicle is when the membrane that covers a
testicle
breaks. This membrane is the tunica albuginea (TOO-ni-kuh al-buh-JI-nee-uh). It can occur when:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Something pierces your
scrotum
Your testicle is hit very hard
Your testicle gets crushed against a bone in your pelvis
Your testicles don’t have muscles or bones around them for protection. This means they’re vulnerable to injury. When a testicle ruptures, the tunica albuginea breaks, and seminiferous tubules stick out. Your seminiferous tubules are the structures in your testicles that make sperm.
Although
testicular trauma
is common, a ruptured testicle isn’t. It takes a force of 50 pounds or more to rupture a testicle.
A ruptured testicle is a medical emergency. Seek medical attention quickly if you think you might have a ruptured testicle.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a ruptured testicle
Ruptured testicle symptoms may include:
Severe testicular pain
Swollen testicles
Bruising
Nausea and vomiting
Pain and discomfort in your lower abdomen
Blood in your pee (hematuria)
Pain while peeing (dysuria)
Fever after the injury
If you have these symptoms after trauma to your scrotum, get medical treatment.
Ruptured testicle causes
Testicular rupture happens with trauma (injury). It may be
blunt force
or an injury that pierces your skin (penetrating injury). Examples include:
Bite
Gunshot wound
Impact from a fall or vehicle crash
Kick or punch to your groin
An object hitting your testicle at a high speed (like a ball or puck in sports)
Stab wound
Advertisement
Any
male
can experience a ruptured testicle. But it’s more common in adolescents and young adults who play sports.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose it
Visit an emergency department, your primary care provider (PCP) or a
urologist
to diagnose a ruptured testicle. A healthcare provider will ask you questions about your symptoms and do a physical exam of your testicles and the surrounding area. They may also recommend tests, such as:
Imaging tests like an
ultrasound
or
MRI
Pee tests
to check for signs of infection or disease
Your provider will want to make sure you don’t have another type of problem with your testicle, like:
A collection of blood in the space around your testicle (hematocele)
Infection
Organs pushing through weak muscle or tissue in your abdomen (hernia)
Testicular cancer
Your testicle twisting and cutting off the blood supply
(testicular torsion)
Management and Treatment
How do you repair a ruptured testicle?
Most cases of testicular rupture require surgery to:
Control bleeding
Repair tears to your tunica albuginea
Remove tissue that treatment can’t fix
During surgery, your surgeon will:
Give you general anesthesia so you aren’t awake during the surgery
Make a cut (incision) in your scrotum
Check your testicle and nearby structures
Close any tears in your tunica albuginea with dissolvable stitches (sutures)
Possibly place a temporary tube to drain blood and other fluids from your scrotum
Can it be saved?
Not always. Sometimes, healthcare providers can’t repair a ruptured testicle. In this case, they must remove your testicle (
orchiectomy
).
Recovery time
It can take several weeks to a couple of months to recover from a testicular rupture.
After surgery, your incisions will ooze fluid for a few days, and you’ll have swelling in the area. You’ll likely have mild to moderate pain for several days after the procedure. Pain medications can help. Your stitches should dissolve in two to three weeks. Swelling usually goes away after a few weeks.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Seek medical attention as quickly as possible if you have any symptoms of a ruptured testicle after an injury to your testicles or scrotum.
During your visit, you may wish to ask:
Will you have to remove my testicle?
Was anything else damaged?
Will I need a drainage tube after surgery?
Will it affect my fertility?
How long do I have to wait before I can be sexually active?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a ruptured testicle?
With fast treatment, the outlook for a ruptured testicle is good. Most people make a full recovery without permanent damage to their testicles.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
As you recover, healthcare providers typically suggest that you:
Avoid physical activity, contact sports and sexual activity (including masturbation) for several weeks
Follow up with a urologist to see how well you’re healing
Take
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) to manage your pain and reduce swelling
Wear a jockstrap or tight underwear to support and protect your testicles
Advertisement
Prevention
Can a ruptured testicle be prevented?
To help reduce your risk of rupturing a testicle, you should:
Wear properly fitting protective equipment (jockstrap and athletic cup) when playing sports
Drive safely, and always wear a seatbelt
Be careful when handling guns and knives
Living With
Will a ruptured testicle make me infertile?
Not usually. One healthy testicle is often enough for you to make
sperm
and get a female partner pregnant. If you have
infertility
problems after a testicular rupture, schedule an appointment with your primary care physician or a urologist. They can do a
semen analysis
to check the volume and quality of your sperm.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s common to accidentally take a hit to your groin. Most of the time, it’s minor and the pain goes away after a little while. A ruptured testicle isn’t minor. The pain doesn’t go away with rest or ice. It’s your body’s way of telling you that something is very wrong, and you need treatment as soon as possible. The faster you get treatment, the better your chances of having a good outcome.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment