Functional Seizures (also known as PNES): Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Psychogenic Nonepileptic Seizure (PNES)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Psychogenic Nonepileptic Seizure (PNES)
Functional seizures (FS), also known as psychogenic nonepileptic seizures or PNES, are attacks that resemble epilepsy-related seizures. They happen due to psychological distress, not abnormal electrical activity in your brain. You can manage FS with cognitive behavioral therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Psychogenic Nonepileptic Seizure (PNES) Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What are functional seizures (psychogenic nonepileptic seizures)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What are functional seizures (psychogenic nonepileptic seizures)?
Functional seizures (FS), also known as psychogenic nonepileptic seizures (PNES), are episodes that look and feel like seizures caused by epilepsy. But they aren’t caused by abnormal electrical activity in your
brain
. Instead, these seizures are a physical reaction of your nervous system to:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Physical triggers, like injury or pain
Stressors
in your environment
Past traumatic event
If you have this condition, the seizures you have are real. You aren’t “faking” it. You don’t have any conscious or voluntary control over these episodes. They can be very disruptive to your life. But help is available.
You may hear your healthcare provider refer to this condition as
functional neurological disorder
(FND). This is because your symptoms can be explained by functional disruption in your brain’s communication system. Functional seizures are sometimes understood as a problem with the software rather than the hardware of your brain.
Other names for this condition include psychogenic nonepileptic attacks, episodes or spells.
Symptoms and Causes
Functional seizures (also known as PNES) cause seizure-like episodes with symptoms that affect your movement, awareness and/or emotional state.
Symptoms of functional seizures (PNES)
The main symptom of FS is seizure-like events (or episodes). These events can look different from person to person.
It may look like you’re having symptoms similar to
tonic-clonic seizures
, with full-body shaking that’s common in epilepsy. Or you may have twitching or jerking in your limbs. Events may also present as
absence seizures
(a brief lapse in awareness) or
drop attacks
. The difference is that there aren’t any abnormal brain waves causing the seizures.
Advertisement
Common symptoms of PNES include:
Changing patterns of movement
Convulsive-type episodes with retained awareness
Eyes-closed unresponsiveness
Full-body shaking episodes that are over 10 minutes long
Loss of awareness
Out-of-sync limb movements
Pelvic movements
Rapid side-to-side head movements
In addition to seizure episodes, you may experience other symptoms from underlying mental health conditions, like:
Anxiety
Depression
Panic attacks
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Functional seizure (PNES) causes
Researchers believe FS symptoms are caused by a mix of stress that affects your body, mind and relationships. This is known as the biopsychosocial model.
In addition, the following personal challenges may be contributing factors:
Difficulty understanding and expressing emotions
Trouble processing information from your senses to turn it into movement (sensorimotor processing)
Unhelpful response to stressors (physical and mental)
Genetics may also play a role in how this condition develops.
An underlying mental health condition may trigger these seizures. Common conditions include:
Anxiety disorders
with
panic attacks
Depressive disorders
Dissociative disorders
Mood disorders
Personality disorders
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Somatic symptom disorder
Substance use disorder
Risk factors of functional seizures
You may be more at risk of developing this condition if you:
Experienced physical, sexual or emotional abuse or neglect in your early years
Lived through a difficult or traumatic event
Have a chronic condition like
chronic pain
or
fibromyalgia
PNES most commonly begins in young adulthood, but it can start at any age.
Complications of functional seizures
You may have little to no awareness or knowledge of when a seizure happens. For this reason, you could be at risk of accidents and injuries that could be potentially life-threatening in certain situations.
Before you know it, you may isolate yourself and stay away from others out of fear or embarrassment. This can pull you away from your loved ones, friends and the activities you once enjoyed.
Having seizure-like episodes may also significantly affect your mental health. FS increases your risk of developing
suicidal thoughts
. If you’re having suicidal thoughts, know that there’s someone available who can help you. You can call or text 988. This is the
Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
(U.S.). You don’t have to be in a crisis to ask for help.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose functional seizures (PNES)
Diagnosing PNES can be difficult because symptoms look very similar to epilepsy. Your healthcare provider will make an official diagnosis by recording a seizure or an episode with a video
EEG (electroencephalogram)
.
Advertisement
An EEG measures and records your brain’s electrical signals. During an EEG, a technician places small metal disks (electrodes) on your scalp. The electrodes attach to a machine that gives your provider information about your brain’s activity.
If your episodes are functional, an EEG will show normal electrical brain activity during an episode. However, in those who have epilepsy, EEG will show abnormal electrical activity during a seizure.
Many people with these seizures first receive a misdiagnosis of epilepsy. It’s also possible to have both epileptic and functional seizures in rare cases.
Management and Treatment
How are functional seizures (PNES) treated?
Studies show that
cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT), a type of
psychotherapy
, is most effective in treating PNES.
Your provider will also help you manage any underlying conditions that may trigger episodes. This might include taking
an antidepressant
in addition to therapy, as directed by your provider.
Antiseizure
medications aren’t effective at treating functional seizures.
CBT for PNES
Cognitive behavioral therapy is a counseling approach where you learn about your mind and body’s reaction to various triggers. You’ll also learn how your thoughts affect your emotions and behaviors. A mental health professional can help you identify and modify unhealthy thoughts, emotions and behaviors to cope with stressful events more effectively.
Advertisement
Your provider may recommend other types of counseling approaches to manage episodes or emotional challenges if CBT isn’t right for you.
During your counseling treatment, you’ll meet your provider regularly. Together, you’ll learn more about how your thoughts affect your emotions and seizures. Then, you’ll set and work on achieving goals. When managing functional seizures, you may have some of the following goals:
Learn more about your diagnosis
Identify past or present stressors and find ways to relieve them
Identify and manage common seizure triggers
Improve emotion management skills (like using
relaxation techniques
)
Rebuild your quality of life (relationships, education, career, etc.)
It’s OK if your goals don’t match these exactly. Everyone’s goals are unique to fit their needs.
For adults, your provider may suggest a counseling program called neurobehavioral therapy. This is counseling that uses a workbook and is similar to taking a class. You’ll participate in weekly appointments involving 45 minutes of counseling. You’ll do practice assignments at home. This involves activities like journal-keeping or engaging in a social event. Each week, you can build on what you learned until you’ve mastered specific skills.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Counseling can bring up a lot of feelings that you hide away or try not to think about. If you feel overwhelmed with your emotions or feel unsafe, know that your counselor is there for you to help you in this journey. It’s important to contact your healthcare providers to help you or address any questions you may have about your treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Psychogenic Nonepileptic Seizure (PNES) Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect after being treated for functional seizures?
PNES may impact your life. But with a proper diagnosis and treatment, symptoms may improve. Some people
report
no to fewer seizures after following their provider’s guidance and actively participating in counseling. Your provider can give you the best information on what you can expect in your situation.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that stress plays a part in why you experience functional seizures can be stressful! But it doesn’t have to be. Your care team is available to help you understand your diagnosis in a judgment-free environment. Together, you can come up with a treatment plan to help reduce your symptoms and treat any underlying mental health conditions.
Your providers may encourage you to practice the skills you learn in counseling between sessions. Like anything in life, the more effort you put in, the more you’ll get out of it. Building new skills takes time, so don’t worry if you don’t get it right away. Your providers will support you every step of the way.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you’ve been diagnosed with psychogenic nonepileptic seizures, you might have questions. Cleveland Clinic’s expert neurology and psychology providers have answers.
Psychogenic Nonepileptic Seizure (PNES) Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment