Left Ventricular Hypertrophy (LVH)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Left Ventricular Hypertrophy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Left Ventricular Hypertrophy
Left ventricular hypertrophy is thickening of the walls of the left ventricle, your heart’s main pumping chamber. This happens because of high blood pressure or volume. Thicker walls in your left ventricle can interfere with its ability to pump blood into your aorta. This major artery sends oxygenated blood all through your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Left Ventricular Hypertrophy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Left Ventricular Hypertrophy?
With left ventricular hypertrophy, the walls of your lower left heart chamber get thicker.
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is a thickening of muscles in the walls of your lower left
heart chamber
. This happens when your
heart
works too hard to pump against high pressure and a large volume of blood. Your left ventricle can also stretch out when it’s handling too much blood.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your left ventricle has the vital job of pumping oxygen-rich blood into your
aorta
(your largest artery). From there,
blood
goes all throughout your body.
LVH, an enlarged left ventricle, can happen when your heart tries to keep up with the demands on it. The condition affects nearly
1 in 5 people
.
Types of this condition
To describe your condition, healthcare providers look at the size of your left ventricle and the thickness of its walls. Types of left ventricular hypertrophy are:
Concentric
. The walls get thicker inward and make the space inside of the ventricle smaller.
Eccentric
. The space inside gets larger as the ventricle expands outward.
Concentric remodeling (CR)
. The walls get thicker but the total amount of wall tissue is normal.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of left ventricular hypertrophy
With mild left ventricular hypertrophy, you may not notice any symptoms. As the condition gets worse, you may have LVH symptoms that include:
Chest pain
Dizziness
or fainting (
syncope
)
Fast or irregular heartbeat
Heart palpitations
Fatigue
Shortness of breath
LVH causes
There are many different diseases and conditions that may cause LVH. The most common cause of left ventricular hypertrophy is
high blood pressure
(hypertension). High blood pressure makes your heart work harder than normal. The extra work it takes to pump blood can make the muscle in your left ventricle walls get larger and thicker.
Advertisement
Intense athletic training can sometimes lead to an increase in the size and thickness of your left ventricle walls. But in most cases,
athletes’ hearts
still function normally and don’t need treatment.
Other conditions that can lead to LVH include:
Heart valve disease
.
This may include a leak or narrowing in your
aortic valve
or a leak in your
mitral valve
. All of these make it harder for blood to get where it needs to go.
Diabetes
. High blood sugar levels that occur with diabetes can lead to heart damage.
Cardiomyopathy
. Certain types of this heart muscle disease make your heart stiff or thick.
Aortic coarctation
. This is a narrowing in part of your aorta, which makes it hard for blood to get through.
Cardiac amyloidosis
. With this condition, proteins build up in your heart and make pumping more difficult.
Renal artery stenosis
. This is a narrowing of the arteries that bring blood to your
kidneys
.
Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
. This is a hole in the wall of tissue between your two lower heart chambers.
Genetic diseases
. More rarely, some inherited or acquired genetic variations can cause left ventricular hypertrophy, like
Fabry disease
and
Danon disease
, among others.
Risk factors
You may have a higher risk of LVH if you have:
A
body mass index (BMI)
greater than 30 (
obesity
)
Chronic kidney disease
Obstructive sleep apnea
You may also be at a higher risk of an enlarged left ventricle if you use tobacco products, eat a lot of salt and don’t get much physical activity.
What are the complications of left ventricular hypertrophy?
Other heart issues usually lead to left ventricular hypertrophy. Together, they can raise your risk of serious complications. Left untreated, LVH affects your heart’s ability to pump blood efficiently. These changes increase your risk of other issues, including:
Arrhythmia
Heart attack
Cardiac arrest
Heart failure
Stroke
Dementia
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose an enlarged left ventricle
Even if you aren’t having symptoms of LVH, your healthcare provider may find it during a routine heart screening. Because there are many different causes for LVH, your
cardiologist
may order different tests to rule out these conditions.
Tests providers use to diagnose left ventricular hypertrophy include:
Echocardiogram
Electrocardiogram
(ECG or EKG)
MRI
A technetium pyrophosphate scan, a
nuclear imaging
test to evaluate for cardiac amyloidosis
Blood work
Management and Treatment
How do you treat left ventricular hypertrophy?
Treating the cause of LVH will help stop or slow disease progression. Depending on the cause, you may need to change your daily habits, take medicine or have surgery.
Advertisement
Left ventricular hypertrophy treatment may include:
Lifestyle changes
. Heart-healthy habits can lower your blood pressure and reduce LVH complications. Good habits include eating healthy foods and being
physically active
.
Blood pressure medication
. Lowering your blood pressure will help prevent left ventricular hypertrophy from worsening. It also can reduce your risk of heart failure, heart attack or stroke.
Other medicines
.
An SGLT2 inhibitor (an
oral diabetes medicine
) or
allopurinol
can help manage LVH.
Heart valve surgery
. If aortic valve stenosis caused your condition, you may need aortic valve surgery to replace the narrowed valve. This allows blood to flow properly.
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
. This device can shock your heart when you have certain abnormal heart rhythms. This treats a complication of LVH.
Bariatric surgery
.
Surgery for weight loss can lower your weight and blood pressure. Lowering your blood pressure can keep LVH from getting worse.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if you experience:
Severe chest pain
Shortness of breath
Signs of stroke
Sudden racing or irregular heartbeat
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
Should I have testing to look for signs of left ventricular hypertrophy?
What medications will I need to take to manage my condition?
Will I need heart surgery?
What lifestyle changes can I make to improve my heart health?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Left ventricular hypertrophy can get better or worse.
Studies have shown
that LVH can improve — and even reverse — when you lower your blood pressure. Other factors come into play, though. If you’ve had high blood pressure a long time and have obesity, you may not be able to reverse LVH.
You may be able to live a normal life with LVH if you can manage the condition that caused it. Life expectancy with left ventricular hypertrophy is different from person to person. You may have many other conditions that stress your heart compared to someone who doesn’t. Your provider is the best person to help you understand what you can expect.
Prognosis of left ventricular hypertrophy
Left untreated, LVH (and related underlying heart conditions) increases your risk of serious
heart disease
or even death. Treatment to slow or stop the progression of left ventricular hypertrophy lowers the risk of severe heart damage. An early and accurate diagnosis is the key to improving the outlook for people with left ventricular hypertrophy.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
If you have a heart condition that could lead to LVH, catching and treating it early can make a big difference. Treatment can help prevent left ventricular hypertrophy from developing. It can also reduce the risk of damage to your heart muscle.
Advertisement
Preventing or managing high blood pressure is the best way to prevent left ventricular hypertrophy. In addition to taking any medications your healthcare provider prescribes, you can:
Manage conditions that can cause LVH
Eat foods that are low in fat, salt and cholesterol
Be physically active on a regular basis
Reach and maintain a weight that’s healthy for you
Manage stress
Stop using tobacco products
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may be surprised to learn that you have left ventricular hypertrophy. But finding it before it causes symptoms is a good thing. It means you can treat it before it gets worse. Even if you have symptoms, you can treat LVH. Ask your healthcare provider what steps you can take to treat this condition and improve your heart health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment