Cryoablation: What It Is, Used For, Benefits & Risks
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Cryoablation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cryoablation
Cryoablation is treatment for some common cancers like lung and prostate cancer. It works by freezing cancer cells and eliminating tumors. Healthcare providers may use cryoablation to treat small tumors or when surgery isn’t an option. They may also use this procedure to shrink tumors that are pressing on nerves or nearby organs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is cryoablation?
Cryoablation is a procedure that uses extremely cold gas contained in a needle (or needles) to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue. Healthcare providers use cryoablation to treat several conditions, including
cancer
. The procedure shrinks cancerous
tumors
by freezing and killing cancer cells. Healthcare providers may call this procedure cryosurgery or percutaneous cryotherapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you have a cancerous tumor, your first question may be, “Is there surgery to remove the tumor?” Often, surgery is the solution. But sometimes, surgery isn’t the best option. In that case, your healthcare provider may recommend cryoablation if they think that procedure is the best way to eliminate a cancerous tumor.
When would a healthcare provider recommend cryoablation?
A provider may recommend cryoablation to treat a cancerous tumor if you have:
An
early-stage
or small tumor that a provider can reach without making a large cut (incision) or several small incisions
A tumor that your provider can’t safely remove with surgery. This might be because the tumor is very large or there’s a chance that surgery could damage nearby organs
Metastatic cancer
(cancer that’s spread to other areas of your body) that affects nearby organs or causes
pain
. Your provider could use cryotherapy to shrink the cancerous tumor or help with the pain (palliative cryoablation)
What conditions does cryoablation treat?
Cryoablation may be a treatment for:
Breast cancer
Cervical cancer
Kidney cancer
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Prostate cancer
Sarcomas
Thyroid cancer
Treatment Details
How does cryoablation work?
Healthcare providers do cryoablation by inserting a cryoprobe into your body through a small puncture (hole). Cryoprobes are needle-like applicators.
The applicator contains a type of very cold gas. For example, your provider may use liquid nitrogen, liquid nitrous oxide or compressed argon gas.
Advertisement
When your provider touches cancerous tumor tissue with the cryoprobe, the cold gas freezes cells in that tissue. When the tissue thaws, the cancerous cells die so the tumor shrinks or gradually disappears.
How should I prepare?
Your healthcare team will give you specific information on what you should do before your procedure. The details may vary depending on your situation. For example, you may receive general
anesthesia
. In that case, you may need to fast for several hours before the procedure. But in general, you should:
Arrange for a ride home after the procedure
Stop taking certain medications, like aspirin,
NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) and blood thinners
Take certain medications in advance to prevent pain or infection, as instructed by your healthcare provider
What happens during cryoablation?
Your anesthesiologist may give you local anesthesia that numbs the area where you’ll have surgery, or general anesthesia that puts you to sleep. During the procedure, your provider will:
Make a puncture (hole) in the treatment area
Insert a cryoprobe filled with very cold gas
Use the cryoprobe to touch the cancerous tumor for a few seconds or minutes. The intense cold at the tip of the cryoprobe freezes and destroys the tumor
Use real-time images from an
ultrasound
,
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) or
CT scan
(computed tomography scan) to track the treatment
Possibly need to touch the tumor with the cryoprobe more than once to destroy enough tissue
Remove the cryoprobe
Cover the puncture
How long does cryoablation take?
Cryoablation for cancer treatment may take several hours. The procedure time will depend on your situation. Your healthcare provider will explain how long your procedure may take.
Can providers do laparoscopic surgery to do cryoablation?
Yes,
laparoscopic surgery
is an option. In laparoscopic cryoablation, a surgeon makes several small cuts in the surgery area so they can use more than one cryoprobe to freeze cancerous cells. They may also use an ultrasound probe. This probe sends images of the inside of the treatment area.
What happens after cryoablation?
If you receive general anesthesia, your care team will take you to a recovery room. They’ll monitor your vital signs as you recover from anesthesia.
Most people go home on the same day as their procedure. In some cases, however, you may need to stay overnight so your healthcare team can check on your recovery from treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of cryoablation?
Cryoablation is treatment for small tumors and in situations where surgery isn’t an option. In general, cryoablation benefits are that the procedure:
Can be done without an incision
Causes fewer side effects and scarring
Does less damage to nearby tissues
How successful is cryoablation?
Healthcare providers use cryoablation to treat many types of cancer and for different reasons. In general, research shows cryoablation is a safe and effective way to treat cancer. If your provider recommends cryoablation, they’ll explain why the procedure is appropriate for your situation and what you can expect.
Advertisement
What are the risks or complications?
Cryoablation is generally very safe. But there are some risks, just as there are in any procedure that involves inserting a tool through your skin. Potential risks include:
Skin burn
Complications from anesthesia, like
nausea
Damage to nearby tissues or organs if the cryoprobe touches them
Infection
Nerve damage that may cause
numbness
or weakness
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time?
Most people go back to work or resume their usual daily activities within two to seven days after their procedure. But your situation may be different, so be sure to ask your surgeon about any activities you need to avoid while you recover.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Your provider will explain when you should follow up with them. In general, they’ll schedule a checkup appointment a few weeks after your procedure. But contact them if you have infection symptoms like:
Excessive swelling
Fever (greater than 101 degrees Fahrenheit or 38.4 degrees Celsius)
Pus oozing from the spot where the cryoprobe was placed
Redness or color changes in your skin near the puncture site
Additional Common Questions
What happens to the tumor after cryoablation?
The tumor will shrink after the tumor ice melts. Over time, your body will get rid of the dead cancer cells — and the cancerous tumor — as part of the usual process of finding and getting rid of damaged or dead cells.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have a cancerous tumor, cryoablation may be a way that a healthcare provider can eliminate the tumor without removing it with surgery. Cryoablation works by freezing cancer cells. The procedure is safe and effective.
Cryoablation isn’t a treatment option for every type of cancer, or all cancerous tumor stages. But it may be an option you should consider after talking to your healthcare provider. They’ll answer your questions about cryoablation and recommend the treatment that’s right for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sometimes you have surgery planned. Other times, it’s an emergency. No matter how you end up in the OR, Cleveland Clinic’s general surgery team is here for you.
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointment Center
216.445.7050
Appointments & Locations