Hypertensive Crisis: Types, Causes & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hypertensive Crisis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hypertensive Crisis
A hypertensive crisis is very high blood pressure that happens without warning. Your reading can be 180/120 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) or higher. If this happens, take it seriously and call for help immediately. Without treatment for this dangerous condition, you can have life-threatening issues with your heart, lungs or brain.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Hypertensive Crisis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Hypertensive Crisis?
A hypertensive crisis means you suddenly have very high
blood pressure
. Normally, your blood pressure should be:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Top number (
systolic
) below 120 mm Hg
Bottom number (diastolic) below 80 mm Hg
During a hypertensive crisis, it jumps much higher:
Top number: 180 mm Hg or higher, AND/OR
Bottom number: 120 mm Hg or higher
A hypertensive crisis is a medical emergency. Go to the emergency room (ER) for treatment.
Most people who have a hypertensive crisis have
high blood pressure (hypertension)
. This means their blood pressure is higher than it should be from day to day.
Experts
estimate that about 1% to 2% of people with high blood pressure experience a hypertensive crisis. But such crises can also affect people who’ve never had blood pressure problems before.
Types of this condition
There are two main types of hypertensive crises:
Hypertensive urgency
. You have very high blood pressure, but no signs of
organ
damage.
Some
healthcare providers call this “uncontrolled hypertension” instead of hypertensive urgency. No matter the term used, the goal is to get your numbers to a healthy range.
Hypertensive emergency
. You have very high blood pressure that’s causing new or worsening organ damage. Examples of affected organs include your
heart
,
aorta
, eyes,
brain
and kidneys. Severe preeclampsia and eclampsia are also considered hypertensive emergencies in pregnant patients.
Advertisement
You might also hear your provider use the term “malignant hypertension.” This is a historical term from the early twentieth century. It describes sudden damage to your kidneys and eyes from extremely high blood pressure. Out of habit, some providers still use this term when talking about hypertensive emergency. But providers generally prefer the term “hypertensive emergency” because it has a more specific definition today.
Symptoms and Causes
A hypertensive emergency is when you have blood pressure that’s at least 180/120, along with symptoms like chest pain, dizziness or severe headache.
Symptoms of a hypertensive crisis
Hypertensive crisis symptoms depend on whether or not there’s organ damage.
Hypertensive urgency (very high blood pressure without organ damage) usually doesn’t have symptoms. The only way you know your blood pressure is very high is by checking it. But it’s also possible to have symptoms like:
Anxiety
Mild
headache
Nosebleed
Shortness of breath
Symptoms of a hypertensive emergency (high blood pressure with organ damage) include:
Altered mental status
Chest pain
Dizziness
Edema
(swelling)
Heart palpitations
Peeing less than usual
Seizures
Severe headache
Symptoms and signs of stroke, such as sudden facial droop, slurred speech or sudden weakness in your arms and/or legs
Vision
changes, including eye pain, loss of vision or sudden blurry vision
During an exam, your provider may notice these signs of a hypertensive emergency:
Bulging neck veins (
jugular venous distention
)
Crackling
sounds in your lungs
Heart murmurs
that you didn’t have before
Blood vessel damage in the back of your eye
Unusual asymmetric weakness that raises suspicion for a stroke
What causes a hypertension crisis?
Hypertensive crisis causes include:
Not taking your
blood pressure medicines
as prescribed, for any reason (most common cause)
Suddenly stopping the use of your blood pressure medicines
Medicines interacting with each other
Kidney disease
Endocrine
issues
Preeclampsia
or
eclampsia
during pregnancy
Use of certain
addictive substances
Head trauma
Brain tumor
Certain medicines you take for other conditions
Medicines that may cause a hypertensive crisis include:
Steroids
Medicines for depression
Cyclosporine
Pseudoephedrine
(an ingredient in some cold and flu products)
Risk factors
You may have a higher risk of having a hypertensive crisis if you:
Have
obesity
Are
male
Are Black
Don’t take your blood pressure medicines consistently
Use
stimulant
drugs that aren’t prescribed for you
Complications of a hypertensive crisis
Dangerously high blood pressure can lead to:
A sudden, rapid decline in heart function (
acute heart failure
)
Sudden fluid buildup in your lungs (acute
pulmonary edema
)
Sudden loss of kidney function (acute
kidney failure
)
A tear in your largest artery (
aortic dissection
)
Bleeding around your brain (
intracranial hemorrhage
)
Lack of blood flow to your heart (
heart attack
)
Lack of blood flow to your brain (
ischemic stroke
)
Temporary brain dysfunction (
hypertensive encephalopathy
)
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will take your blood pressure in both arms to diagnose a hypertensive crisis. They’ll also review your medical history, talk to you about any symptoms you have and do a
physical exam
. You may need some tests to help your provider find the cause.
Possible tests include:
Blood tests
Urine tests
Electrocardiogram (EKG/ECG)
Fundoscopic exam
Neurological exam
Transthoracic echocardiogram
Computed tomography (CT) scan
of your chest and head
Your provider will diagnose you with a hypertensive emergency if you have signs of new or worsening organ damage. They’ll diagnose you with hypertensive urgency if these signs aren’t there.
Management and Treatment
How is a hypertensive crisis treated?
Treatment for a hypertensive crisis happens in the emergency room. Healthcare providers give you medicine to bring your blood pressure down to a safe level.
You may go home the same day (with medicines to take on your own) if you don’t have signs of organ damage. But if you’re having a hypertensive emergency, you’ll need to stay in the
intensive care unit (ICU)
for a couple of days. Providers will give you medicine directly into your veins (through an IV). They’ll also continuously monitor your blood pressure.
Your care team will decide how quickly to bring down your blood pressure based on what other medical conditions you have. In some cases, lowering your blood pressure too quickly can prevent your organs and tissues from getting enough
blood
. So, your providers may lower it gradually over 24 to 48 hours.
Advertisement
But they’ll bring down your blood pressure more quickly during a hypertensive crisis if you have certain conditions like aortic dissection, severe preeclampsia or eclampsia. In these cases, the benefits of rapid lowering outweigh any risks.
Medications
Medicines for hypertensive crisis treatment include:
Captopril
Clevidipine
Clonidine
Esmolol
Hydralazine
Labetalol
Nicardipine
Nifedipine
Nitroglycerin
Nitroprusside
Providers choose the right medicine for your needs. They take into account your medical conditions and other medicines you’re taking.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call 911 or your local emergency services number if your blood pressure is 180/120 mm Hg or higher. You need treatment right away.
After receiving treatment for a hypertensive crisis, follow up with your usual healthcare provider. They may want to adjust your blood pressure medicines. They’ll also talk to you about any changes you should make in your daily life.
For example, they may recommend changing what you eat (like following the
DASH diet
) or adding more physical activity to your routine.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
A hypertensive crisis is a warning sign that your blood pressure isn’t where it needs to be. Your provider will help you lower your blood pressure and keep it at healthy levels. Make sure to keep all your follow-up appointments and take your medicines exactly as your provider prescribes them.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Anything with “crisis” in it can feel scary. You might worry your blood pressure will keep going up this high. You might wonder what a hypertensive crisis diagnosis means for your health or your future.
Lots of things can raise your blood pressure to very high levels. And healthcare providers are prepared to identify causes unique to each person. Once you know the cause, you can take steps to lower your risk of another hypertensive crisis.
That might mean setting reminders to take your medicines. Or working with your provider to adjust the medicines you take for other reasons. Each step you take now to manage your blood pressure may help lower your risk of serious issues down the road.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment