Factitious Disorder Imposed on Self (Munchausen Syndrome)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Factitious Disorder Imposed on Self (Formerly Known as Munchausen Syndrome)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Factitious Disorder Imposed on Self (Formerly Known as Munchausen Syndrome)
Factitious disorder imposed on self, formerly known as Munchausen syndrome, happens when you falsify, create and/or exaggerate having symptoms of an illness that you don’t really have. There isn’t a conscious goal or benefit to this behavior. Diagnosing this condition is difficult, but treatment is available when you’re ready.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is factitious disorder imposed on self?
Factitious disorder imposed on self, formerly known as Munchausen syndrome, is a
mental health condition
that occurs when you appear sick, pretend to feel symptoms or intentionally make yourself ill.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most reported symptoms relate to physical illness, such as
chest pain
, upset stomach or
fever
, rather than those of a mental health condition. But if you have this factitious disorder, you may pretend to experience mental health symptoms, too, like
hallucinations
or hearing voices.
This condition can be dangerous because your behaviors may be a form of
self-harm
.
How common is factitious disorder imposed on self?
Factitious disorder imposed on self isn’t common. It’s difficult to determine exactly how many people experience it. Many people seek treatment from multiple healthcare providers, so the statistics are misleading.
Where did the term ‘Munchausen syndrome’ come from?
Factitious disorder was originally called Munchausen syndrome. It got its initial name after Baron Munchausen. He was an 18th-century German officer known for embellishing the stories of his life and experiences. The condition name reflects the embellishing aspect of the syndrome but not its complexity as a mental health condition.
Today, healthcare providers don’t use the term “Munchausen syndrome.” Instead, they refer to the condition as “factitious disorder imposed on self.”
Symptoms and Causes
What are the behaviors of factitious disorder imposed on self?
Behaviors of factitious disorder imposed on self include:
Pretending to have physical symptoms (like a
headache
, stomachache or chest pain).
Pretending to have psychological symptoms (like hallucinating or hearing voices).
Making yourself ill or producing physical symptoms (like damaging a wound to prevent healing or eating contaminated food to make yourself
vomit
).
Advertisement
What are the signs of factitious disorder imposed on self?
If you have factitious disorder imposed on self, you make up or exaggerate symptoms to appear ill. You may:
Falsify feeling symptoms that you don’t have.
Show or pretend to have new or additional symptoms following test results or after treatment begins.
Show symptoms only when alone.
Alter diagnostic tests (like contaminating a urine sample).
Pretend to take medications but hide them or spit them out.
Intentionally harm yourself.
Other signs may include:
Having an inconsistent medical history
Changing or falsifying your identity
Visiting many different healthcare facilities to receive care
Not wanting to allow providers to meet with your family or friends or speak with other providers you’ve seen
Wanting to undergo painful testing or procedures
What causes factitious disorder imposed on self?
Healthcare providers don’t know exactly what causes a factitious disorder. Studies suggest it could involve psychological factors (parts of your personality that influence your thoughts and actions) and biological factors (your brain chemistry and
genetic
makeup).
Research suggests that you might have a motivation to deceive healthcare providers for the following reasons:
Wanting someone else to take care of your physical or emotional needs
Looking for power and superiority over others
Reducing anxiety around a fear of abandonment
Creating a new personal identity
It’s possible to develop a factitious disorder without an identifiable cause.
What motivates factitious disorder imposed on self behaviors?
People with this condition typically know they’re pretending. However, they’re not actively seeking tangible benefits by making things up or embellishing (like avoiding obligations or obtaining disability benefits). The benefits are typically unconscious and emotional in nature. They may not even be aware of the benefits they’re getting.
Is factitious disorder imposed on self hereditary?
There’s no known link between factitious disorder imposed on self and
genetics
. Research is ongoing to learn more about the cause.
What are the risk factors for factitious disorder imposed on self?
Factitious disorders are rare but you may have a higher risk of developing this condition if you experienced:
Abuse or neglect
Trauma
Frequent illnesses that affected you or a loved one
Family dysfunction
A lot of time in a healthcare facility
Diagnosis and Tests
How is factitious disorder imposed on self diagnosed?
It can be difficult for healthcare providers to diagnose factitious disorder imposed on self. A healthcare provider will rule out possible physical and mental health conditions and verify diagnostic criteria. There needs to be clear evidence that you’re falsifying or creating symptoms. A diagnosis usually happens after several diagnostic tests and procedures. A variety of healthcare providers work together to make a diagnosis.
Advertisement
Is there a factitious disorder imposed on self test?
There isn’t a specific test to diagnose factitious disorder imposed on self. Testing to rule out other conditions may include blood tests, urine tests, imaging tests and more.
Your provider bases their diagnosis on the exclusion of physical conditions or other psychiatric disorders and their observations of your attitude and behavior.
In some cases, your healthcare provider may refer you to a
psychiatrist
or
psychologist
(mental health professionals specially trained to diagnose and treat mental health conditions). Psychiatrists and psychologists use a thorough medical history, physical history, laboratory and/or imaging tests, and psychological assessment tools to make an evaluation.
Factitious disorder imposed on self in the
DSM-5
Your healthcare provider(s) will refer to the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(
DSM-5
) to determine if your symptoms compare to the criteria for this condition. The
DSM-5
is the standard reference book for recognized mental health conditions in the United States.
Diagnostic criteria for factitious disorder imposed on self include:
Falsifying physical or psychological signs and symptoms, inducing injury or disease
Presenting to others as ill, impaired or injured
Deceptive behavior that happens without an external reward
Another mental health condition doesn’t explain the behavior well
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is factitious disorder imposed on self (formerly known as Munchausen syndrome) treated?
The first goal of treatment for factitious disorder imposed on self is to modify harmful behaviors and reduce the misuse or overuse of medical resources. After you meet these goals, your care team will address any underlying causes of your behavior.
The main focus of factitious disorders management is decreasing harm. Healthcare providers might work together to make sure you don’t undergo unnecessary medical testing or treatment. Many medical tests and treatments can cause harmful side effects if you don’t need them. Your providers may work with you closely to prevent harm based on your needs.
A form of
psychotherapy
that addresses your thinking and behavioral patterns (
cognitive behavioral therapy
) helps treat factitious disorder imposed on self.
Family therapy
may also help teach your family members more about this condition. Group therapy may reduce feelings of isolation or abandonment.
It can be difficult to treat factitious disorder imposed on self many people who experience this condition deny that they have it, making it difficult to treat. However, treatment is available when you’re ready.
You’ll likely only need care from one physician or the combined efforts of two caregivers with different specialties working closely together; for example, a psychiatrist and a
primary care physician
. Your caregiver(s) will focus on reducing self-harm and educating you on how to care for yourself and prevent complications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis (outlook) for factitious disorder imposed on self?
Your prognosis varies based on your willingness to accept and follow a treatment plan. If you acknowledge the diagnosis and follow your healthcare provider’s instructions during treatment, you’ll likely have a positive outcome. If you deny or avoid treatment, your outcome may be poor, and your behavior could be very dangerous, even life-threatening.
While some people might have only one episode of this condition, most experience recurring episodes throughout their lives. Ongoing treatment is necessary.
Prevention
Can factitious disorder imposed on self be prevented?
There’s no known way to prevent this condition. However, beginning treatment as soon as you notice symptoms may help you achieve the best outcome.
Factitious disorder imposed on self can be dangerous, even life-threatening. If you intentionally harm yourself or take medications for symptoms you don’t have, you may experience severe side effects that can affect how your body functions. Undergoing unnecessary tests or procedures can also do more harm to your body than good.
In addition, many people diagnosed with factitious disorder imposed on self experience
substance use disorder
and are at risk of
suicide
.
If you or a loved one are thinking about hurting yourself or have suicidal thoughts, contact a healthcare provider or call
988
(Suicide & Crisis Lifeline). If you feel like you or a loved one are in immediate danger, contact 911 or your local emergency services number.
Living With
How do I help someone with factitious disorder imposed on self?
Factitious disorder imposed on self is a serious mental health condition. It can be difficult for the person who experiences it to realize how harmful it is. If your loved one experiences this condition, it may feel easy to point out when they’re lying. But this can feel like a personal attack on them, and your words may be met with anger, avoidance or aggression.
Some providers recommend addressing factitious disorder imposed on self behaviors directly with the person, then asking them if they feel overwhelmed,
stressed
, anxious or depressed. Others might recommend a nonconfrontational approach by referring someone to see a psychologist without addressing the reason why.
If you’re not sure where to start, ask a healthcare provider or mental health professional for advice. They can educate you, your loved one and your family and friends about the condition. Working together, you can help keep your loved one accountable by making sure they follow their personalized treatment plan. Take them to see their psychologist and/or therapy appointments. Help dispense their medication (if applicable). Being available to support your loved one (not enabling their behavior) is the best way to help someone with factitious disorder imposed on self.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you or a loved one shows behaviors of factitious disorder imposed on self. Your prognosis may be better when you address the condition early to reduce the likelihood of harm.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
What treatment is best for me?
Do I have a related mental health diagnosis, such as depression or a personality disorder?
Can you recommend a psychiatrist or therapist?
How often should I return to see you for treatment?
How do I discuss this condition with my friends and family?
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between malingering behavior and factitious disorder imposed on self?
If you practice malingering behaviors, you might pretend to be sick or ill to gain something tangible, like avoiding work or school or to get benefits. There isn’t a conscious gain when someone has factitious disorder imposed on self. The behaviors may instead provide a subconscious emotional benefit.
What’s the difference between Munchausen syndrome and Munchausen syndrome by proxy?
Both factitious disorder imposed on self (formerly known as Munchausen syndrome) and
factitious disorder imposed on another
(formerly known as Munchausen syndrome by proxy) are types of
factitious disorders
.
Factitious disorder imposed on self is pretending you have an illness.
Factitious disorder imposed on another is where you pretend that someone within your care (like a child or adult) experiences symptoms. You may also harm someone within your care so they show symptoms of a physical or mental illness that they don’t have. This is a form of abuse.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Factitious disorder imposed on self is a form of self-harm. It’s a serious mental health condition that’s difficult to diagnose and treat. But treatment is available to help you when you’re ready.
You can educate your loved ones on your condition so they can help keep you accountable. It’s also important to tell the truth when you see your healthcare providers because they want what’s best for you and want to help the “real” you.
If you’re thinking about harming yourself, contact a healthcare provider. Contact emergency services right away if you or a loved one are in immediate danger.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/01/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment