What Is a Doula? When To Use One & What To Expect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Doula
Advertisement
Advertisement
Doula
A doula is a trained professional who supports you before, during and after you’ve had a baby. Doulas don’t deliver healthcare services, but they do offer physical and emotional support during pregnancy and the postpartum period.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
A doula can support you emotionally and physically during childbirth to help give you a positive birth experience.
What is a doula?
A doula is a person who assists you before, during and shortly after
childbirth
. Doulas aren’t medical professionals, and they can’t deliver your baby. Instead, they complement the care you receive from your healthcare team (like
obstetricians
,
nurses
and
midwives
). Doulas offer physical and emotional support so you can have a positive birth experience. They’re someone who advocates for you and helps you feel empowered, comfortable and cared for. Some people call their doula a birth coach or a birth companion.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hiring a doula may be a good idea if you’d like someone in your corner whose sole purpose is to support you. A doula can advocate for your birthing preferences (for example, delivery methods and preference for
pain relief
). They can offer comfort and reassurance during delivery. Doulas can also help once you go home and adjust to life with your newborn.
What does a doula do?
Doulas offer different services, often based on what they specialize in. But the role of a doula is extremely customizable — they’ll work with you to determine what type of support you need and if they can provide it.
If you’re looking to hire a doula, make a list of things you anticipate needing help with. Some doulas offer a wider range of services than others. For example, some doulas focus primarily on caring for you and your baby, while others will do light housework or run errands for your family.
Birth doula
Birth doulas — also called a labor doula — prepare you for childbirth and provide ongoing support while you’re in
labor
. Your relationship with your doula often begins in your
second
or
third semester
during pregnancy. This type of doula is the most popular type.
Birth doulas:
Discuss your preferences and expectations of childbirth.
A doula will consider where you’d like to give birth, the delivery method you’d prefer, your feelings about pain medication, etc. They’ll support your needs and wishes in the delivery room.
Prepare you mentally and emotionally for childbirth.
A birth doula can help you understand what to expect during labor and teach you strategies to make the experience more comfortable (for example, breathing exercises and relaxation techniques).
Provide physical support during labor.
Birth doulas can help with posture and movement, coach you through relaxation and breathing exercises to
manage pain
, ensure you’re drinking plenty of water, etc.
Provide emotional support during labor.
Doulas coach and encourage you during labor. They also provide a calming influence for you and your partner.
Advocate for your birthing preferences.
A birth doula communicates your needs and preferences to your healthcare team, freeing you from these concerns.
Advertisement
Pregnancy doula
Pregnancy
(or antepartum) doulas assist with pregnancies that require special care and attention. They provide physical and emotional support if you have a
high-risk pregnancy
, are on
bed rest
or have unmanageable symptoms, like severe
morning sickness
. Pregnancy doulas also:
Plan and prepare meals.
Plan and organize the nursery.
Assist with housework and childcare.
Postpartum doula
Postpartum
doulas assist you in the first few weeks or months after you’ve had your baby. In addition to offering emotional support to help you adjust to life with an infant, postpartum doulas:
Help with housework like laundry and preparing meals.
Help take care of your baby.
Help teach proper
breastfeeding
techniques.
Advise you and the other caregivers in the household on how to care for the new baby.
Coordinate household responsibilities.
Full-spectrum doula
Full-spectrum doulas offer support that extends beyond the more traditional role of birth doulas. They offer support across the entire reproductive journey. Full-spectrum doulas may:
Provide support that’s similar to birth and postpartum doulas.
Offer informational and emotional support to families and individuals across various circumstances, including
miscarriage
and
stillbirth
.
Provide pregnancy support for individuals and families who wish to conceive a child or adopt.
What are the qualifications of a doula?
There aren’t any laws requiring doulas to be accredited, but most doulas go through training and receive certifications. There are many organizations that offer doula certification. The exact training and certification can vary, but most programs require doulas to:
Read materials covering topics like the delivery process, labor support techniques, caring for a newborn, etc. It may involve taking a test to show you know the material.
Complete multiday training programs or workshops.
Attend and assist in several births.
Provide recommendations from healthcare providers and individuals they’ve assisted.
Maintain their certification by completing continuing education classes.
What are the benefits of having a doula?
Support from a doula can improve your childbirth experience during delivery and afterward. Doulas improve healthcare outcomes, too.
Research
has shown that doula-supported births are associated with:
Increased
vaginal births
Less use of pain medications during labor
Shorter labor times
Increased breastfeeding success
Reduced anxiety and stress for the birth mother
What are disadvantages of having a doula?
There are some reasons why people choose not to hire a doula. Some of those are:
Cost.
The expense of having a doula can add up. Insurance typically doesn’t cover doula services. You should check your health insurance to see if any aspect of doula care is covered.
Not finding the right fit.
Compatibility is huge when it comes to hiring a doula. It may be hard to find a person who shares the same values and philosophies as you.
Hospital/birth center rules.
Some facilities have rules about how many people can be in a delivery room. For example, they may consider a doula to be a visitor and you may only be able to have one visitor with you. This means your partner could potentially not be in the delivery room.
Role of partner.
Your partner may feel that they’re not as involved in the birth or feel uncomfortable with the role they plan in their child’s birth or care.
Advertisement
How do I find a good doula?
The relationship you have with your doula is special and important. A good doula should be knowledgeable, but they should also be someone you like and trust. Ask medical professionals, friends and family members for recommendations.
When you meet with a potential doula, listen to your intuition. Does this person make you feel comfortable? Are you able to express yourself? Do you feel like you “click” with them?
During your initial meeting with a potential doula, ask:
Where did you receive training?
What certifications do you have?
How many births have you assisted with?
How many families have you worked with?
Do you have a list of references?
How much do you charge?
What is your availability around my
due date
?
What happens if you’re not available when I go into labor?
If you’re interested in a doula, start looking for one as soon as possible. Depending on where you live, the demand for doulas could be high. They can only help so many people with similar due dates.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between a doula and a midwife?
A midwife has medical training that qualifies them to deliver a baby during low-risk births. They can also prescribe medications. Midwives can’t perform surgeries, like
C-sections
.
Doulas aren’t medical professionals and can’t provide treatment or medical advice. Instead, they’re trained birthing companions that advocate for your physical and emotional needs.
Advertisement
Can a doula deliver a baby?
No. A doula can provide support and advocacy during birth. Only a medical professional can provide treatment or deliver your baby.
Are doulas worth the money?
Many people who work with doulas are glad they received the additional support. Providers also recognize the important work that doulas do. Having a doula attend to your emotional needs in the delivery room can help your care team focus entirely on delivering a healthy baby.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Are you thinking of hiring a doula? A doula’s goal is to make your birth experience as pleasant as possible. They act as your personal advocate, making sure your emotional and physical needs are met. Reach out to people you know and trust for recommendations on doulas in your location. Some doulas specialize in different areas and offer different services. Interview multiple doulas so you find the best fit for you and your family.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Trying to choose where to give birth? Learn why Cleveland Clinic is the best choice to help you through each step of the labor and delivery process.
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment