Cardiogenic Shock: Symptoms & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cardiogenic Shock
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cardiogenic Shock
Cardiogenic shock is a life-threatening condition that happens suddenly when your heart can’t pump enough blood to keep up with your body’s demand for it. Without oxygen, your cells can’t function and can die. This can lead to organ failure and be fatal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Cardiogenic Shock?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Cardiogenic Shock?
Cardiogenic shock is a medical emergency that happens when your
heart
can’t push enough
blood
to your body. It can be fatal if a lack of oxygen leads to
organ failure
.
You need treatment right away in a hospital.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers may categorize cardiogenic shock into a number of different stages. These range from being at risk to being very sick. Stages are:
At risk (A)
:
Heart attack
or
heart failure
, but no signs of shock
Beginning (B)
:
Low blood pressure
or
heart rate
Classic (C)
: Need for medicine or devices to help get blood to
organs
Deteriorating (D)
: No response to medicines or devices for 30 minutes and getting worse
Extremis (E)
:
Cardiac arrest
that needs
CPR
, ventilator and
defibrillator
An estimated
40,000 to 50,000
people per year in the United States get cardiogenic shock. This condition happens more in
females
. Being 75 or older and having pre-existing heart conditions raises your risk.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of cardiogenic shock
Symptoms can include:
Confusion
or not being alert
Fainting
Shortness of breath
Low pee output
Cool hands
and
feet
Loss of skin color
Fatigue
Swelling
in your belly and legs
Poor appetite
Get treatment right away if you have any
symptoms of a heart attack
.
What causes cardiogenic shock?
A heart attack is one of the most common causes of cardiogenic shock. But many heart conditions can lead to this condition. Simply put, anything that can cause your heart to work inefficiently may lead to cardiogenic shock. This includes heart attacks, abnormal heart rhythms and heart failure, for example.
Advertisement
Other conditions that can lead to cardiogenic shock include:
Inflammation in your heart muscle (
myocarditis
)
An infection in your heart valves (
endocarditis
)
An abnormal heart rhythm (
arrhythmia
)
Too much fluid or blood around your heart (
cardiac tamponade
)
A blood clot that suddenly blocks a blood vessel in your lung (
pulmonary embolism
)
A
heart valve
problem — like torn muscles supporting your valve, or a replacement valve not working right
Damage to the wall of tissue between the left and right ventricles of your heart
Injury to your chest
Risk factors
Several factors can increase your risk of heart disease. This can lead to cardiogenic shock at some point. Risk factors include:
Heart failure
A prior heart attack
Coronary artery disease
High blood pressure
High cholesterol
Diabetes
Use of tobacco products
Overweight
and
obesity
A prior
coronary artery bypass surgery
Lack of physical activity
You can lower your risk by managing risk factors that you can change.
Complications of this condition
Complications from cardiogenic shock may include damage to organs like your brain,
liver
and
kidneys
. You can have abnormal heart rhythms that lead to cardiac arrest.
Stroke
is another possible complication. Cardiogenic shock can be fatal.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose cardiogenic shock
Your healthcare provider will ask about your medical history, including how you’re feeling that day or recently. During a
physical exam
, they may find these signs of cardiogenic shock:
A weak
pulse
Skin that feels cold and clammy
Low blood pressure
An abnormal heart rhythm or
heart murmur
they can hear through a stethoscope
Tests that are used
Several tests can help you find out if you have cardiogenic shock. These include:
Blood pressure cuff
to check for low
blood pressure
Cardiac catheterization
to find blockages in the arteries that supply blood to your heart (
coronary arteries
). This test can also check how much blood your heart is pumping.
Electrocardiogram
(ECG/EKG)
to see your heart’s electrical activity (heart rhythm)
Echocardiogram
to show the strength of your heart and any structural issues
Chest X-ray
to look for fluid in your lungs and get pictures of your heart and blood vessels
Blood tests
like
lactate
to check the oxygen level in your blood and look for damage to major organs
Management and Treatment
How is cardiogenic shock treated?
This is a life-threatening condition. You need emergency treatment.
The key part of cardiogenic shock treatment is improving the flow of blood and oxygen to major organs to avoid damage. Sometimes, medicines can do this. In more severe cases, you may need
support devices
to help your heart.
Advertisement
Treatment that starts in a hospital emergency room or intensive care unit may include:
Medications to help remove excess fluid, improve blood flow and support your heart function
Oxygen (and maybe a
ventilator
) to help your breathing
A
Swan-Ganz catheter
to monitor the pressures inside your heart
Support devices to help your heart mechanically
Further treatment
After emergency treatment, the next step depends on the cause of your cardiogenic shock. Treatment may include:
For a heart attack
:
Angioplasty
and possibly a
stent
to help blood get through a blocked blood vessel
For a valve problem
:
Heart valve repair
or
replacement
For a heart with an abnormal rhythm:
Defibrillation
or a
pacemaker
For fluid around your heart
: A
procedure
that uses a needle to remove excess fluid pressing on your heart
For blocked coronary arteries
: Coronary artery bypass graft (
open-heart surgery
) to help more blood get to your heart
For a heart that needs extra help
:
ECMO
(extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) to do the work of your heart and lungs, and a short-term
pump
in your
aorta
can help your heart move more blood
For a heart that may not improve
: A
left ventricular assist device
(LVAD), a long-term device, can support your heart (a
heart transplant
is the next step)
Advertisement
Recovery time
Your recovery time depends on the treatment you received. You may spend a week or more in the hospital. It can take several weeks to months to recover at home or in a rehab facility afterward. Going to
cardiac rehab
after a heart attack helps with this process.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call for an ambulance if you have heart attack or cardiogenic shock symptoms. Your treatment can start on the way to the hospital when you’re in an ambulance.
After you have cardiogenic shock, you’ll need follow-up visits with your provider. If you received a medical device to help your heart work better, you’ll need regular checkups to make sure your device is working right.
You should contact your provider if you start to have new symptoms.
Questions to ask your provider may include:
What do I need to be careful about in the future?
Do I need to make changes to my daily habits?
Which medicines do I need to keep taking and for how long?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have cardiogenic shock?
The impact cardiogenic shock has on your life depends on how quickly you get treatment. The less time you’re in shock, the better. Less time in shock means less damage to your major organs. The risk of dying from cardiogenic shock goes up along with the number of organs that aren’t getting enough blood.
Advertisement
The chances of surviving cardiogenic shock have improved over time. But even with treatment, the condition can be fatal. Many people don’t survive.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
Getting treatment for a heart attack right away is the best way to prevent cardiogenic shock. That’s because a heart attack usually causes cardiogenic shock.
See your healthcare provider to find out your
risk of heart disease
and take steps to improve your heart health. If you have
coronary artery disease
, see your provider regularly and follow your plan of care.
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference: Cardiogenic shock vs. septic shock?
Both are forms of shock, which means your organs and tissues can’t get the oxygen they need. The causes are different for these life-threatening conditions, though. Heart conditions lead to cardiogenic shock. Infections cause
septic shock
. It’s possible to have both conditions at the same time.
Is cardiogenic shock a heart attack?
No, cardiogenic shock isn’t a heart attack. But a heart attack is one of the most common causes of cardiogenic shock.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A lot of emotions can surface when you survive a heart attack and cardiogenic shock. It’s OK to talk with a counselor, friend or support group about what you’ve experienced. Be sure to keep taking all medicines your healthcare provider prescribed for you. Going to follow-up appointments with your provider can help you stay on track with your recovery.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment