Infected Pimple: What It Looks Like, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Infected Pimple
Advertisement
Advertisement
Infected Pimple
An infected pimple happens when bacteria enter your skin, causing pain, redness and swelling. Popping, squeezing or picking at a pimple can lead to infection. You can treat mild infections at home with warm compresses and acne-fighting creams. Some infections require antibiotics. To avoid an infected pimple, never pop zits and keep your skin clean.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
An infected pimple causes a painful, swollen red blemish on your skin that’s filled with pus.
What is an infected pimple?
A
pimple
can get infected if you try to “pop” or squeeze it. When you pop a zit, you create an open wound. Bacteria that naturally live on your skin get inside the opening, causing an infection. The area around the pimple may be very sore, red or inflamed. You may also develop a fever.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You can treat mildly infected pimples at home using a warm compress and topical creams. But if the pain or swelling is severe, or if the infected pimple is near your eye, see your healthcare provider. Some infections require prescription antibiotics to kill the bacteria.
To prevent a pimple from getting infected, never try to pop it. Keep the area clean, practice good hygiene and leave the zit alone while it heals.
Who might get an infected pimple?
Anyone can get an infected pimple. But they’re more common among teenagers and young adults who are going through
adolescent development
(puberty). A pimple can get infected at any age, though. You’re more likely to get an infection if you pop your pimples.
People who have severe types of acne called
cystic acne
and nodular acne may have a higher risk of getting an infected pimple. These conditions cause painful lumps (sometimes called blind pimples) to form deep below your skin. They may also appear as pimples on the skin’s surface.
If you have
rosacea
, you may be at an increased risk of infected pimples. Rosacea is a skin condition that causes facial redness and pimples that burn or sting.
How common are infected pimples?
In the United States, around 50 million people have
acne
(the skin condition that causes pimples). Most pimples don’t become infected. Since many people treat infected pimples at home, healthcare providers aren’t sure exactly how many people have infected pimples.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What causes infected pimples?
Pimples develop when you have clogged pores. Pores (or hair follicles) are tiny holes in your skin. Dead skin cells, hair, bacteria and sebum (oil your skin produces) can block pores. When oil and skin cells get trapped under your skin, pimples form.
You have hundreds of different types of bacteria that naturally live on your skin. These bacteria aren’t usually harmful or dangerous. But they can cause infection if they get under your skin.
When you pop, squeeze or pick at a zit, you create a break in your skin. This opening allows bacteria to get inside, leading to infection.
What are the symptoms of an infected pimple?
Signs of an infected pimple include:
Blemish that’s larger or more obvious than a typical pimple.
Fever
or
fatigue
.
Oozing or bleeding from the zit (pus may be yellow).
Pain or discomfort on and around the pimple. Pain can be severe.
Swelling, inflammation or redness in the area. The pimple may be warm to the touch.
Zit that doesn’t go away with over-the-counter acne treatments.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are infected pimples diagnosed?
You may be able to recognize signs of an infected pimple on your own. If pain and swelling are severe or you have a pimple that doesn’t go away, see your healthcare provider. You may need to see a
dermatologist
(a provider who specializes in caring for the skin).
They’ll examine the pimple and ask about your symptoms. Your healthcare provider may take a sample of the pus and send it to a lab to test for infections.
Management and Treatment
How can I treat infected pimples?
You can treat mild infected pimples at home. Don’t try to pop or drain an infected pimple. Doing so can make it worse or spread the infection. You should:
Clean the area:
It’s very important to keep the wound clean. Use a gentle face cleanser regularly and avoid touching the zit.
Place warm compresses on the pimple:
Gently place a clean, warm, wet washcloth on the area for about 10 minutes, several times a day. But make sure the washcloth isn’t too hot. The warm washcloth helps pus dissolve or rise to the surface.
Use topical treatments:
Benzoyl peroxide
products kill bacteria. Apply this cream according to the directions, usually twice a day.
If you have a lot of pain, the zit is near your eye or the swelling is severe, see your healthcare provider for an evaluation and treatment. You may need prescription
antibiotics
to kill the bacteria.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have an infected pimple?
You can avoid complications from a pimple infection by keeping the area clean and keeping your hands away from the zit. Most infected pimples get better with good hygiene and antibiotics. But it may take a few weeks for the infection to clear up.
Advertisement
Serious infections and complications from an infected pimple are rare. They include:
Acne scars
, which can result from infection.
Boils and carbuncles
, which result from
Staphylococcus aureus
bacteria (
staph infection
).
Cellulitis
, a skin infection that can be very dangerous if untreated. If cellulitis gets into your eye, it can cause
low vision
and vision loss.
Prevention
How can I prevent infected pimples?
You can avoid an infected pimple by:
Practicing good hygiene:
Keep your skin clean using a gentle cleanser twice a day and after you sweat. Change sheets, pillowcases and towels regularly. Use clean makeup brushes, and replace them often.
Resisting the urge to pop zits:
Picking at, squeezing or popping pimples creates an open wound for bacteria to enter. Never pop your pimples.
Staying away from skin products:
Avoid applying makeup or lotion on the infected pimple while it’s healing.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider about infected pimples?
See your healthcare provider if you have:
A pimple that takes longer to heal than usual, or one that goes away and comes back.
A zit near your eye.
Fever or fatigue.
Severe pain, swelling or redness, or if the area feels warm when you touch it.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Most infected pimples get better with at-home treatments. To reduce pain and swelling, use a warm compress and apply over-the-counter benzoyl peroxide. Keep the area clean and avoid touching the pimple while it heals. Some infections require prescription antibiotics. See your healthcare provider right away if pain and swelling are severe or if the pimple is near your eye. It may be hard to resist the urge to mess with pimples. But you should never pick at, squeeze or try to pop them.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/19/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment