Interoception: Definition, Symptoms & How To Improve
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Interoception
Advertisement
Advertisement
Interoception
Interoception is the understanding of your body’s internal senses. You can feel that you’re hungry, that your heart is beating or that you need to pee. It’s a learned skill that you develop as you grow. Certain conditions may make it more difficult for you to feel internal senses than others. Mindfulness exercises and therapy may help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Interoception is awareness of your body’s internal senses or signals.
What is interoception?
Interoception is awareness of your body’s internal senses or signals. It identifies how you feel.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You can consciously or unconsciously respond to these signals. For example, if your
stomach
rumbles, you know you’re hungry. You can go have a snack. Once you’ve satisfied your hunger, you’ve reached a state of balance — your body stops sending you hunger signals. This is called
homeostasis
.
As you grow and develop, you learn more about what important interoception skills are necessary, like feeling the need to pee or poop and knowing when to use the toilet.
It can also have a significant impact on your behavior and emotions. For example, if you’re in a dark room and your heart is beating fast, you might feel scared. By identifying how you feel, interoception helps you make a decision. In this example, you can decide to turn on a light.
Interoception may be more difficult for some to recognize and interpret than others. There are ways you can practice and improve your interoception skills. A healthcare provider may help you with this.
Examples of interoception
Examples of interoception include the following feelings:
A full bladder
Anxiety or nervousness
Hot or cold temperatures
Hunger
Itchy skin
Muscle tension
Nausea
Thirst
Pain
Your heartbeat
How does interoception work?
There are three steps to the interoception process:
Sensing (you feel a sensation).
An interoceptor (sensor in a neuron/
nerve
cell) detects a signal. A neuron sends it along a nerve fiber pathway to your
brain
. It lands in a region called your
thalamus
. (Your stomach rumbles).
Interpreting (you determine what the feeling is).
Your thalamus sends the information to the insula to decode it. Your insula rewrites the message into a language that you can understand. (You feel hungry).
Integrating (you take action).
You read the message with your conscious mind and determine whether or not you need to take action. (You eat some food).
Advertisement
Your understanding of the sensation may be:
Benign.
It’s harmless.
Ambiguous.
Not sure about all the details.
Threatening.
It will cause harm.
Certain mental health conditions like anxiety disorders may make you perceive benign sensations as threatening ones. This could potentially cause you to have more symptoms and
stress
. The opposite is true for depression, which may make it difficult for you to clearly identify a threatening sensation, like pain from an injury.
What are the types of interoception?
There are two types of interoception. They describe your ability to detect internal signals
Attention:
How often you notice signals from your body
Accuracy:
How correct you are at understanding signals from your body
You may be highly in tune with these signals, while others may not notice them. It varies significantly from person to person.
A healthcare provider might use different techniques to measure interoception functionality, like having you:
Answer questions about what you feel, like do you feel your heartbeat right now?
Perform a task, like count how many times you feel your heartbeat in a minute or does the beat of this song match your heartbeat?
Use a device-assisted task performance. For example, while wearing a
heart rate monitor
to confirm the accuracy, how many times can you feel your heart beat in a minute?
What are the signs and symptoms of interoception?
Your body tries to communicate these signals through signs and symptoms. Common signs of interoception include:
Dilated pupils
Fast breathing
Fast heartbeat
Flushing
Goosebumps (piloerection)
Sweating
Common symptoms of interoception may include:
Discomfort after an injury (
nociceptive pain
)
Dry mouth
Muscle stiffness
Nausea
Abdominal pain
What are the symptoms of poor interoception?
You might notice your interoception skills may not be working as well as expected if you experience any of the following common symptoms:
Difficulty knowing when your bladder is full (when you need to pee)
Difficulty managing emotions
Feeling easily anxious
Having a high or low pain tolerance
Not feeling hungry or thirsty or not feeling full after a meal
Many different conditions can affect how well interoception works. In some cases, interoception skills may not be fully developed.
What conditions affect interoception?
The following conditions may affect how well you’re able to process interoception:
Anxiety disorders
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD)
Autism
Depersonalization-derealization disorder
Depression
Eating disorders
Panic disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Somatic symptom disorder
Substance use disorder
How does interoception relate to neurodivergence?
“
Neurodivergence
” is a term to describe brain functionality that differs from the norm. Interoception, or your ability to detect your body’s internal signals, may be heightened or not working as expected with neurodivergence.
Advertisement
Two examples of neurodivergent conditions that can affect your interoception include:
Autism.
Interoception accuracy (how correct you are at identifying feelings) is low. For example, it might be hard for you to regulate or express your emotions. You might also have trouble identifying bodily needs, like hunger.
ADHD.
Interoception attention (how often you notice signals) is strong but you may have trouble acting on those signals. For example, you feel thirsty but can’t decide what you want to drink.
How to improve interoception?
You can improve your interoception skills by:
Performing deep breathing exercises (like
diaphragmatic breathing
or
box breathing
)
Practicing
mindfulness
Practicing
yoga
Meditating
Participating in
cognitive behavioral therapy
A mental health professional or healthcare provider will discuss different ways you can meet your goals. These vary from person to person and may be unique to your situation. For example, electrical stimulation (like
vagus nerve stimulation
) may target areas of your brain to make communication between your body and brain easier.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You probably weren’t thinking about the feeling of your heart beating until now. Or maybe you’re thinking about what you’ll be eating for dinner and you feel your stomach growling. These are examples of interoception at work. Many conditions can interfere with how well you can use your interoception skills. If you’re looking to improve those skills, a healthcare provider can help. Have patience with yourself as you learn new techniques. This learned skill takes time to develop and doesn’t come naturally to everyone.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment