Bladder Outlet Obstruction (BOO): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bladder Outlet Obstruction
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bladder Outlet Obstruction
A bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) is a blockage at the neck of your bladder. This slows or stops pee right before it goes into your urethra. It may cause pain in your abdomen, pain when you pee and/or an inability to empty your bladder. This condition has many possible causes, from scar tissue to prostate cancer. Treatments are available.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Bladder Outlet Obstruction?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Bladder Outlet Obstruction?
Bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) is a blockage in the neck at the very bottom of your bladder. The neck is where your bladder connects to your urethra, which carries urine (pee) out of your body. A urinary tract blockage stops or slows down the flow of pee.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
BOO is most common in people over age 65 and
males
. Possible urinary blockages include scar tissue, bladder stones, an enlarged prostate gland or prostate cancer. Women with
cystocele
(prolapsed bladder) are more likely to have a bladder outlet obstruction than other women. Children and babies, including developing fetuses, can also get BOO.
Rarely, a developing fetus can get bladder outlet obstruction in utero. Other names for this are fetal bladder outlet obstruction or fetal lower urinary tract obstruction (LUTO). When a fetus’s pee is blocked, it increases the size of their bladder and can cause kidney issues and other problems.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction
Bladder outlet obstruction can cause symptoms of urinary tract obstruction. The name for these is lower urinary tract symptoms (
LUTS
).
You may have a urinary blockage if you:
Have trouble starting your urine stream
Feel like you have a full bladder but can’t empty it completely
Pass pee frequently during sleeping hours
Have pain in your lower abdomen or side
Have a pee flow that starts and stops or is very slow
Use the bathroom often, but very little pee comes out
Feel pain when passing pee
Feel an urgent need to empty your bladder
What causes a bladder outlet obstruction?
An enlarged prostate gland (
benign prostatic hyperplasia
or BPH) is a common cause of bladder outlet obstruction.
Advertisement
But many different things can cause a bladder outlet obstruction, like:
Scar tissue in your urethra (
urethral stricture
)
Bladder stones (hardened minerals)
Procedures for stress incontinence
Noncancerous (harmless) lesions or cysts
Urethral, vaginal, uterine, bladder, rectal, prostate or cervical cancer
Bladder or uterus falling down into your vaginal area (pelvic organ prolapse)
Severe constipation or impaction of stool
Risk factors
Risk factors for bladder obstruction include:
Lower maximum flow rate of urine
Longer urine flow time
Less efficient bladder emptying
Older age
Complications of this condition
It’s important to treat a urinary tract blockage as soon as possible to prevent complications. Without prompt diagnosis and treatment, you may have complications like:
Urinary tract infections
Loss of some kidney function
Kidney damage
Kidney stones
Inability to empty your bladder completely
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will perform a physical exam to diagnose bladder outlet obstruction. They’ll also want to know about your medical history and what you’ve been experiencing. They’ll ask you questions like:
Do you feel pain in your abdomen, or pain when you pee?
When you go to pee, does it take a while to start?
Do you ever pee in your sleep?
When you’re done peeing, do you feel like your bladder is still full, or partially full?
When you pee, does your urine stream start and stop (out of your control)?
Tests to diagnose bladder outlet obstruction may include:
Blood tests to check for kidney damage
Urinalysis to check for blood or infection
Pelvic ultrasound
of your kidneys and bladder to find where the pee blockage is occurring
Cystoscopy
to look for narrowing of your urethra
Urodynamic testing
to show how the muscles of your bladder and sphincters function
Electromyography (EMG)
to check your muscle and nerve function
Post-void residual urine test
to see how much pee you have in your bladder after you pee
CT urogram
(a series of X-rays)
MRI (imaging that uses radio waves)
Voiding cystourethrogram (
VCUG
, a type of X-ray)
Management and Treatment
How is bladder outlet obstruction treated?
The type of treatment you get depends on what’s causing the urinary blockage. For example, a healthcare provider will use different treatments for bladder stones than for
prostate cancer
. For some people, medications like
alpha-blockers
or
finasteride
improve bladder outlet obstruction. For others, physical therapy or a pessary (device to support a woman’s pelvic organs) may help with bladder obstruction.
Procedures or surgeries for bladder outlet obstruction may include:
Foley catheter to drain pee from your bladder
Surgical procedures to remove the obstruction
Transurethral bladder neck incisions
Sacrocolpopexy
for pelvic organ prolapse
Laser lithotripsy
for stones
Urethroplasty
for strictures
Advertisement
Many of these urological surgeries are minimally invasive. That means you can expect a shorter hospital stay and a quicker recovery. Recovery time varies by procedure.
While waiting for treatment to fix bladder outlet obstruction, you may be able to unblock urine flow at home. You can learn to use a catheter to empty your bladder (self-catheterization). If you have a penis, you may get a better urine (pee) flow by sitting down to pee. Or you may be able to pass more pee by leaning forward for 30 seconds before trying to pee again.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Go to the emergency department if the pain from a urinary tract blockage is unbearable. This could be a sign of complications. You should also seek immediate help if you can’t pass pee or have a urinary tract infection.
If you’ve had surgery, you’ll need follow-up appointments with your provider. After you’ve recovered, contact your provider if you have problems peeing again.
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What’s the cause of bladder outlet obstruction in my case?
Could it happen again?
What’s the best treatment option for me?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Unless the pain is unbearable, bladder outlet obstruction shouldn’t keep you from your normal daily activities.
It’s comforting to know that healthcare providers can treat most cases of bladder outlet obstruction. Your BOO-related symptoms should go away with treatment. But bladder outlet obstruction can come back. In some cases, you may need surgery.
Advertisement
The cause of a bladder outlet obstruction affects your
prognosis
(outlook). It’s different for each case.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s frustrating to have a hard time emptying your bladder. But you don’t have to accept it. Treatments can help many people with this condition. If you have symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction, don’t hesitate to see your healthcare provider. Prompt treatment can help you avoid kidney and bladder complications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
It can be stressful (and painful) to have bladder disorders, like urinary incontinence or cystitis. But the urology providers at Cleveland Clinic are here for you.
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment