What Is Public Health?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Public Health
Advertisement
Advertisement
Public Health
Public health is the combined effort of many professionals who work together to promote health and prevent disease in communities. From tracking the spread of infectious diseases to inspecting workplaces for safety hazards, public health professionals help make our communities healthier and safer places to live, work and play.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is public health?
Public health is a field that’s dedicated to improving our health and well-being. Public health experts assess the needs of particular
groups
, or populations, rather than the needs of any one person. This makes public health different from healthcare, which involves diagnosing and treating individuals. Such a big-picture approach allows public health efforts to benefit lots of people at once — including you and those you love.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
For example, data might show that swimming pool accidents are a leading cause of injury or death for children in a certain community. In response, public health experts may help community leaders develop a plan to offer free swim classes. They may also craft educational materials on water safety for parents. Such changes can help you and your family in ways that complement advice from your
pediatrician
.
Public health experts don’t focus on one specific family or child. Instead, they zoom out to understand the health of entire populations. Over time, across many communities, this can have a big impact.
Who works in public health?
Public health professionals, also sometimes called public health workers or experts, include:
Epidemiologists
. These “disease detectives” study patterns of health and disease among specific groups.
Health education specialists
. These health educators teach people about their bodies and help them access healthcare services.
Public health physicians
. These doctors specialize in public health. They work at community health centers and often take on leadership roles.
Community health workers
. These trusted liaisons get to know a specific community’s needs and connect them with health services.
Biostatisticians
. These experts collect, organize and interpret health-related data. Their work helps policymakers and others make important decisions.
Occupational health and safety specialists and technicians
. These experts ensure that workplaces meet safety requirements. Their inspections help keep workers safe.
Restaurant inspectors
. These professionals ensure restaurants follow health and safety standards. Their work allows you to enjoy your meal without getting
sick
afterward.
Advertisement
What are public health issues?
Public health issues are aspects of the world around us that affect
how long we live
and/or our quality of life. Public health issues don’t affect everyone equally. That’s why experts typically study groups of people, defined by things like zip code, race or age. They want to understand what issues a certain group faces and how to make things better.
In an ideal world, everyone would have fair and equal access to the resources they need to support their health. We’re not there yet, but public health as a field is dedicated to moving us as far as possible in that direction.
Public health issues change over time. This is because new health risks can emerge. Plus, advances in medicine make some diseases less of a concern than they were in the past. Public health issues also vary by country.
In the U.S., public health experts are currently developing strategies to:
Protect us from environmental hazards like toxins in the
air
, water and soil
Prevent injuries and deaths from things like gun violence, car accidents and unsafe home or workplace conditions
Prepare for future epidemics or pandemics
Address systemic social justice issues that put some groups at a higher risk for physical and mental health issues
Improve our access to healthcare services, including
preventive care
and timely treatments
Improve our access to the resources we need to support our health, like nutritious foods and places to exercise
These are just some examples. Public health is a vast, far-reaching field. It addresses long-standing issues while also responding to emerging needs.
What is the public health system?
In the U.S., the public health system is a large network of public health agencies at all levels of government. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
lead public health efforts at the national level. There are also departments of public health at local, state, tribal and territorial levels that serve people in those areas.
When it comes to public health, it truly takes a village to keep all the wheels turning. You might be familiar with your local health department or know about the CDC. But you might not know that these agencies partner with many other groups and organizations. For example, governmental health agencies might team up with:
Other government agencies, like the U.S. Department of Transportation or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Churches
Nonprofits
Hospitals and healthcare systems
Community volunteers
This collaboration is vital for building a world where everyone gets the health services they need.
What services does the public health system provide?
The public health system provides a broad range of services to try and give everyone a fair chance at being as healthy as possible. Here are some examples of what public health experts do in communities across the country:
Advertisement
Collect and analyze health data
. This is called public health surveillance. Experts look for patterns to understand a community’s needs. For example, they identify who’s most at risk for certain health conditions.
Respond to health emergencies
. When there’s an
infectious disease
outbreak or other concern, public health experts take the lead. They use timely data to recommend next steps.
Educate the public
. The world of health and disease is complex. But public health experts help translate the science into terms we can all understand.
Set and enforce safety standards
. Public health experts inspect spaces that need to follow certain health or safety rules. They make sure everything is up to the proper standards.
Develop policies that remove barriers to care.
Many nonmedical things affect our health every day. These are called the social drivers of health or factors that influence health outcomes. Public health experts study how these factors affect certain groups and create policies to give everyone a fair chance.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What is a Master of Public Health degree?
A Master of Public Health (MPH) degree is a graduate-level degree that provides training in these areas:
Epidemiology
Biostatistics
Environmental health sciences
Health services administration
Social and behavioral sciences
Advertisement
MPH programs typically involve classroom learning as well as a capstone project and internship.
What is a public health major?
Some colleges offer a public health major for undergraduates to help them prepare for a career in public health. Pursuing this major allows you to earn a Bachelor of Science in Public Health (BSPH) degree. After earning your BSPH, you may choose to earn your MPH or seek a job in the field.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Public health is a professional field, but it’s also so much more. It’s the combined efforts of people who look for opportunities to help others lead their healthiest possible lives. If you’re reading this and thinking, “I care about helping others stay healthy and safe,” then you’re already invested in public health. Even if you don’t have a degree or formal training, you can make a difference in others’ lives through what you say and do every day.
For example, if you know someone has trouble making it to medical appointments, offer to drive them. Set up weekly walks with a neighbor who says they’d like to move around more. Check on loved ones who live alone and bring a nutritious, home-cooked meal. Share educational resources with your family or friends. Contact your local lawmakers about public health issues you care about.
Advertisement
Public health affects all of us, and we all have a stake in supporting its efforts.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/09/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider