Stable Angina: Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Stable Angina
Advertisement
Advertisement
Stable Angina
Stable angina is chest pain or discomfort that lasts up to five minutes and most often occurs when you’re exerting yourself or stressed. Coronary artery disease is the most common cause. You may need medicines or procedures to improve blood flow to your heart. Rest and nitroglycerin can treat an episode as it’s happening.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Possible Causes
Care and Treatment
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is stable angina?
Stable
angina
is a type of chest pain or discomfort that’s short in duration (around five minutes) and consistent in how it feels each time it occurs. It happens when your
heart
muscle needs more oxygen than usual but isn’t getting it at that moment because of heart disease. Episodes come and go in predictable patterns. For example, they may occur when you’re moving around.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Stable angina is a symptom of
coronary artery disease (CAD)
. This means there’s a sticky substance called plaque in the arteries that supply oxygen-rich blood to your heart. This plaque narrows your arteries and makes it harder for blood (and oxygen) to flow through.
Rest and medicine can stop an episode of stable angina. But this symptom is still serious and potentially dangerous. That’s because it can get worse or become unstable over time. In other words, it can progress to a complete blockage, causing permanent heart damage (a
heart attack
). For example, episodes might last longer or occur at times you can’t predict — even while you’re resting. Or you may need more doses of medicine to make the pain go away.
Stable angina is your heart’s way of telling you it needs your attention. Without treatment for CAD, you’re at risk of a heart attack. Your healthcare provider may recommend medicines, procedures and changes to your daily habits to help protect your heart.
What does stable angina feel like?
Stable angina causes
chest pain
or discomfort that may feel like pressure, heaviness, squeezing, burning or indigestion. The discomfort may spread from your chest to your left shoulder, left arm or other nearby areas.
You may also have symptoms like:
Advertisement
Shortness of breath
Dizziness
Nausea
Fatigue
Possible Causes
What’s the most common cause of stable angina?
Coronary artery disease causes most cases of stable angina. Other causes include:
Heart failure
Problems with your
heart valves
Problems with your
heart rhythm
Hyperthyroidism
Anemia
Common triggers for a stable angina episode include physical exertion,
stress
, strong emotions and sudden changes in the temperature around you (like going into a very hot or cold room).
Care and Treatment
How is stable angina treated?
When you first notice an episode of stable angina starting, you should:
Stop what you’re doing
Sit down and rest
Take
nitroglycerin
if your provider prescribes it for you
Resting and taking your medicine should make stable angina go away within five minutes. If not, you may need to take another dose of medicine. Your provider will tell you how many doses you should take before seeking medical care. Follow their guidance closely.
To help prevent stable angina from happening again, your provider may prescribe other medicines for you to take. These may include
beta-blockers
, extended-release nitroglycerin or
ranolazine
.
You may also need treatment for the condition that’s causing your angina. For example, if you have coronary artery disease, you may need
stents
or
bypass surgery
. Your provider will explain your treatment options, along with the benefits and risks.
Can this symptom be prevented?
The best way to prevent stable angina is to lower your risk of coronary artery disease. If possible, start working with a
preventive cardiologist
early in life. This is especially important if heart disease runs in your biological family. Your provider will help you find ways to lower your risk. These include:
Eating
heart-healthy meals
Getting enough physical activity each day
Taking medicine to manage conditions like high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes
Not smoking or vaping
Finding healthy ways to
relieve stress
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Stable angina isn’t something you can manage alone. If you’re having chest discomfort for the first time, seek medical care right away. Your provider will do a physical exam. They may also do tests, including:
Blood tests
EKG
Stress test
Coronary angiography
CT scan
These tests help your provider diagnose the problem and plan your treatment.
If you’ve been diagnosed with stable angina, your provider will tell you how to treat it at home and when to seek care.
When to go to the ER
You should call 911 or your local emergency services number if:
The nitroglycerin you took doesn’t help (your provider will tell you how many doses to take before seeking care)
The pain you had comes back or gets worse
The chest pain you’re having feels different from usual
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Is stable angina dangerous?
Stable angina can be dangerous, but it’s mostly a warning sign that you could be at risk of a heart attack. You probably need to make some lifestyle changes.
Can stable angina lead to a heart attack?
Yes, if you have stable angina, you could have a heart attack in the future if you don’t reduce your risk.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Stable angina is common and treatable. But that doesn’t mean it’s easy to live with this symptom of heart disease. If you’re feeling stressed or anxious, talk to your provider. They can help you find ways to worry less while making changes to support your heart.
It may also help to connect with others who are living with angina. Sharing experiences and advice can help you feel supported and part of a larger community.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment