Systemic Mastocytosis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Systemic Mastocytosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Systemic Mastocytosis
Systemic mastocytosis is a rare blood disorder. It happens when your body makes abnormal mast cells that multiply. Mast cells defend against intruders like allergens. In systemic mastocytosis, abnormal mast cells set up a continuous allergic response. The cells also multiply uncontrollably, affecting your skin and internal organs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Systemic Mastocytosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
People with systemic mastocytosis may develop raised spots or rashes on their skin. When touched or stroked, the area of skin affected may turn red and start to itch or swell.
What is systemic mastocytosis?
Systemic mastocytosis is a type of
mastocytosis
— a rare
blood disorder
that happens when your body makes abnormal
mast cells
. Mast cells are a type of
white blood cell
and part of your
immune system
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When mast cells detect intruders, they release
histamine
. Histamine sets off an allergic response. Normally, mast cells stop releasing histamine when their job is done. But in systemic mastocytosis, large numbers of abnormal mast cells continue to release histamine long after they should. This chemical overload causes a continuous allergic response that can affect your
skin
and internal organs.
Systemic mastocytosis is rare. It affects about
13 out of every 100,000
people worldwide.
People with systemic mastocytosis have a higher risk of
anaphylaxis
(a severe, life-threatening allergic reaction). Rarely, systemic mastocytosis can become
cancer
.
Healthcare providers can’t cure the condition. But treatment can ease your symptoms.
Learn how each different phase can impact your life.
Types of systemic mastocytosis
There are six types of systemic mastocytosis. Each can affect you in different ways. In general, the more abnormal mast cells you have, the greater the chance you’ll have complications.
These types include:
Indolent systemic mastocytosis
. This is the most common type. Symptoms usually develop over several years. Abnormal mast cells increase. This causes symptoms that affect your skin,
liver
, spleen and
gastrointestinal tract
.
Systemic smoldering mastocytosis
. In this type, abnormal mast cells multiply in your liver and
spleen
. Eventually, the cells may cause an
enlarged spleen
or
enlarged liver
.
Systemic mastocytosis with associated hematologic neoplasm
. People with this type develop blood disorders like
myeloproliferative neoplasms
and
myelodysplastic syndrome
. This type affects about one-fifth of people with systemic mastocytosis.
Aggressive systemic mastocytosis
. This type can affect your
bone marrow
and
bones
. Abnormal mast cells can grow into your bones, making them weak and more likely to break.
Mast cell leukemia
. Very rarely, systemic mastocytosis becomes mast cell leukemia. This is a form of
acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
.
Mast cell sarcoma
. Tumors made of abnormal mast cells attack tissue. Very few people with systemic mastocytosis develop mast cell sarcoma.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of systemic mastocytosis?
Symptoms vary depending on where the abnormal mast cells gather. For example, if you have too many mast cells in your
stomach
, you might develop
ulcers
and
belly pain
. In the same way, abnormal mast cells that build up in your bone marrow may affect blood cell production.
Systemic mastocytosis symptoms may include:
Anemia
Bone pain
Excessive bleeding
Fatigue
Flushed skin
Heart palpitations
Hives
Itchy skin
Mood changes
or
depression
Urticaria pigmentosa (dark, itchy bumps on your skin)
People with systemic mastocytosis may suddenly develop several symptoms all at once. Healthcare providers may refer to this as a mastocytosis attack or flare.
Having these symptoms doesn’t necessarily mean you have systemic mastocytosis. But if you have several of these symptoms at the same time and they don’t go away, talk to a healthcare provider.
What causes systemic mastocytosis?
Research shows about 80% of people with systemic mastocytosis have a
KIT
gene
variant (change)
.
KIT
genes play a role in developing certain cell types, including blood cells and mast cells. The gene change happens after
conception
and isn’t hereditary.
Risk factors
Many things can trigger systemic mastocytosis. Not everyone with the condition reacts to the same triggers, but common ones include:
Alcohol
Spicy foods
Certain medications, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (
NSAIDs
),
muscle relaxers
and
anesthesia
Exercise and physical activity
Insect bites (especially
ant bites
) and wasp and
bee stings
Physical or emotional
stress
Rubbing or friction on your skin
Sudden changes in temperature, like jumping into cold water
Ask your healthcare provider which triggers you should avoid.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is systemic mastocytosis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will start with a
physical exam
. They’ll ask about your symptoms and medical history.
They may also run one or more of the following tests to diagnose or rule out systemic mastocytosis:
Blood tests
to check on the amount of tryptase in your blood (an
enzyme
that mast cells release when they react to intruders)
Bone scans
to look for signs of bone damage
Bone marrow biopsy
to look for unusual numbers of mast cells in your bone marrow
Genetic tests
to check for a
KIT
gene variant
Management and Treatment
How is systemic mastocytosis treated?
Healthcare providers treat systemic mastocytosis by managing symptoms and complications. For example, if you have excess stomach acid, they may prescribe
H2 blockers
(antacids). If the condition causes anemia, they’ll treat the anemia.
Systemic mastocytosis treatments may include:
Antihistamines
to relieve itching, flushing and other skin reactions
Corticosteroids
to reduce inflammation
Bisphosphonates
to help with bone weakness
Targeted therapy
, which focuses on the protein in abnormal mast cells
Chemotherapy
, if systemic mastocytosis becomes cancerous
Splenectomy
to remove an enlarged spleen
Bone marrow transplant
to treat aggressive or advanced systemic mastocytosis
Advertisement
If you have systemic mastocytosis, you should always carry an EpiPen
®
.
Epinephrine
treats anaphylactic shock, a severe, life-threatening allergic reaction.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Systemic Mastocytosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have systemic mastocytosis?
There’s no
cure
for systemic mastocytosis. But healthcare providers have treatment strategies to manage symptoms and complications.
A bone marrow transplant can permanently get rid of systemic mastocytosis. But healthcare providers reserve this treatment for those with the most aggressive forms of the condition.
What’s the outlook for systemic mastocytosis?
That depends on the condition type. People with indolent systemic mastocytosis can usually manage their condition with treatment. They have a typical life expectancy. Those with more aggressive types may have shorter lifespans.
Prevention
Can systemic mastocytosis be prevented?
Systemic mastocytosis happens when you have the genetic change that causes it. That means you can’t prevent it. But you can reduce your risk for attacks or flares by avoiding triggers.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Knowing how to avoid triggers is a big part of living with systemic mastocytosis. If you have this condition, you should:
Always carry an
EpiPen
to treat severe, life-threatening allergic reactions.
Know your triggers and do your best to avoid them.
Manage
stress
by practicing
meditation
or other forms of
mindfulness
.
Wear a medical alert bracelet that lists medications you can’t take.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll see your healthcare provider for regular check-ups. Be sure to tell them whenever you notice new or worsening symptoms.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Systemic mastocytosis is rare. Here are some questions you might want to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of systemic mastocytosis do I have?
What are additional symptoms that may be a sign my condition is getting worse?
What are treatments for the condition type I have?
Will treatments make my symptoms go away?
Are there clinical trials I should consider?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Systemic mastocytosis is a life-changing diagnosis. It means you’ll visit your healthcare provider often. Blood tests will become routine. You’ll also need to identify triggers and try to avoid them. Living with this condition is a big adjustment. Lean on your healthcare provider. They’re here to help. They can point you to resources and support groups that can empower you to take control of your health.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have systemic mastocytosis, your allergic reactions never stop. Cleveland Clinic can help you manage that with personalized treatment.
Systemic Mastocytosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials