Surgical Tech: What They Do & Training Requirements
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Surgical Technologist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Surgical Technologist
Surgical technologists work with and help surgeons, nurses and other members of the surgery team. They set up surgical instruments and help to protect patient safety. Surgical technologists may have an associate’s degree or complete a surgical technology training program.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is a surgical technologist?
A surgical technologist is a healthcare provider who supports surgeons, nurses and other healthcare providers during surgery. If you’re having surgery, a surgical technologist may be the person in the operating room who’s setting up surgical equipment. But that’s just one of their many responsibilities.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What do surgical technologists do?
They do many things to support surgical teams. For example, they:
Set up surgical instruments and equipment in the operating room
Count all instruments and supplies with an operating room registered nurse before, during and after the case to protect patients from harm
Actively participate in surgical team safety checks before and during surgery
Set up any robotic surgical equipment that the surgical team may use
Make sure all surgical equipment works like it should
Prepare sterile solutions and medications for use during your surgery
Help surgeons during surgery by handing them surgical instruments and other sterile supplies
Take steps to reduce the chance of surgical wound infections
Monitor all activities around the surgical instruments and operating room to make sure everything remains sterile
Apply bandages to the surgical site after surgery
How do you become a surgical technologist?
Surgical technologists have associate degrees or certificates in surgical technology. These programs include class work, practical training and hands-on experience in a hospital or outpatient surgery center. Surgical technology programs include courses like:
Anatomy
Microbiology
Physiology
Programs also include training in
Surgical equipment set up
Patient care
Preventing and controlling infection
Sterile techniques
Advertisement
How long is surgical technologist school?
It can take six months to complete a program and get a certificate in surgical technology. Associate degree programs take about two years to complete.
What skills do you need to be a surgical technologist?
Surgical technologists need soft skills, like:
Attention to detail
: They’re responsible for giving surgeons the right sterile equipment at the right time.
Communication
: Preventing infection is an important part of the surgical technologist’s job. Strong communication skills help them to effectively speak up to the team if they have any concerns about patient safety before or during surgery, like any concerns about potential infection issues.
Dexterity
: This is working with your hands. Surgical technologists keep surgical equipment in good shape. They also must move equipment as needed during surgery.
Listening skills
: These skills go along with communication. Listening skills mean you focus on what the surgical team says. That way, you can act on the team’s directions.
Physical stamina
: Some surgeries take hours to complete. Surgical technologists should be comfortable staying on their feet throughout surgery.
Stress management skills
: Working in an operating room can feel like working in a pressure cooker. Managing stress helps you stay focused on the surgery.
Where do surgical technologists work?
They typically work in hospitals or outpatient surgery centers. They may work for healthcare providers who have their own healthcare practices.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Surgical technologists play a hands-on role before, during and after surgery. They help surgery move smoothly. They do things like handing sterile surgical tools to surgeons at the right time. They move surgical equipment to the right spot. They’re also responsible for helping ensure patient safety. In short, they’re an important part of a surgical team.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sometimes you have surgery planned. Other times, it’s an emergency. No matter how you end up in the OR, Cleveland Clinic’s general surgery team is here for you.
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us