Arteriovenous (AV) Fistula: Types, Symptoms & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Arteriovenous Fistula
Advertisement
Advertisement
Arteriovenous Fistula
An arteriovenous (AV) fistula is an unusual link between an artery and a vein that allows blood to flow between them. Most often, surgeons create these for people who need dialysis care. But they can also form because of injuries or during fetal development. While arteriovenous fistulas are sometimes dangerous, they’re usually treatable and often curable.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is an AV Fistula?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is an AV Fistula?
An arteriovenous fistula (AV fistula) is an abnormal link between an
artery
and a
vein
. Blood flows from one to the other instead of going through the
capillaries
between them. You can be born with it or get it through an injury or surgery for dialysis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
An AV fistula can form anywhere in your body where an artery and a vein are close together. Depending on their location, cause and size, they can be harmless. They can even be helpful when there’s a medical reason to create one. But some can be a major health issue and damage your heart.
Arteriovenous fistulas are rare overall, except those that surgeons create to make
dialysis
easier. Those are the most common types. The least common AV fistulas are those you have at birth.
Arteriovenous fistulas can happen to anyone at any age, especially when an injury causes them.
Types of AV fistulas
Arteriovenous fistulas can be congenital (present at birth) or acquired. You can acquire an AV fistula from an injury (even years later) or from a procedure to
prepare for dialysis
. Types by location may include:
Coronary (heart)
Dural
and pial (brain)
Peripheral (arms and legs)
Renal (kidneys)
Spinal dura (spine)
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of AV fistulas
Symptoms can vary based on where the arteriovenous fistula is. The most common symptoms include:
Swelling around the fistula
Skin color changes (like purple or bright red)
Bulging or stretched veins
Warmth in the area around the fistula
Congenital arteriovenous fistulas often change how the affected body part grows. An AV fistula on your arm or leg may give that limb greater muscle mass or longer bones. You may also have swelling in your fingertips (
clubbing
). In other cases, you may not have enough blood flow to the affected limb. This makes it turn blue.
Advertisement
AV fistula causes
The three main causes of arteriovenous fistulas are:
Dialysis
: Creating an arteriovenous fistula helps make a wider, thicker vein. This is better able to handle dialysis needles and can carry more blood out of and into your body.
Injuries
: Arteriovenous fistulas form from trauma because of tissue damage around them. Healing structures can get stuck together. It can sometimes take years to detect these.
Congenital
: These fistulas form during fetal development and are present at birth. They usually involve many small fistulas rather than a single bigger one. Some are fatal if they happen in a critical place.
In rarer cases, AV fistulas can happen because of conditions like cancer, infections or when a weak artery wall bulges out (
aneurysm
) and presses against a nearby vein.
Complications of this condition
When blood moves between an artery and a vein, it can disrupt the blood flow in the vein and keep it from flowing toward your heart. The higher pressure of blood coming from arteries into veins can make veins stretch and swell.
When an AV fistula on one of your limbs is very large, areas farther away from the heart than the fistula may not get enough blood flow. If the lack of blood flow is severe enough, it can damage those areas.
Large arteriovenous fistulas can also cause problems for your heart. Because blood isn’t flowing correctly around the fistula, your heart tries to make up for this by pumping harder. Over time, that damages your heart and causes
heart failure
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider can diagnose an arteriovenous fistula with a physical exam and imaging. Other tests may help them find the cause.
During a physical exam, your provider will:
Look at areas of your body for signs of a problem.
Use a stethoscope to listen for blood flowing back and forth.
Feel the vibration of the disrupted blood flow with their hand near the fistula.
The most likely tests for AV fistulas include at least one type of imaging, like:
Duplex ultrasound mapping
using sound waves
Angiogram
using a contrast injection to show areas of unusual blood flow on X-rays or CT
MRA
using a powerful magnet and computer imaging
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Treating an AV fistula often involves a procedure and medication. Common treatments include:
Catheter-based procedures
: A healthcare provider inserts a tube (catheter) into a major blood vessel. They move the tube to the fistula and repair or plug it with a device or substance.
Surgery
: A surgeon can separate the two vessels or take a blood vessel from elsewhere in your body and graft it into place to make a repair.
Radiation therapy
: In some cases, a provider uses radiation therapy to turn the fistula into scar tissue. This keeps blood from passing through it.
Medication
:
Blood-thinning medications
keep clots from blocking blood vessels or breaking loose and moving to another part of your body.
Advertisement
Treatment depends on the cause, size and location of the AV fistula. Healthcare providers can usually treat them and manage any related issues. Most arteriovenous fistulas are curable. But it’s harder to cure the kind you’re born with.
Many people with an AV fistula may not need treatment unless they have:
Something go wrong with a dialysis-related fistula
Severe or nonstop bleeding
Problems in nearby tissue from growth or a change in shape in the fistula
An issue with too little blood reaching a body part or too much staying there
Heart failure symptoms due to the fistula
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call or see your provider if you notice any changes in your symptoms. These include symptoms that are new, get worse or that start to affect your routine. Key symptoms to watch for include new or worse pain, growth around the fistula or skin color changes to an area of your body. For a dialysis fistula, watch for signs of infection or changes in shape or in how well blood flows through the fistula.
You should go to the emergency room if you have any symptoms of internal bleeding or poor blood flow. These include:
Fainting or dizziness
Fast heartbeat or breathing
Shortness of breath
Sudden, severe pain near the fistula
You may want to ask your provider:
Advertisement
How did this AV fistula happen?
Do I need treatment?
What’s the best treatment for me?
How often do I need follow-up visits with you?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have an AV fistula?
The outlook for arteriovenous fistulas depends on their size, location and cause. Smaller fistulas or those in certain places often don’t need treatment. Many people will only notice mild symptoms or have no symptoms at all. Larger fistulas or those in critical places can cause the most problems.
Congenital fistulas often have a good prognosis if they aren’t in a critical place. When they’re in a dangerous spot or very severe, they can cause serious issues or even death.
Dialysis-related fistulas usually don’t cause any problems. When they cause side effects, your healthcare provider can often treat them. They may do a follow-up surgery to repair the fistula or return the affected blood vessels to their original shape and location in more severe cases.
Is an AV fistula permanent or temporary?
Arteriovenous fistulas don’t go away unless you fix them. AV fistulas that aren’t serious can last your whole life and cause few or no problems. Larger fistulas can make your heart strain until you develop heart failure. Repairing a fistula often allows your heart to return to normal even after heart failure starts. It’s best to treat arteriovenous fistulas sooner rather than later.
Advertisement
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
If you have an AV fistula with symptoms, you may benefit from wearing compression garments. These put light pressure on an entire area of your body and help push fluid out of that area. Your provider can let you know if you should wear them.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe you have kidney issues and need dialysis. In that case, an AV fistula can help you. But if an injury causes an AV fistula, it can have a minor to major effect on your life. Fortunately, this condition is often treatable or even curable. Your healthcare provider can help you understand your condition and how they can treat you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment