Subclinical Hypothyroidism: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Subclinical Hypothyroidism
Advertisement
Advertisement
Subclinical Hypothyroidism
Subclinical hypothyroidism happens when you have elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels with normal thyroxine levels. It usually doesn’t cause symptoms, and it may or may not require treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Subclinical Hypothyroidism?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Subclinical Hypothyroidism?
Subclinical hypothyroidism happens when you have elevated
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels
with normal levels of the hormone thyroxine (T4).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
“Subclinical” describes a condition that’s not severe enough to cause definite symptoms.
Hypothyroidism
happens when your
thyroid
doesn’t produce enough
thyroid hormones
. With subclinical hypothyroidism, you don’t technically have hypothyroidism, but it has the potential to develop.
Subclinical hypothyroidism is often temporary but can be long-lasting. It may or may not require treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of subclinical hypothyroidism
Most of the time, subclinical hypothyroidism doesn’t cause any symptoms. But you may have symptoms like:
Fatigue
Unexplained weight gain
Constipation
Depression
Decreased attention span
Being unable to tolerate cold temperatures
Dry, coarse skin and hair
Diastolic hypertension (
high blood pressure
)
Frequent and
heavy menstrual bleeding
Subclinical hypothyroidism causes
The typical cause of subclinical hypothyroidism is an underlying issue with your thyroid gland, like
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
or another
autoimmune disease
that causes thyroid
inflammation
.
Usually, multiple hormones and glands in your
endocrine system
work together to carefully control the level of TSH in your bloodstream. TSH then stimulates cells in your thyroid to release thyroxine and triiodothyronine into your bloodstream. These two hormones prevent your pituitary gland from producing more TSH if the levels of thyroxine and triiodothyronine are too high.
Advertisement
But in subclinical hypothyroidism, thyroid hormonal output doesn’t increase as it normally should in response to the elevated TSH levels. This leads to elevated TSH levels and normal thyroxine levels.
Risk factors
Some risk factors that contribute to subclinical hypothyroidism include:
Being
female
and older than 60
Personal or family history of
thyroid disease
Positive
thyroid antibodies
Prior or current
amiodarone
or
lithium
use
Iodine deficiency
Head or neck
radiation
exposure
Obesity
Type 1 diabetes
Prior treatment for
Graves’ disease
with antithyroid drugs or ablation
Complications of subclinical hypothyroidism
Most commonly, subclinical hypothyroidism can progress to full-blown hypothyroidism.
Subclinical hypothyroidism may have a connection to an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases like high blood pressure and
high cholesterol
. But this isn’t a definitive connection.
Does subclinical hypothyroidism affect pregnancy?
Subclinical hypothyroidism affects
fewer than 1 in 5
pregnancies in the U.S.
Evidence linking subclinical hypothyroidism to issues during
pregnancy
is inconsistent and conflicting. Older studies have shown an association between subclinical hypothyroidism in pregnancy and the following conditions:
Gestational high blood pressure and
diabetes
Preterm labor
Miscarriage
But more recent studies have not confirmed these findings. Healthcare providers typically only screen for subclinical hypothyroidism during pregnancy if you have risk factors for developing it.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose subclinical hypothyroidism
Healthcare providers diagnose subclinical hypothyroidism solely on
thyroid blood tests
.
If your thyroid blood test results show that your TSH levels are elevated (5 to 10 milli-international units per liter or mIU/L) and your thyroxine (T4) levels are in the normal range, it means you have subclinical hypothyroidism.
Providers may categorize subclinical hypothyroidism as grade 1 when TSH levels are between 4.5 and 9.9 mIU/L and as grade 2 if TSH levels are 10 mIU/L or higher.
Management and Treatment
Does it need to be treated?
It depends on factors like your TSH levels, symptoms and overall health.
On one hand, it makes sense for some people to receive treatment so it doesn’t advance to hypothyroidism. But for others, treatment could potentially cause
thyrotoxicosis
(too much thyroid hormone in your body), especially in people 65 years or older. Additionally, most people with subclinical hypothyroidism don’t have symptoms.
For most people with subclinical hypothyroidism, providers recommend that they take a “wait and see” approach and not start treatment. However, providers may recommend treatment in the following cases:
Advertisement
People who have thyrotropin (TSH) levels of 10 mIU/L or higher
Young and middle-aged people who have symptoms
Young and middle-aged people who have other risk factors
What is the treatment for subclinical hypothyroidism?
If your healthcare provider recommends treatment for subclinical hypothyroidism, they’ll prescribe a thyroid hormone replacement medication called
levothyroxine
. It comes in pill form.
Before starting levothyroxine therapy in subclinical hypothyroidism, your provider may order another blood test to check your TSH levels within three months of the first abnormal test result. This is because TSH levels normalize without treatment after three months in many people.
Your provider will likely want you to get routine
blood tests
to make sure your thyroid levels are in a healthy range while taking medication. If your dosage of levothyroxine is too high, it can cause
hyperthyroidism
.
Subclinical hypothyroidism treatment for fertility
For women with subclinical hypothyroidism having
IVF
or
ICSI
, the American Thyroid Association recommends levothyroxine treatment to achieve a TSH level of 2.5 mIU/L.
When should I see my healthcare provider about subclinical hypothyroidism?
In most cases, healthcare providers take a “wait and see” approach.
If you start to experience symptoms of hypothyroidism, such as fatigue and unexplained weight gain, talk to your healthcare provider. They’ll likely order another thyroid blood test to see if you have overt hypothyroidism.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have subclinical hypothyroidism?
Each case of subclinical hypothyroidism is unique. Many cases resolve on their own within three months.
The risk of subclinical hypothyroidism progressing to overt hypothyroidism is 2% to 6% per year.
You should talk to your healthcare provider about your unique situation to see how they recommend moving forward and how often you should be having blood work.
Prevention
Can subclinical hypothyroidism be prevented?
In most cases, there’s nothing you can do to prevent subclinical hypothyroidism.
However, if you’re not getting enough iodine in your diet, you can develop subclinical hypothyroidism. This is because your thyroid needs iodine to make thyroid hormone. While this is uncommon in the United States due to the use of table salt, iodine deficiency is the most common cause of hypothyroidism worldwide.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Due to conflicting studies, there’s still a lot of debate about whether subclinical hypothyroidism should be treated. Each case and each person is unique, so the best strategy is to talk to your healthcare provider about your concerns and options. They’re available to help you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s experienced healthcare providers treat all kinds of thyroid disorders, including issues that cause hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes