OEIS Syndrome (Cloacal Exstrophy): Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
OEIS Syndrome (Cloacal Exstrophy)
Advertisement
Advertisement
OEIS Syndrome (Cloacal Exstrophy)
OEIS syndrome, or cloacal exstrophy, is a condition that occurs during fetal development. It affects your baby’s urinary, digestive and reproductive systems. It causes the bladder to develop inside out and some organs to push through a hole in the abdomen. It can also affect the genitals and anus. Treatment involves a series of surgeries.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Fetal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is OEIS Syndrome (Cloacal Exstrophy)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is OEIS Syndrome (Cloacal Exstrophy)?
OEIS syndrome (pronounced “kloh-EY-kel” “EK-struh-fee”) is a rare congenital condition (
birth defect
) that affects how the lower abdominal wall, intestines and urinary bladder form during
fetal development
. This results in the bladder and part of the intestines being outside of the body at birth.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In addition, babies with cloacal exstrophy usually have other associated abnormalities at birth. The abnormalities affect other abdominal organs, the anus/rectum, genital (penis or vagina) formation, the spinal cord and lower limbs.
Other names for OEIS syndrome are OEIS complex and cloacal exstrophy. Healthcare providers sometimes use the “OEIS” names because the condition causes the following conditions:
Omphalocele
: As the abdominal wall doesn’t form as expected, there’s a hole near the belly button/umbilical cord. Some of the abdominal organs come out of this hole. The organs are in a membrane or sac (omphalocele).
Exstrophy of the bladder
and rectum
: The bladder opens up like a flat plate instead of a hollow sphere. It may split into halves. The pelvic bones don’t join correctly and are far apart. The rectum and colon may also be open and split in half. There may be extra parts of the intestines and internal reproductive organs. The genitals may also be split and smaller than expected.
Imperforate anus
: The anus is the last part of the digestive system where poop comes out. In cloacal exstrophy, the opening to the anus doesn’t form. The intestines may be shorter than expected. This can affect how your body absorbs nutrients when you eat.
Spinal defects
: As many as 3 out of 4 infants with cloacal exstrophy also have
spina bifida
, which is when the spinal cord doesn’t close. This allows a sac of fluid (and sometimes nerves) to bulge through the opening. Spina bifida affects the nerves to the bladder, bowel and legs.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of OEIS syndrome
OEIS syndrome symptoms are visible at birth and may include:
Organs in a sac coming through an opening in your baby’s belly
Exposed, open bladder and intestines in the lower abdomen
An abnormal opening in the lower back where you can see the spinal cord or it is coming out
The penis and
scrotum
are split into two halves, which are very small and short
The
clitoris
and labia are split into two halves and there may be extra vaginas and
uteruses
Cloacal exstrophy causes
Healthcare providers don’t know why some babies develop cloacal exstrophy. And there’s no known way to prevent it before or during pregnancy. Something happens during the first trimester of pregnancy that causes the cloacal membrane to tear or break apart.
The cloaca is the area where the
male
/
female
reproductive system, digestive system and
urinary system
come together. The cloacal membrane usually separates the organs in these systems. But if the membrane tears or breaks apart, the fetus’s abdominal wall doesn’t form completely. Organs don’t develop as they should or may connect incorrectly. Some organs poke through an abdominal opening.
Complications of cloacal exstrophy
Cloacal exstrophy increases the risk of:
Inability to control when you pee (urinary incontinence)
Inability to control when you poop (fecal incontinence)
Problems with walking and muscle strength (paraplegia)
Kidney failure
Kidney infections
Kidney stones
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Kidney failure
Sexual dysfunction, including erectile dysfunction
Inability to get pregnant (infertility)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose cloacal exstrophy
Healthcare providers usually diagnose cloacal exstrophy during a
prenatal ultrasound
. They may also recommend a fetal
MRI
, which provides more detailed images of fetal organs. These tests may reveal:
The bladder isn’t filling or emptying properly
Widely separated pelvic bones
Small penis
The umbilical cord sits too low on the fetus’s belly
Abdominal wall abnormalities with a sac that bulges out and may contain organs
Exposed spinal cord or it’s coming out
After birth, your baby may get other imaging tests to see how severe the condition is and how well their organs work. This information helps your child’s provider develop a treatment plan. These tests may include an MRI,
abdominal ultrasound
and other tests.
Management and Treatment
What surgery is done for OEIS syndrome?
All newborns with OEIS syndrome need staged surgical reconstruction. It’s a series of surgeries that take place over many years. During these surgeries, healthcare providers put your baby’s organs in their proper places and close the abdominal and spinal openings.
Treatments soon after birth may include:
Fixing the bladder, placing organs back into the abdominal cavity and closing the opening in the abdomen.
Creating a temporary opening (stoma) in the abdominal wall (colostomy). The opening allows the large intestine to empty poop into a bag outside the body. Your baby may need a colostomy bag until they can get other surgeries.
Repairing the spinal cord and closing the back.
Advertisement
Treatments during early childhood may include:
Cutting and realigning the pelvic bones (osteotomy). This procedure allows the pelvis to close more easily and supports the bladder as your child grows.
Closing the bladder and reconstructing the genitals
Creating an anal opening. If there’s enough large intestine, your child’s surgeon may perform a pull-through surgery. A pull-through surgery connects the large intestine to the rectum. The surgeon then closes the stoma. Your child will no longer need a colostomy bag.
Your child will usually need other surgeries on their bladder as they grow.
Outlook and recovery
Your child will likely need multiple surgeries over many years. It can take years because your child needs to grow and develop in between procedures. But improvements in surgical approaches, anesthesia and infant nutrition have helped increase cloacal exstrophy survival rates. Your child will have a team of specialists to help manage their long-term needs.
Your child’s recovery depends on the severity of their cloacal exstrophy and how many procedures they need. You may need special strategies for managing their pee and poop. Their medical team will give you a better idea of what to expect according to your child’s specific situation.
Advertisement
The goals of treatment are to:
Protect kidney function
Keep urinary infection rates low
Help develop strategies for peeing and pooping
When should my child see a healthcare provider?
You’ll work closely with your child’s healthcare providers to learn about and manage their care and learn how to prevent infections. As your child grows and develops, their providers may recommend additional procedures.
During your appointments, you may wish to ask the following questions:
Does my child have a higher risk of any other health conditions?
What treatment do you recommend?
How many surgeries will my child need?
What complications do I need to be aware of after surgery?
What are the chances that another biological child of mine will have OEIS syndrome?
Will my child be able to have biological children when they’re older?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Fetal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has this condition?
OEIS syndrome is a complex condition that can cause many complicated feelings. You might feel scared or helpless. But you’ll have a care team to support you. A team-based approach to your child’s care is very important. The team may include:
Pediatric surgeon
Pediatric urologist
Pediatric
neurosurgeon
Genetic counselors
Psychologist
Pediatric gastroenterologist
Social worker
Physical therapist
It’s important to schedule regular appointments with your child’s providers so they can check on your child’s health and schedule any other necessary treatments. They can also recommend support groups. If you have any questions, reach out to them for help.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between bladder exstrophy and cloacal exstrophy?
Cloacal exstrophy is a more severe condition that involves more areas of the body. It usually affects the bladder, genitals, spinal cord and bowel.
Bladder exstrophy is typically just one part of cloacal exstrophy. Classic bladder exstrophy only affects the external genitals and bladder. The bladder and genitals are “opened up.” The bladder is outside the body at birth.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out that your child has a congenital condition can cause a flood of emotions. You might feel afraid for your child or second-guess your abilities as a caregiver.
It’s important to remember that if your child has OEIS, you’re not to blame. It’s a condition that appears to happen without any specific cause. Many times, a healthcare provider can diagnose it during an ultrasound and prepare you for what to expect during the rest of your pregnancy and the first years of your child’s life.
With appropriate treatment, most children who have cloacal exstrophy at birth enjoy full lives. But those first years can be challenging. Talk to your child’s providers about any concerns you have and lean on your family and friends for support.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Our fetal surgery program includes leading experts and advanced technology. We perform in utero surgery for tumors, spina bifida and many other birth defects.
Fetal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment