Digital Disimpaction: What It Is, Procedure & Risks
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Digital Disimpaction
Advertisement
Advertisement
Digital Disimpaction
Digital disimpaction is a procedure to remove trapped stool (poop) from your rectum. A provider uses a gloved finger to break up the stool and remove it, giving you quick relief from fecal impaction and severe constipation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What is digital disimpaction?
Digital disimpaction is a procedure where a healthcare provider uses a digit (finger) to remove stool (poop) from your rectum. Other names for this procedure include manual disimpaction and digital evacuation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Why would someone need digital disimpaction?
You may need digital disimpaction if stool is stuck in your
rectum
and you can’t poop. Usually, your provider will recommend other treatments first, like laxatives, stool softeners or an
enema
.
Typically, providers only recommend digital disimpaction if you have:
A health condition that prevents you from having regular bowel movements, like
pelvic floor dysfunction
.
Fecal impaction
(buildup of stool in your rectum).
Severe
constipation
that doesn’t respond to other therapies.
Treatment Details
How do healthcare providers do digital disimpaction?
Providers can do digital disimpaction in a medical office setting but may have to perform this in the operating room (OR) under anesthesia if your symptoms are severe. During the procedure, you’ll lie down on an exam table, on your side with knees drawn up toward your belly.
Your provider will:
Insert a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum.
Sweep their finger around or through the stool to break it up into smaller pieces.
Remove pieces of stool to clear the blockage.
Can nurses perform digital disimpaction?
Many different medical providers can perform digital disimpaction, including:
Nurse practitioners (NP)
.
Physicians (MD or DO).
Physician assistants (PA).
Registered nurses (RN).
Can you digitally disimpact yourself?
Only a trained medical professional should do digital disimpaction. You shouldn’t try to disimpact yourself.
Advertisement
Done incorrectly, digital disimpaction can cause complications like:
Arrhythmia
(irregular heartbeat).
Damage to the walls of your
anus
(butthole), rectum or large intestine.
Fainting
.
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of digital disimpaction?
Digital disimpaction can bring quick relief of severe constipation and rectal discomfort. People who have
abdominal pain
,
nausea
or
loss of appetite
usually feel better within minutes after digital disimpaction.
Digital disimpaction may also help you avoid complications from fecal impaction, including:
Bleeding or sores in your large intestine.
Fecal (bowel) incontinence
secondary to liquid poop sliding around the impaction.
Gastrointestinal perforation
.
Megacolon
.
What are the risks or complications of digital disimpaction?
Digital disimpaction carries a low risk of complications when done correctly. Done improperly, the procedure can cause:
Anal fissures
(tears in your anus).
Damage to your anus or anal sphincter (muscle in your anus).
Infection.
Although uncommon, digital disimpaction can overstimulate your
vagus nerve
, which can cause fainting or a temporary irregular heartbeat.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time after digital disimpaction?
Digital disimpaction isn’t surgery, so recovery is short. In most cases, you can resume normal routines a few minutes after the procedure unless it required anesthesia. However, ask your provider when you can resume activities like heavy lifting or exercise.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your provider if you have gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms after disimpaction, including:
Abdominal pain.
Constipation.
Diarrhea.
Loss of appetite.
Nausea.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The thought of digital disimpaction might be embarrassing. But fecal impaction and long-term constipation can cause extreme discomfort and serious complications. Digital disimpaction can provide quick relief when other treatments don’t work. Be open and honest with your provider about problems you have in the bathroom and ways to prevent constipation and fecal impaction. Together, you can come up with a plan to avoid severe bowel blockages and keep your colon healthy.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/06/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us