Hemifacial Microsomia: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hemifacial Microsomia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hemifacial Microsomia
With hemifacial microsomia, one side of your face doesn’t develop as it should. It can affect your child’s breathing, eating and hearing. Surgery can address many of these issues. It takes time and multiple procedures to maximize functioning and cosmetic results.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Pediatric Hemifacial Microsomia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is hemifacial microsomia?
Hemifacial microsomia (craniofacial microsomia) is a condition you’re born with. It occurs when features on one side of your face don’t develop as they should. It most commonly occurs on one side of your face but can sometimes affect both sides (bilateral hemifacial microsomia).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hemifacial microsomia can affect your:
Cheekbones
Eyes
External and middle ear
Facial nerves
Lower jaw
Muscles
Neck
Skull
Teeth
Rarely, hemifacial microsomia involves other body systems,
bones
and soft tissues, like your
heart
,
kidneys
, ribs and
spine
.
Hemifacial microsomia affects
1 in every 3,000 to 5,600
live births. It’s the second most common facial anomaly after
cleft lip or palate
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hemifacial microsomia?
Symptoms can range from mild to severe and usually involve the underdevelopment of one or more facial features. Hemifacial microsomia affects everyone differently, and the degree of involvement can vary. Some of the most common signs and symptoms include:
Microtia
(small, displaced or misshapen ear)
Hypodontia
(you never developed some of your teeth)
Facial paralysis
due to
nerve
issues
Skin tags
Small eye (
microphthalmia
)
Uneven smile due to muscle and nerve issues
What causes hemifacial microsomia?
Experts don’t know why hemifacial microsomia happens. They believe something disrupts
fetal development
during the first six weeks of
pregnancy
.
Researchers haven’t linked any
genes
or environmental factors to hemifacial microsomia yet. But they think it could be hereditary. This is because some families have more than one person born with the condition.
Advertisement
What are complications of this condition?
In addition to facial abnormalities, people with hemifacial microsomia may develop complications like:
Hearing loss
Malnutrition
due to difficulty eating
Oral health conditions
Speech disorders
Vision
issues
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hemifacial microsomia diagnosed?
Healthcare providers typically start with a
physical exam
. They usually diagnose the condition shortly after birth. In some cases, they might detect it before birth using
prenatal ultrasound
or MRI (magnetic resonance imaging).
Your healthcare provider may need to run additional imaging tests to diagnose hemifacial microsomia, like:
X-rays
CT scans
(computed tomography scans)
Management and Treatment
How is hemifacial microsomia treated?
Treatment for this condition depends on the severity of involvement. Children with hemifacial microsomia usually need surgery to repair or reconstruct their facial features. The type and timing of these procedures depend on your child’s needs. In infancy, the focus of treatment is to make sure your baby is breathing and feeding well. In childhood and adolescence, the goal of treatment is to improve the function and appearance of the face. It’s often necessary to delay procedures or do them in multiple stages as your child grows.
Surgical treatments
Surgical treatments for hemifacial microsomia include:
Ear, nose and throat surgery
Facial plastic surgery
Eye surgery
Maxillofacial surgery
Oral surgery
Plastic surgery
Neonatal surgery
If your newborn has breathing difficulties or is unable to nurse, your healthcare provider may treat your baby’s hemifacial microsomia immediately after birth. The most common procedures done after delivery include:
Tracheostomy
, an incision in your baby’s neck and windpipe to aid breathing
Tube feeding
, which gives your baby nutrition if they’re unable to nurse
Nonsurgical treatments
In addition to surgical treatments, your healthcare provider may recommend these nonsurgical therapies:
Braces
and other teeth-straightening devices
Hearing aids
for mild hearing loss
Speech therapy
to address challenges with swallowing and speaking
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Pediatric Hemifacial Microsomia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for hemifacial microsomia?
In most cases, the condition doesn’t limit life expectancy. A child born with this condition can expect to live about as long as a child without it.
But hemifacial microsomia can affect quality of life. As children get older, they’ll have to cope with the challenges of looking different. Tasks that are easy for other children — like eating, talking or sleeping — may be difficult even with successful surgeries.
Prevention
Can hemifacial microsomia be prevented?
You can’t prevent hemifacial microsomia because researchers don’t know what causes it. A genetic link is possible, but they haven’t identified it yet. If your baby has hemifacial microsomia, it’s not because of something you did (or didn’t do).
Advertisement
Living With
How do I take care of my child?
Children with hemifacial microsomia need ongoing medical care, including multiple surgeries. But once they reach early adulthood, they likely won’t need any more procedures. Long-term follow-up may be necessary to check for issues that come back or worsen over time. Hearing aids and implants may need adjusting.
Physical challenges and the psychological effects of looking different can impact your child’s emotional health. Seeking support through counseling is essential in helping your child develop coping strategies.
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between hemifacial microsomia and Goldenhar syndrome?
Goldenhar syndrome
(also known as oculoauriculovertebral spectrum, or OAVS) is a rare disorder that you can be born with. Hemifacial microsomia is one of the aspects of this syndrome, but people with Goldenhar syndrome may also have
noncancerous tumors
on their eyes (epibulbar dermoids) or spinal abnormalities in addition to hemifacial microsomia characteristics.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
As a parent, you want everyone to see your baby the way that you see them. It’s natural to worry as your child approaches school age. Kids can be mean, especially to those they perceive as different. As soon as your child is old enough to understand, talk openly with them about their diagnosis. Normalizing these discussions can empower your child and help them understand that their facial difference doesn’t define them.
Advertisement
Surgery can address most physical symptoms of hemifacial microsomia. In addition, talk therapy can help your child express themselves and learn how to fully engage in social situations. Ask your healthcare provider for more resources. They’re here to help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your baby is diagnosed with hemifacial microsomia, you’ll want to be sure they get the best care. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is here for you.
Pediatric Hemifacial Microsomia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/11/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment