Dental Drugs & Medications: Types & Uses
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Dental Drugs and Medications
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dental Drugs and Medications
Dentists use medications to treat health conditions that affect your mouth. Dental drugs may manage pain, prevent disease or fight infection, among other things. Used before or after a dental procedure or oral surgery, common medications can reduce your pain or discomfort and help prevent complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What are dental drugs and medications?
Dentists use a range of dental medications to treat health conditions that affect your
mouth
. You may receive medication to manage pain, help you relax, prevent disease or fight infection.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
dentist
will recommend dental medications and dosages based on your needs, age, medical conditions, current medications, weight and other factors.
What are the types of dental drugs and medications?
Several types of medications are used in dentistry, depending on your needs. Your dentist may give them to you in the office as part of a treatment or procedure, or you may need to take a prescription to the pharmacy and take the medications at home. These include:
Pain relievers (
analgesics
) or numbing medications.
Preventive medications to prevent tooth decay or manage
plaque
and gingivitis.
Medications to treat
dry mouth
or excessive drooling.
Antibiotics
.
Antivirals
.
Antifungals
.
Sedatives
.
Anti-anxiety medications (
anxiolytics
).
Medications you might get at the dentist’s office
During nearly every dental appointment — from
cleaning
, to cavity
fillings
, to
root canals
and more — your dentist will use some type of medication as part of your treatment. These may include:
Medication for pain relief or sedation during dental procedures
Dentists use
anesthesia
to soothe pain or irritation by numbing irritated parts of your mouth so you don’t feel anything. Like pain medications, the calming effect of anesthetics can also help prevent discomfort or anxiety.
Over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription anesthetics come in many forms, including gels and sprays. You can also receive an injection or inhale an anesthetic. The main types used in dentistry are:
Advertisement
Topical anesthetic
, including
benzocaine
, which can be applied directly to the inside of your mouth.
Local anesthetic
, like lidocaine or novocaine, which numbs a specific part of your mouth — during
wisdom teeth removal
, for instance.
General anesthesia
, which relaxes your whole body and puts you to sleep.
Sometimes, your dentist uses a sedative, so you can rest in a light sleep but respond to your care team when needed. Or they may give you nitrous oxide (laughing gas) to help you relax during a procedure. If you have
high blood pressure (hypertension)
, your dentist may combine epinephrine with local anesthesia. This reduces bleeding during your treatment.
Medication to prevent tooth decay
Tooth decay (
cavities
) occurs when acid wears away the surface of your teeth (
tooth enamel
). Dentists often recommend
fluoride
to strengthen teeth and prevent or reverse tooth decay. Talk to your provider about the most effective form of fluoride for your needs.
Medication to manage plaque and gingivitis
Dental plaque is a common problem that people develop. Untreated, it can lead to early-stage gum disease (
gingivitis
) or bad breath.
To remove plaque and prevent or treat gingivitis, dentists often use an antiseptic drug called
chlorhexidine
(like Peridex™). You use chlorhexidine as a mouth rinse to reduce bacteria from
periodontal disease (gum disease)
or after a dental procedure (usually for a short time).
Chlorhexidine use may lead to increased
tartar
buildup on your teeth or stain your
teeth
, fillings, dentures or other appliances. It can also affect your sense of taste. Keep follow-up appointments to treat buildup and stains, and to help maintain good
oral hygiene
.
At-home medications for dental conditions
You may need other medications that you take at home, either before or after your visit with the dentist.
Medication for dental pain
You may experience pain, irritation or discomfort with dental appliances like
dentures
or
braces
, or conditions like
toothache
or
canker sores
. Topical
analgesics
(like Anbesol®, Chloraseptic®, Orajel® and Xylocaine®) that you rub inside your mouth can relieve the pain. Ask your dentist before using one of these medications. However, never use topical analgesics for
teething
in infants.
These analgesics come in several forms:
Cream or dental paste.
Gel.
Lozenge.
Mouth rinse.
Ointment.
Spray.
You may also need pain management before having dental work. Your dentist may recommend over-the-counter or prescription
pain relievers
before cavity filling, crown placement (
restorative dentistry
) or
oral surgery
.
These drugs include:
Acetaminophen.
Corticosteroids
.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), such as
ibuprofen
,
aspirin
and naproxen, for mild to moderate pain. (Never give aspirin to infants and children unless directed by your dentist.)
Opioids
(narcotics) for moderate or severe pain from procedures such as
tooth extraction
(removal),
gum graft surgery
or
dental implants
.
Advertisement
Talk to your dentist about the potential side effects of pain medications, like dry mouth (xerostomia), dental plaque or cavities. Many over-the-counter pain relievers are equally effective — or more effective — than opioids, which carry significantly more risk.
Medications for dry mouth or drooling
Dry mouth develops when the glands in your mouth (
salivary glands
) don’t make enough saliva (spit). Dental medications to increase saliva production (sialagogues) include:
Cevimeline
.
Pilocarpine
.
Saliva substitutes, with ingredients that temporarily relieve dry mouth symptoms.
Some people have too much saliva (hypersalivation). Your dentist can use medications to reduce how much saliva your glands make (antisialagogues). Drugs to reduce
drooling
or hypersalivation include:
Atropine sulfate.
Glycopyrrolate
.
Scopolamine
.
Medications for severe gum disease
In cases of severe gum disease (
periodontitis
), your dentist may recommend antibiotics like amoxicillin or doxycycline. These medications fight
bacterial infections
and help prevent the loss of gum tissue or bone and other complications.
Antibiotics for oral bacterial infections
Dentists use a range of antibiotics to treat oral infections caused by
bacteria
. They come in many forms, including mouth rinses, ointments, tablets or liquids.
In some cases — like severe gum disease (
periodontitis
) — you may receive an antibiotic before or after dental care. This prevents bacteria normally found on tissues around your teeth from entering your
blood
, where they can cause infection in another part of your body.
Advertisement
Common antibiotics used in dentistry include:
Amoxicillin
Clindamycin
Azithromycin.
Your treatment may involve only an antibiotic or an antibiotic combined with other medications or therapies.
Antivirals for oral viral infections
While other providers may care for you when you have a cold or
flu
, dentists often treat
viruses
that affect your mouth. Medications can’t
cure
viral infections, but they can reduce symptoms like
cold sores
.
Antiviral drugs used in dentistry include:
Acyclovir.
Valacyclovir
.
Famciclovir
.
Antifungals for oral fungal infections
Thrush
is a common oral infection caused by a fungus called
Candida albicans
. To stop it from spreading, your dentist uses antifungal medication. Dentists also prescribe antifungal medication to treat
denture stomatitis
.
You may receive these drugs in lozenge or tablet form. Or you may “swish” liquid medication in your mouth before spitting it out or swallowing it. Common types are:
Clotrimazole.
Fluconazole.
Miconazole.
Nystatin.
Medication for dental anxiety
Many people feel a bit anxious at the thought of going to the dentist. But if your
dental anxiety
starts to interfere with your day-to-day life, talk to your dentist. They may recommend ways to reduce your stress and relax your muscles. They may also suggest talking with a mental healthcare provider about medications to reduce anxiety and/or depression.
Advertisement
Anxiety disorders
can affect your mouth in lots of ways. They may:
Cause you to grind your teeth a lot (
bruxism
).
Contribute to
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorders
. Occasionally, dentists may prescribe
muscle relaxers
to help manage TMJ.
Affect your dental hygiene if you have a hard time doing daily activities like brushing your teeth.
What are the benefits of medications in dentistry?
Your dentist uses medications to keep you safe, comfortable and healthy. Each type offers its own benefit.
Some medications fight infection or make procedures easier. Others keep your teeth and
gums
healthy or relieve pain. Ask your dentist about the medications you may need and any questions you may have.
What are the risks?
Most medications used in dentistry are low-risk. In some cases, medications treat one condition but may raise your risk of another.
For example, some strong pain medications can make it more likely that you develop cavities or dry mouth. Your dentist will discuss the risks and benefits of each type of medication and work with you to prevent complications.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Dentists use medications to provide safe and effective care for issues involving your mouth, teeth or gums. Medications can manage pain, ease your anxiety before a procedure, clear up infections or prevent complications. Your dentist will discuss what medications you need, how they work and how you can expect to feel. They can also answer your questions, so you feel comfortable and reassured about your dental care.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Dentistry plays an important role in oral health. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can design a personalized plan that will keep you smiling for the long haul.
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/24/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment