Pilon Fracture (Tibial Plafond Fracture): Types & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pilon Fracture (Tibial Plafond Fracture)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pilon Fracture (Tibial Plafond Fracture)
A pilon fracture (tibial plafond fracture) is a rare but severe type of bone break that affects your tibia (and, sometimes, fibula). High-impact events like car accidents are the most common cause of this type of fracture. You’ll likely experience sudden, extreme pain. Depending on the severity of the injury, treatment usually involves surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Pilon Fracture?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is a Pilon Fracture?
A pilon fracture, or tibial plafond fracture, is a relatively rare bone break (
fracture
) that affects the lower end of your shinbone (
tibia
). In many cases, your other ankle bone (
fibula
) is broken, as well. Pilon fractures can be challenging to treat because they involve your
ankle joint
, and there’s usually damage to surrounding soft tissues like skin, muscles and ligaments.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
“Pilon” is the French word for pestle, which is a tool with a rounded end that’s used to crush and grind substances. This type of bone break is called a pilon fracture because of the crushing force that often causes it. Your tibia and fibula are attached to your
talus
, which is the other weight-bearing bone in your ankle. Tibial plafond fractures happen when your talus is driven into your tibia with such force that your tibia (and often your fibula) breaks at your ankle joint.
Types of pilon fractures
Healthcare providers can classify pilon fractures (tibial plafond fractures) in a couple of different ways.
Ruedi-Allgower
Under the Ruedi-Allgower classification system, providers categorize pilon fractures into the following types:
Type I:
A type I pilon fracture is an articular fracture (bone break in or around a joint) with minimal or no bone displacement (the broken bones are still aligned).
Type II:
A type II pilon fracture happens when the bottom of your tibia is displaced (not aligned), but there’s minimal or no bone fragments (comminution). A
comminuted fracture
is when the bone breaks into more than two pieces.
Type III:
A type III pilon fracture happens when the bone is displaced, has broken into more than two pieces, and the joint surface is in multiple pieces.
Advertisement
AO/OTA
Under the AO/OTA classification system, providers categorize pilon fractures as:
Extraarticular (43A)
Partial articular (43B)
Complete articular (43C)
Then, they subclassify the fracture based on the degree of comminution.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of pilon fractures
Tibial plafond fractures are often severe injuries that can cause
intense pain
in your lower leg and ankle. The injury can be extremely uncomfortable and affect your ability to walk.
Other pilon fracture symptoms may include:
Bruising, swelling and/or tenderness around your lower leg and ankle
Crooked or deformed-looking ankle
Inability to put weight on your injured leg
Skin blisters around your lower leg and ankle
Pilon fracture causes
Most pilon fractures happen when your talus is driven into your tibia and fibula with such force that your leg bone(s) breaks at your ankle joint. There are a few situations or conditions that can cause tibial plafond fractures, including:
High-impact events
, like car accidents, falls from significant heights and skiing accidents
Bone-weakening diseases
, like
osteoporosis
, that contribute to these fractures from low-impact events like minor falls
Risk factors for tibial plafond fractures
Anyone can experience a pilon fracture at any age, but certain people are more likely to have one:
Males
between the ages of 25 and 50
are more likely to get a pilon fracture from a high-impact event, like a car accident.
Females who have osteoporosis
are more likely to get a tibial plafond fracture from a low-impact event, like a minor fall.
People who use ladders or work on roofs
are more likely to experience a pilon fracture due to the chance of falls.
People who have a history of falls
, especially people over the age of 65, are more likely to experience a pilon fracture from falling.
Complications of pilon fractures
Your risk of complications from a tibial plafond fracture depends on how severe the fracture is and whether you had other injuries. Complications may include:
Chronic pain
Decreased mobility
Infection
Joint stiffness
Post-traumatic arthritis
in the affected bones and joint
Soft tissue damage, including muscle, skin, ligaments, tendons, blood vessels and nerves
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose pilon fractures
An
orthopedic surgeon
will do a physical exam of your leg and ankle and ask you about your symptoms. They’ll need to see an X-ray to diagnose a pilon fracture (tibial plafond fracture). They may request additional imaging tests to learn more about your injury.
Imaging tests that your provider may use to diagnose a tibial plafond fracture include:
X-rays
CT scan
Management and Treatment
How is a pilon fracture treated?
Treatment for a tibial plafond fracture depends on several factors, including:
The number of fractures
The pattern and type of the fracture
Whether the bones are displaced (not aligned), and how much they’re displaced
If surrounding soft tissues — like skin, muscles and tendons — are damaged
Your overall health and whether you have other injuries
Nonsurgical treatment
If you have a tibial plafond fracture that isn’t displaced and your bones are still aligned properly, you may not need surgery. Nonsurgical treatment for pilon fractures may include:
Advertisement
Rest
:
Your healthcare provider will most likely recommend that you rest as much as possible with your affected leg elevated.
Cast
,
splint
or boot
:
Your provider will likely have you wear a cast, splint or boot as your fracture heals to stabilize your ankle.
Walking aids
:
Your healthcare team may have you use a walking aid, like crutches, to avoid bearing weight on your affected leg.
Medications
:
Your provider may prescribe a blood thinner (
anticoagulant
) to reduce your risk of blood clots forming in the veins of your leg.
Physical therapy
:
Your provider may recommend physical therapy to restore strength in your leg and ankle after your fracture has healed.
Surgical treatment
If you have a pilon fracture that’s displaced and the bones aren’t aligned properly, you’ll likely need surgery. Depending on the severity of your fracture and whether you have other injuries, your orthopedic surgeon may delay your surgery until the swelling around your ankle has settled. They need to make sure you’re healthy enough to have the surgery to minimize risks, like an infection. Types of pilon fracture surgeries include:
Open reduction and internal fixation
:
Your orthopedic surgeon repositions the displaced bone fragments into their normal alignment. The fragments are then held together with screws or metal plates that are attached to the outer surface of the bone.
External fixation
:
Your surgeon inserts metal pins through your bones. The pins stick out of your skin and are attached to bars outside your body. The external fixator acts as a frame to help hold your ankle in a stable and secure position until your surgeon can perform a second surgery.
Advertisement
How long does it take a pilon fracture to fully heal?
The length of time it takes for a tibial plafond fracture to heal depends on the severity and whether you had other injuries. Most pilon fractures require surgery. It usually takes three to six months for the fracture to heal completely after surgery. But it often takes a year or more to fully recover from the injury.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re experiencing signs and symptoms of a pilon fracture, see a healthcare provider right away. If you can’t get to urgent care or an emergency room on your own, call 911 or your local emergency number for help.
If you had surgery to fix the pilon fracture and are experiencing signs of infection — like redness, pus or warmth at your surgical site — go to the nearest hospital as soon as possible.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis (outlook) for a pilon fracture?
Despite advances in imaging technology and surgical approaches, pilon fractures are challenging to treat. This is because pilon fractures often cause damage to the ankle joint surface itself and the surrounding soft tissues, like muscles and ligaments. It can take a year or more to fully recover from the injury, and long-term
ankle arthritis
, stiffness and swelling are common following a pilon fracture.
Prevention
What are the risk factors for getting a pilon fracture?
Some risk factors for getting a pilon fracture include:
Using a ladder
: Falls off a ladder or roof (and automobile collisions) are common causes of pilon fractures
.
Osteoporosis
: Although pilon fractures caused by low-impact events like a minor fall aren’t that common, people who have osteoporosis are at a higher risk of experiencing a pilon fracture from a low-impact event.
A history of falls
: People who have a history of falls, especially older people, are more likely to experience a pilon fracture from falling.
Advertisement
How can I prevent getting a pilon fracture?
Depending on your age and lifestyle, there are a few things you can do to try and prevent getting a pilon fracture, including:
Driving safely
: High-impact vehicle accidents are a common cause of pilon fractures. Always practice safe driving and follow traffic laws. Avoid distractions while you’re driving.
Following ladder safety instructions
:
When you’re using a ladder, be sure you’re doing so properly and safely. Always make sure your ladder is in a secure position before using it.
Using a walking aid if you’re at a higher risk of falling
: Using a walking aid, such as a cane or a walker, can help prevent you from falling. This could prevent you from getting a pilon fracture.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A pilon fracture (tibial plafond fracture) is a painful injury. Whether you experience a mild fracture or severe injury, you can expect it to take a while to heal. Depending on the severity of your condition and if you had other injuries, you may develop complications, too. Don’t be afraid to ask your healthcare team about your injury and treatment plan. You can lean on them and get support along the way to your recovery.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment