Acute Monocytic Leukemia: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Acute Monocytic Leukemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Acute Monocytic Leukemia
Acute monocytic leukemia (AMoL) is a type of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). It’s also known as AML-M5. It happens when immature cells that are on track to develop into white blood cells (monocytes) turn cancerous. The most common treatments are chemotherapy and stem cell transplants.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is acute monocytic leukemia?
Acute monocytic leukemia (AMoL) is a type of
acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Like all forms of
leukemia
, AMoL is a
blood cancer
. It happens when there’s a problem with blood cell development. Instead of becoming healthy blood cells, the still-developing cells transform into abnormal cancer cells.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
With AMoL, the immature cells, or
blasts
, are on a path to becoming white blood cells called
monocytes
. But instead, they get stuck in the immature or blast form.
Acute monocytic leukemia is a serious and aggressive cancer. Your healthcare provider will work with you to find the best treatments based on your situation.
Types of acute monocytic leukemia
The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies AMoL based on the type of cells that turn cancerous (monocytes). Acute monocytic leukemia is also known as AML-M5 according to the French-American-British (FAB) Classification system. This system further divides AML-M5 into two groups:
Acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5a)
. At least 80% of the cells turn cancerous before they finish developing. This type is most common in children and young adults.
Acute monocytic leukemia (AML-M5b)
. Most of the abnormal cells were at a more advanced stage of cell development before becoming cancerous. This type doesn’t impact one age group more than another.
These classifications help healthcare providers diagnose the condition. But one type isn’t more serious than another.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of acute monocytic leukemia?
Symptoms of AMoL are often noticeable and get worse fast. They include:
Easy
bruising
and bleeding (including bleeding gums and frequent
nosebleeds
)
Purple, red or brown dots beneath your skin (
petechiae
)
Swollen gums
or an overgrowth of gum tissue
Weakness and
fatigue
Shortness of breath
Loss of appetite
Unexplained weight loss
Pale skin
Dizziness
Fever
Advertisement
Acute monocytic leukemia can often involve your
brain
and
central nervous system
. If it does, you may notice related symptoms, like trouble remembering or focusing.
What causes AMoL?
Medical experts don’t know what causes AMoL. But it likely involves
genetic mutations
(changes) in cell DNA. These changes cause a healthy cell to become cancerous.
Researchers have found that in some people with AMoL, there’s a mix-up involving genetic material called
chromosomes
. One piece of a chromosome breaks off and attaches to a different chromosome. This is called chromosomal translocation. The mix-up may cause a cell to stop developing into a monocyte and become a cancer cell instead.
Research into these gene changes is ongoing. Understanding the genetics behind cancer helps experts develop better treatments to fight it.
Risk factors
Factors that may increase your risk of acute monocytic leukemia include:
Smoking
and being around
secondhand smoke
Previous cancer treatments, like
chemotherapy
and
radiation therapy
Long-term exposure to cancer-causing toxins (carcinogens), like benzene and formaldehyde
Radiation exposure after a nuclear reactor accident or atomic bomb
Genetic disorders you inherit, like
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Bone marrow diseases, including
myeloproliferative neoplasms
It’s important to remember that having a risk factor doesn’t mean you’ll get cancer. Still, it’s a good idea to avoid risks you can control, like choosing not to smoke.
What are the complications of AMoL?
With AMoL, too many abnormal cells can build up in your
bone marrow
. This is where blood cells get made. The cancer cells can crowd out your healthy blood cells. This can lead to low
red blood cells
,
white blood cells
and
platelets
, leading to complications like:
Anemia
Neutropenia
Thrombocytopenia
Diagnosis and Tests
How is acute monocytic leukemia diagnosed?
Healthcare providers use a series of tests to diagnose AMoL. According to the World Health Organization, a person has AMoL when 20% or more of their blood cells are abnormal, immature cells. More than 80% of the abnormal cells have to be monocytes or early forms of monocytes.
Your provider will draw blood or take samples of fluid, tissue or bone marrow. The actual analysis happens behind the in a lab.
Tests to diagnose AMoL include:
Blood tests
. A
complete blood count
(CBC) can reveal signs of AMoL, like a
high white blood cell count
. A
peripheral blood smear
can show if cells look abnormal.
Bone marrow biopsy
. For this test, your provider takes a sample of tissue or fluid from a
bone
(usually in your hip). Then, they’ll use a microscope to check for cancer cells.
Spinal tap
. Your provider takes spinal fluid for testing to see if cancer cells have spread to your brain or central nervous system.
Immunophenotyping
. This test checks for specific proteins on the cells’ surface. These proteins help identify the cells as AMoL.
Cytogenic analysis
. This type of analysis checks the chromosomes inside cells for translocations (mix-ups) associated with AMoL.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is acute monocytic leukemia treated?
The goals of treatment are to put cancer into
remission
. This means you no longer have cancer cells in your bone marrow or blood. This isn’t the same as a
cure
, which means the cancer is gone and won’t come back.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy
is the main treatment for acute monocytic leukemia. It involves:
Induction therapy
. This treatment uses a combination of chemotherapy drugs to send AMoL into remission. Treatment usually involves repeat visits that span several days.
Consolidation therapy
. In this treatment, you’ll continue to receive high-dose chemo to kill any remaining cancer cells. It reduces the chance that the cancer cells will come back. Treatment usually happens for several days for three to four months.
Maintenance therapy
. You may need low-dose chemo for several months or years after consolidation therapy.
Targeted therapy
This treatment targets specific mutations (changes) in cancer cells. You may need
targeted therapy
if chemotherapy hasn’t worked. Or you may get targeted therapy if the cancer cells have a specific genetic mutation that a targeted therapy drug treats.
Stem cell transplant
The only way to
cure
acute monocytic leukemia is with an
allogeneic stem cell transplant
. You may need one after you are in remission. Or you may get a transplant if the cancer
comes back
after remission. During the procedure, a provider replaces your
stem cells
with stem cells from a donor. Usually, a donor is a close relative with a matching blood type. They may also be an unrelated donor from a national or international registry.
Advertisement
Not everyone is a candidate for a stem cell transplant. And it can cause serious side effects. Your healthcare provider can explain the benefits and risks if they’re recommending it.
Clinical trials
A
clinical trial
is a study that tests the safety and effectiveness of new treatments. Depending on your diagnosis, it may be the best treatment for you. Ask your healthcare provider if they think you should participate in a clinical trial.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
The outlook for acute monocytic leukemia (AMoL) is similar to acute myeloid leukemia in general (AML) in general. About
3 people in 10
with AMoL are alive five years after they’re diagnosed.
Still, it’s important to remember that these numbers don’t reflect new treatments. And new treatments are helping people live longer with AMoL. Also, your
prognosis
(likely outcome) depends on several factors, including your:
Age
. AMoL has a better outlook in people under 65.
White blood cell counts
. AMoL has a better outlook in people who don’t have very high white blood cell counts.
Response to treatment
. AMoL has a better outlook if induction chemotherapy leads to remission.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Living with leukemia is stressful. Even after remission, you may have to
cope with concerns
that the cancer may come back. You may have to manage long-term side effects of
cancer treatment
. The best way to take care of yourself is to take advantage of every available resource. This may include:
Advertisement
Cancer survivorship
programs
. Connecting with others with cancer can provide much-needed support and assurance that you’re not alone.
Palliative care
. Palliative care can help you manage symptoms of cancer and cancer treatment. It’s an excellent resource no matter your prognosis.
Therapy
. Many people with cancer develop
anxiety
and
depression
. Meeting with a mental health professional who works with cancer survivors can help. A therapist can help you manage the daily stressors that can go along with a cancer diagnosis.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll see your healthcare provider regularly to monitor your response to treatment. They’ll let you know what changes in your body to look out for that may be signs the cancer is coming back.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask include:
Which treatments will I need?
Which side effects should I expect, and how can I manage them?
Should I take part in a clinical trial?
How often will I need follow-up appointments?
What resources are available that can help me?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that you or your child has acute monocytic leukemia (AMoL) can feel jarring. Blood cancers are serious, and treatments tend to be aggressive. You may be dealing with several treatment sessions in the days, weeks and months ahead.
It’s important to remember that these treatments are helping people live longer than ever. For some, treatment gets rid of the cancer for good. Ask your healthcare provider what outcomes you can expect. Have them explain the benefits and potential risks of all of your treatment options. They can help you handle what comes next.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A leukemia diagnosis can come as quite a shock. Cleveland Clinic’s blood cancer experts are here to guide you through it and help you move forward.
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials