What Is Cluster Feeding?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Cluster Feeding
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cluster Feeding
Cluster feeding is when your baby breastfeeds more frequently than expected. It’s a normal behavior for infants, particularly in the first few days of life. Older babies cluster feed occasionally. But call your pediatrician if your baby is older than 1 week and cluster feeding 24/7. It could be a sign they’re not getting enough milk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is cluster feeding?
Cluster feeding refers to a pattern of
breastfeeding
. It’s when your baby has several short feeds spaced closer together than you’d expect. For example, instead of nursing every three to four hours, your baby might nurse every hour.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cluster feeding around the clock is normal during the first few days of your baby’s life. In older babies, more frequent feeds are normal at certain times of the day (like evenings) or when your baby needs comfort.
But beyond your baby’s first week, cluster feeding shouldn’t happen all day, every day. Constant cluster feeding may be a sign that something else is going on — like a temporary drop in your milk supply or issues with your baby’s
latch
.
If it seems like your baby needs to nurse frequently and there’s no clear reason, call your
pediatrician
. They’ll evaluate what’s going on and may recommend working with
a lactation consultant
or breastfeeding medicine specialist. These experts can help you to solve a wide range of issues related to milk supply, milk transfer, latch and more. Don’t feel discouraged or give up on breastfeeding. Setbacks are common, and help is available.
Why do babies cluster feed?
Babies cluster feed for lots of different reasons. Sometimes, cluster feeding is normal, expected behavior. Other times, it’s a sign of an underlying issue that might need treatment or management.
Lots of things, from tiny tummy size to a need for comfort, can lead to cluster feeding. It’s a normal infant feeding pattern.
Reasons for normal cluster feeding
It’s normal for your baby to cluster feed when:
Their tummy is still too small to hold a lot of milk.
Your
prolactin
levels naturally drop (often later in the day)
They need comfort.
They’re going through certain
developmental stages
or a growth spurt.
Advertisement
Let’s take a closer look at each of these reasons.
Tiny tummy size
Your newborn’s stomach is super small and can only hold a little bit of milk at a time. So, they need to
feed more often
(possibly hourly) to get enough nourishment.
Within 24 hours of birth, your baby will likely take in only 2 to 10 milliliters (mL) of milk per feeding. (That’s much less than what you’d take in a dose of cough/cold syrup.) By around day three, your baby’s intake triples to about 1 ounce (29.5 mL) per feeding. And by the end of their first week, they can take in 1 to 2 ounces per feeding. So, their tummy fills up and you don’t need to do feedings as frequently.
A natural drop in prolactin levels
Prolactin is a hormone that tells your body to secrete milk. When you’re nursing, the amount of prolactin in your bloodstream naturally fluctuates throughout the day. This is normal and expected. Prolactin levels are usually lowest in the evening, causing a slight drop in your milk supply, in turn. So, your baby may cluster feed in the evening since they’re not getting as much milk per feeding.
Need for comfort
Breastfeeding provides your baby with necessary nutrients, but this act of closeness also offers them
comfort
. So, your baby may want to nurse more often than usual if they’re upset or feeling unwell.
Normal developmental changes
It’s normal for your baby to cluster feed when they’re going through certain stages and changes. For example:
Around 4 to 6 months of age, babies become more aware of their surroundings and also more mobile. This means they have plenty of distractions all around them. It’s normal for your baby to nurse at one breast but then get distracted by sounds or activity going on around them. Since they didn’t fill up, they’ll want to nurse again an hour or so later.
Some researchers theorize that babies cluster feed during
growth spurts
. We don’t have enough evidence to know for sure, but it’s possible your baby will feed more often during these times.
Factors unique to your baby
Every baby has unique needs. Your baby may cluster feed because they:
Need to “catch up” to the
normal growth
for their age. For example, babies who have a
low birth weight
may need more frequent feeds to help them grow faster.
Have been diagnosed with an underlying medical condition (like
congenital heart disease
) that causes them to have higher caloric needs.
In such situations, your pediatrician will tell you what you can expect and what’s “normal” based on your baby’s needs.
Cluster feeding as a red flag
Sometimes, all the reasons above can’t explain why your baby is cluster feeding. If that’s the case, it’s a good idea to call your pediatrician and talk about what you’re noticing. It’s possible that cluster feeding — particularly when it happens all day, every day — can be a sign of the following issues.
Advertisement
Delayed lactogenesis
This is the medical term for a delay in your milk “
coming in
,” or what providers call the second stage of milk production (
lactation
).
Normally, your body shifts from making
colostrum
(the first stage of milk production) to making transitional milk (a mix of colostrum and mature milk) by around 72 hours after birth. But many things can delay your milk coming in. Examples include:
Certain health conditions, like
obesity
,
diabetes
or
hypertension
.
Factors surrounding
labor and delivery
, like having
preterm labor
or a
C-section
.
A delay in your milk production can mean your baby isn’t getting enough milk per feeding. So, they need to feed more often as a result. By day four or five after birth, you should be nursing every two to three hours. More frequent feeds at this point may be a sign your baby isn’t filling up each time.
The good news is that delayed lactogenesis isn’t a forever problem. Your body just needs a little more time to ramp up milk production. In the meantime, your pediatrician may recommend
supplementing with formula
or donor milk.
Low milk production
Low milk production
is when the amount of milk your body produces doesn’t meet your baby’s needs. It’s a common issue that has many possible causes. You might have a good supply at first but then it suddenly drops. If this happens, your baby may start feeding more frequently — all day long and for multiple days in a row. This is because they’re getting less milk at each feeding, and they’re hungry.
Advertisement
Providers tailor the treatment for low milk supply to its underlying cause. Your lactation consultant or breastfeeding specialist will offer guidance based on your situation.
Improper latch
A latch is the way your baby attaches to your nipple and areola when nursing. If your baby isn’t latching on properly, they may not take in enough milk. Providers call this a transfer issue. Your body is making the milk, but it’s not getting where it needs to be (your baby’s mouth and, ultimately, tummy). As a result, your baby feeds more often than expected because they’re not filling up at each feeding.
An improper latch is a temporary and very solvable issue. Your lactation consultant or breastfeeding medicine specialist can work with you to find a comfortable
breastfeeding position
. This is key to getting a good latch. They’ll also teach you other strategies to help your baby latch on securely each time, while addressing any medical needs unique to your baby.
How long do babies cluster feed?
Cluster feeding starts the day your baby is born. This is normal and expected. They’ll need frequent feedings (every hour or so) to get enough nourishment. This early phase of cluster feeding ends as your baby’s stomach grows and your milk supply comes in. Generally, by the end of their first week, your baby shouldn’t be cluster feeding around the clock anymore.
Advertisement
But keep in mind that cluster feeding isn’t a one-and-done stage. As your baby grows, they may need more frequent feedings to support growth, provide comfort or meet other needs. Your pediatrician or lactation consultant can tell you more about what to expect based on your baby’s medical history and growth trajectory.
How do I know my baby is getting enough to eat?
The best way to know if your baby is getting enough milk is for a provider to evaluate their weight gain and compare it with the appropriate growth chart. Another way is for a lactation consultant or breastfeeding medicine specialist to observe as you feed your baby. They’ll listen for swallows and look for things like wide, long jaw movements. If you have concerns about your baby getting enough to eat, don’t hesitate to reach out to a provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
“Is this normal?” That’s a question you’ve probably asked yourself dozens (or hundreds) of times since your baby was born. It’s common to worry about every little thing your baby does — or doesn’t do — especially if you’re a new parent. But rest assured that cluster feeding at certain times is normal and typically nothing to worry about.
Still, it’s important to know that constant cluster feeding can sometimes mean something else is going on — like a drop in milk supply or latch difficulties. Follow your gut, and if your baby’s feeding habits suddenly change, reach out to your pediatrician. Whatever the issue, providers are prepared to help find solutions so you can continue nursing.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breastfeeding is natural and rewarding, but it’s not without challenges. Get the support you need at Cleveland Clinic.
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/19/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider