What Is a Pediatric Neurosurgeon? What They Do & Education
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Pediatric Neurosurgeon
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pediatric Neurosurgeon
A pediatric neurosurgeon diagnoses and treats conditions that affect your child’s nervous system. They treat conditions like spina bifida, epilepsy, brain tumors, scoliosis and more. In addition to surgery, they also offer nonsurgical treatment options. You may get a referral to see this provider from your child’s pediatrician.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurosurgery Care for Adults
Neurosurgery Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Pediatric Neurosurgeon?
Additional Common Questions
What Is a Pediatric Neurosurgeon?
A pediatric neurosurgeon is a
doctor
who treats medical conditions in a child’s
brain
, spinal cord and nerves. This makes up your child’s nervous system. Neurosurgeons care for kids of all ages, from newborns to teens.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
To do this work, neurosurgeons complete over a decade of education and hands-on training. This includes additional specialized training in caring for children. They also stay current through ongoing education and board certifications to ensure they’re providing the safest, most advanced care possible.
They use their expertise to do surgery when needed, but they can also treat your child without surgery when possible. In addition to managing the nervous system itself, they care for the structures that support it, like:
Blood vessels
Protective membranes and soft tissues
Skull
Spinal disks
Spinal vertebrae
What does a pediatric neurosurgeon do?
Pediatric neurosurgeons can do the following:
Diagnose and treat conditions that affect your child’s nervous system and surrounding structures
Recommend and provide nonsurgical treatment options
Perform complex brain and spine surgeries
Interpret imaging and diagnostic tests
Collaborate with
pediatricians
and pediatric specialists to coordinate care
Provide long-term care and follow-ups through childhood and adolescence
Doctors will diagnose and treat neurological conditions in:
Fetuses (before birth)
Babies (after birth)
Children
Adolescents and teenagers
Adults over 18 (sometimes)
What conditions do pediatric neurosurgeons treat?
Neurosurgeons treat a wide range of
neurological conditions
in children.
Advertisement
They treat pediatric brain and
spinal tumors,
including:
Benign (noncancerous) and malignant (cancerous) tumors
Metastatic brain tumors
Neurofibromatosis
Pituitary adenomas
They manage congenital conditions (
birth defects
) that affect your child’s nervous system, including:
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) abnormalities, like
arachnoid cysts
or
hydrocephalus
Chiari malformation
Craniocervical abnormalities (where the skull and spine connect)
Spina bifida
Tethered spinal cord
Skeletal or craniofacial conditions that they may treat include:
Achondroplasia
Craniosynostosis
Plagiocephaly (flat head syndrome)
Scoliosis
Traumatic injuries
Brain function and neurological disorders that they manage in children may include:
Cerebral palsy
Epilepsy
Spasticity
Pediatric blood vessel conditions that neurosurgeons treat may include:
Arteriovenous malformations
(AVMs)
Brain aneurysms
Cavernomas
This list isn’t exhaustive. If your child needs to see a neurosurgeon, they most likely have symptoms or a condition that affects their nervous system.
When should my child see a pediatric neurosurgeon?
In most cases, your child’s pediatrician or neurologist will refer you to a pediatric neurosurgeon if they need surgery or a more in-depth evaluation.
Just because your child’s provider recommends that they see a neurosurgeon doesn’t necessarily mean surgery is around the corner. Instead, it means:
Your child will receive a comprehensive neurological exam
The pediatric neurosurgeon will review your child’s symptoms and medical history
Your child may get special tests, like a brain scan, to help find the cause
Then, your child’s neurosurgeon will talk with you about the best treatment. Sometimes, other specialists will help decide, too. This may be a nonsurgical treatment, surgical treatment or a combination of both.
What can I expect during an appointment with a pediatric neurosurgeon?
Here are some things you can expect your child’s pediatric neurosurgeon to do:
Use various diagnostic tools to identify neurological issues in your child
Recommend tests for your child and explain the results to you
Explain your child’s condition and some of the science behind it
Create treatment plans
Refer your child to other specialists, like physical therapists, for certain kinds of treatments
Tell you how often your child needs appointments or care
Explain how you can take care of your child at home
How do I prepare for an appointment with my child’s pediatric neurosurgeon?
To make the most of your child’s visit with their neurosurgeon, try to come prepared. Helpful steps include:
Write down the top concerns or questions you want to discuss.
Note any changes in your child’s health or symptoms.
Bring recent test results, including imaging and labs from outside providers.
Make a list of all medications, supplements and known allergies.
Consider bringing a friend or family member to take notes.
Ask if a follow-up appointment is needed for additional concerns.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my child’s neurosurgeon?
If your child needs surgery, it may be helpful to ask your child’s neurosurgeon the following questions during their appointment:
What experience do you have with this type of surgery, and how is it performed?
What are the potential risks and benefits for my child?
How soon does my child need surgery, and is a second opinion recommended?
What should we expect during recovery — in the hospital and at home?
How should we prepare for the surgery as a family?
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between a neurosurgeon and a pediatric neurosurgeon?
The main difference is the age group each neurosurgeon treats.
While general
neurosurgeons
usually treat adults, they can treat children. But pediatric neurosurgeons have additional training in caring for developing brains and bodies. This requires a special approach.
They also understand how to communicate with children and adapt care for young patients. This is important for children who may struggle to describe symptoms or cooperate during exams.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When your child has a complex neurological condition, it’s natural to feel overwhelmed and unsure about what lies ahead. Your child’s pediatric neurosurgeon is part of a team of experts who will guide you through the process. They’ll use their experience to provide the best possible care. They’ll help you understand your child’s condition, treatment options and what to expect moving forward.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Learning your child needs brain surgery can turn your life upside down. Cleveland Clinic Children’s neurosurgery experts are here to help make things right.
Neurosurgery Care for Adults
Neurosurgery Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment