Central Serous Retinopathy: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Central Serous Retinopathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Central Serous Retinopathy
Central serous retinopathy occurs when fluid builds up behind the retina in your eye. The fluid can cause your retina to detach, leading to vision problems. The condition is often associated with stress and corticosteroid use. Many cases resolve on their own, but you should seek medical attention to make sure vision problems aren’t permanent.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Retinal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Central Serous Retinopathy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Central Serous Retinopathy?
Central serous retinopathy is a medical condition that occurs when fluid builds up behind the
retina
in your eye. The fluid comes from a layer of blood vessels beneath your retina called the
choroid
. This fluid can cause your
retina to detach
, leading to vision loss or other vision problems.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your retina is a layer of tissue behind each eye. It senses light and translates it into images your brain can understand.
Other names for central serous retinopathy include:
Central serous chorioretinopathy
Central serous choroidopathy
Central serous retinopathy affects about
10 out of every 100,000 people
, depending on your
sex
and other risk factors.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of central serous retinopathy
Central serous retinopathy can affect one
eye
or both at the same time. Central serous chorioretinopathy symptoms may include:
Blurry vision
, like a smudge in the center of your sight
Dark spot in the center of your vision
Darker or dim vision
White items look dull or somewhat brown
Objects seem smaller or further away than they are
Straight lines look crooked or bent
But central serous chorioretinopathy doesn’t always cause symptoms. A person can have the condition but not have vision problems.
Central serous chorioretinopathy causes
Scientists don’t fully understand what causes central serous retinopathy.
Stress
appears to play a key role. Stress makes your body release a hormone called
cortisol
, which can cause inflammation and fluid leakage. People with high stress levels and reduced coping skills are at a higher risk for central serous retinopathy.
The condition is also associated with the use of medications containing
corticosteroids
, which treat inflammation.
Advertisement
Risk factors for central serous retinopathy
Central serous retinopathy can affect anyone, but it’s more common in:
Males between the ages of 30 and 50
People with
myopia (nearsightedness)
Those taking certain medications, especially corticosteroids
Other risk factors include:
Autoimmune diseases
, like
lupus
and
rheumatoid arthritis
Heart disease
or
high blood pressure
Infection with the bacterium
Helicobacter pylori
Kidney disease, like
glomerulonephritis
Pregnancy
Sleep problems, like
sleep apnea
and
insomnia
Use of certain medications, like those that treat
nasal congestion
and
erectile dysfunction
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose central serous chorioretinopathy
If you have changes to your vision, seek medical attention from your
primary care provider
or an
ophthalmologist
(eye specialist). They’ll talk to you about your symptoms and perform an
eye exam
. They may also order certain retina tests, including:
Fluorescein angiography (IVFA)
.
A healthcare provider injects a dye into a vein in your arm that spreads to your retina. Then, they take pictures with a special camera to identify leaks.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT)
. A scan that provides 3D pictures of your retina so your provider can measure retinal thickness, identify swelling and detect serous retinal detachment.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for central serous retinopathy?
Many cases of central serous retinopathy go away on their own over a few weeks or months. Your healthcare provider may recommend monitoring, or a “watch and wait” approach. During the monitoring period, they’ll repeat tests to ensure the fluid is draining.
Your provider may also ask you to stop taking medications that contribute to the eye condition. They’ll counsel you to reduce your stress levels.
If the fluid doesn’t drain on its own in a few months, your provider may recommend central serous chorioretinopathy treatment, including:
Medications
.
Some medications, like anti-vascular endothelial growth factor, can prevent new blood vessels from growing in your eyes. Certain
diuretics
can help reduce fluid.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT)
. A healthcare provider injects a drug called verteporfin into your arm that travels to your eye. Then, they use a cold laser to close the leak.
Other laser treatments
.
After giving you numbing medications, your provider may use thermal laser treatment (a heated laser) to seal leaks. Micropulse laser uses smaller, shorter laser pulses.
How do I take care of myself with central serous retinopathy?
Some lifestyle changes can help you manage central serous retinopathy:
Get at least seven hours of
sleep
every night
Limit caffeine, alcohol and corticosteroids
Manage and reduce stress
with exercise, meditation, time with loved ones or counseling
If you’re experiencing vision loss, some
coping strategies
include:
Joining a support group to meet people who understand
Talking to loved ones or a counselor about your feelings and ways to cope
Using aids to help you complete daily tasks safely
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider for vision changes?
If you experience any changes to your vision, talk to your primary care provider or an ophthalmologist.
Even though central serous chorioretinopathy can go away on its own, it can get worse and cause permanent vision changes or loss. And sometimes, vision problems are a sign of underlying disease.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Retinal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have central serous chorioretinopathy?
Many cases of central serous retinopathy go away on their own as fluid naturally drains. But treatment may be necessary if the condition continues for several months.
After the condition resolves, vision generally improves on its own, often returning to normal. But sometimes, damage can be permanent, with vision changes that don’t improve.
The condition can happen again, even after successful treatment, in the same eye or your other eye. For this reason, you may need regular follow-up appointments with an ophthalmologist.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’re having problems with your vision, it’s important to talk to your primary care provider or an ophthalmologist. While central serous retinopathy isn’t common, it’s an eye disorder that can cause permanent vision loss and other problems down the road. Early intervention can help ensure that issues with your vision don’t become long-term.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your eyes are one of your most important senses. If something goes wrong, it can change your world. Cleveland Clinic can help treat all types of retinal disease.
Retinal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/09/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment