Hypoparathyroidism: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hypoparathyroidism
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism is a rare but treatable condition that causes low levels of calcium in your blood. Damage to your parathyroid glands during surgery and certain genetic and autoimmune diseases can cause it. Treatment usually involves calcium and vitamin D supplements.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parathyroid Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hypoparathyroidism?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Hypoparathyroidism?
Hypoparathyroidism is a rare, treatable condition that happens when your parathyroid glands don’t produce enough
parathyroid hormone (PTH)
. PTH helps regulate calcium and phosphorus levels in your
blood
. This condition causes calcium levels in your blood to drop and phosphorus levels to rise. Too much phosphorus in your blood can lower your calcium even more. This can lead to several health problems.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Calcium is one of the most important minerals in your body. Most of your calcium is stored in your bones, but you have it and need it in your blood, too. The calcium in your blood has many important roles, including helping:
Your
nerves
work
Your
muscles
contract so you can move
Your
blood clot
Your
heart
work
Your
bones
stay strong
Low calcium levels in your blood (
hypocalcemia
) can affect your how well your body works.
Symptoms and Causes
Hypoparathyroidism can cause symptoms like muscle cramps, fatigue and confusion. It happens when your parathyroid glands are damaged.
Symptoms of hypoparathyroidism
Signs and symptoms of hypoparathyroidism include:
Tingling or
numbness
in your lips, fingers and toes
Muscle cramps
and spasms
“
Brain fog
” or
confusion
Abnormal heart rhythm
Brittle nails and
dry skin
Cataracts
Weak
tooth enamel
(in children)
In most cases, hypoparathyroidism progresses gradually, and symptoms can be mild. Many people have symptoms for years before they get a diagnosis.
Hypoparathyroidism causes
Causes of hypoparathyroidism include:
Damage to your parathyroid glands
:
About 75%
of cases are caused by accidental damage to the parathyroid glands during neck or thyroid surgery. This usually happens soon after surgery, but it can also occur many years later. In rare cases,
radiation therapy
can damage your parathyroid glands.
Certain genetic conditions
:
Less than 10%
of cases are genetic. The most common is
DiGeorge syndrome
, where babies are born without parathyroid glands, leading to lifelong low calcium.
About 60% of children
with hypoparathyroidism have DiGeorge syndrome.
Certain
autoimmune diseases
: Certain diseases cause your immune system to attack your parathyroid glands.
Low levels of magnesium
: Low
magnesium
can cause the parathyroid glands to stop making or releasing enough PTH, leading to low calcium levels.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Risk factors for hypoparathyroidism include:
Having recent neck or
thyroid surgery
Having a family history of parathyroid conditions
Having an autoimmune disease that affects your
endocrine system
Having radiation therapy for head or neck
cancer
Both adults and children can get hypoparathyroidism. Adults are more likely to get hypoparathyroidism from accidental damage to their parathyroid glands during surgery. Children are more likely to have hypoparathyroidism due to a genetic condition.
Complications of hypoparathyroidism
Long-term complications of hypoparathyroidism can include:
Issues with
kidney
function
Kidney stones
Calcium deposits
in your brain
For children, complications from hypoparathyroidism can include:
Slow growth
Dental issues
Developmental delays
Bone
problems
Complications of a sudden drop in calcium levels include
seizures
and
larynx spasms
. These can be dangerous. If you’re experiencing these symptoms, get to the nearest hospital as soon as possible.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose hypoparathyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism is generally diagnosed when a person has low levels of calcium and parathyroid hormone in their blood.
Healthcare providers sometimes “accidentally” find hypoparathyroidism when a routine blood screening shows you have low levels of blood calcium.
You have chronic hypoparathyroidism if you have low levels of PTH and calcium at least twice within six months.
Tests that are used
If you’re experiencing symptoms of hypoparathyroidism, your healthcare provider will perform a
physical exam
and ask questions about your symptoms and medical history.
They may order one or more of the following tests to help diagnose hypoparathyroidism:
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) blood test
Calcium blood test
Phosphorus blood test
Magnesium blood test
24-hour urine calcium test
Your healthcare provider may want to check for more serious side effects of hypoparathyroidism, including:
An
electrocardiogram
(ECG or EKG) to check for an abnormal heart rhythm
A
computed tomography (CT) scan
to check for calcium deposits in your
brain
Management and Treatment
Hypoparathyroidism treatment
The goal of treatment for hypoparathyroidism is to get the right amount of calcium and minerals in your body.
Treatment can include:
Taking calcium carbonate and vitamin D supplements
: You have to take
calcium
and
vitamin D
supplements for life. Your body needs vitamin D to absorb and use calcium, so you need to take both supplements. Some people also need a
magnesium supplement
.
Eating a high-calcium and low-phosphorus diet
: Your healthcare provider may recommend eating less red meat and eating more
calcium-rich foods
like broccoli, yogurt and tofu. They may also ask you to limit processed foods, which usually contain phosphorus. A
dietitian
may give you specific instructions on what foods to avoid.
Getting
parathyroid hormone (PTH) injections
: If taking calcium and vitamin D supplements isn’t working to treat hypoparathyroidism, your provider might have you take parathyroid hormone injections.
Thiazide
diuretics
: This medication can help reduce how much calcium you lose in your pee.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of hypoparathyroidism. If you already have a diagnosis, you should have regular visits with them. They’ll monitor your blood calcium levels to make sure treatment is working.
If you have symptoms of acute hypocalcemia, like painful muscle cramps or
seizures
, go to the nearest hospital.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parathyroid Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have hypoparathyroidism?
The prognosis for hypoparathyroidism is generally good, especially if a healthcare provider catches it early. With treatment, you can feel relief from your symptoms. If calcium levels are hard to manage, you may have long-term issues like kidney problems and muscle changes. Regular check-ups with your provider are important. They’ll perform blood tests to check your calcium and phosphorus levels.
How long does hypoparathyroidism last?
Most cases of hypoparathyroidism are chronic (lifelong), though it can sometimes be temporary.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hypoparathyroidism is an uncommon condition. The good news is that it’s treatable. Symptoms of hypoparathyroidism can be mild and undetectable, so it’s important to let your healthcare provider know if you have risk factors for hypoparathyroidism, like having a family history of parathyroid disorders or having neck or thyroid surgery. Your provider can run some simple blood tests to make sure your parathyroid hormone and calcium levels are where they should be.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic treats all parathyroid diseases, including cancer, and their side effects. We’ll create a personalized treatment plan that meets your needs.
Parathyroid Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes