Vascular Dementia: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vascular Dementia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vascular Dementia
Vascular dementia results from conditions that damage blood vessels and block blood flow to your brain. Many of these conditions, like heart disease, diabetes and high blood pressure, are manageable. There’s no direct treatment or cure for vascular dementia, so managing these risk factors is crucial to help prevent it from becoming severe.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cognitive Decline Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Vascular Dementia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Vascular Dementia?
Vascular dementia is when there’s decreased blood flow to areas of your brain. Blood provides oxygen and nutrients. A lack of it damages brain tissue. It leads to symptoms that affect daily living, like memory loss, confusion, and personality and behavioral changes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Several conditions can cause a lack of blood flow, including stroke.
Vascular dementia is one of the
most common types
of dementia in people after age 65 in North America and Europe. About
5% to 10%
of people with dementia have only vascular dementia. But it often happens along with Alzheimer’s disease. When someone has both, providers call it mixed dementia (having more than one cause of dementia).
You may hear your healthcare providers use the term “vascular cognitive impairment” (VCI) instead of “vascular dementia.” This term covers the full range of thinking changes from vascular damage — from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to dementia.
Because vascular dementia can look different for each person, your healthcare team can help you understand your diagnosis and what to expect moving forward.
Types of vascular dementia
Healthcare providers use different terms for vascular dementia. They reflect the number and type of blood vessels involved and how symptoms develop. They include:
Post-stroke dementia
: This can happen after one stroke if the blockage destroys the brain tissue needed for more than one thinking skill. Language or memory problems are common. But symptoms depend on where the stroke happened. These thinking issues must start right after the stroke or within six months, and they don’t get better.
Multi-infarct dementia
: “Infarct” is another word for stroke. This means many strokes affect blood flow to multiple areas of your brain. Symptoms are often noticeable when these events happen. Cognitive changes happen in a step-like way with sudden worsening over time.
Binswanger disease (subcortical vascular dementia)
: In this form,
atherosclerosis
slowly blocks small blood vessels in your brain’s
white matter
. It happens gradually without sudden episodes of worsening.
Mixed dementia
: This happens when more than one disease causes dementia symptoms. The most common is vascular dementia with Alzheimer’s disease. But it can also occur with other brain conditions.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Vascular dementia symptoms can vary widely depending on which parts of your brain it affects.
Vascular dementia symptoms
Symptoms of vascular dementia can vary widely. They depend on which parts of your brain it damages and how severe it is. Symptoms may include:
Bowel or bladder control problems
Confusion (that may
get worse at night
)
Difficulty
understanding or using words
Memory loss
Mood changes, like irritability
Personality and behavior changes
Problems with reasoning, organizing and planning
Sleeping issues
Tremors or reduced
fine motor
control
Trouble concentrating, following instructions and completing tasks
Uncontrolled episodes of laughing or crying
Walking and/or balance problems
It’s important to see your healthcare provider if you or a loved one develops these symptoms.
Vascular dementia stages
There are no clear stages of vascular dementia. It affects each person differently and progresses in a variety of ways.
Most often, symptoms get worse over many years. But they may be most obvious and sudden after a major stroke. There may even be short periods when symptoms improve. But if more strokes happen, they can cause further decline.
Vascular dementia can also occur along with Alzheimer’s disease. Having both can affect how symptoms change over time.
Vascular dementia causes
Conditions that damage blood vessels in your brain or partially or fully block blood flow cause vascular dementia. When blood flow decreases, parts of your brain don’t get enough oxygen and nutrients. Without these, brain cells begin to die.
Common causes include:
Narrowing (atherosclerosis) or blockage of larger blood vessels (ischemic stroke) or
capillaries
(small vessel disease) in your brain
Bleeding from a broken blood vessel (like a hemorrhagic stroke) in your brain
Risk factors
Certain factors increase your risk of having blood vessel issues and vascular dementia, including:
Age (after 60)
Atrial fibrillation (Afib)
Diabetes
Heart disease
High blood pressure (hypertension)
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
History of stroke
Smoking
Is vascular dementia hereditary?
Vascular dementia itself isn’t hereditary (passed down through genes). But conditions that raise the risk, like high blood pressure and heart disease, can run in biological families.
Two rare types happen because of
gene mutations (changes)
:
CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy)
: A child can inherit CADASIL if one parent has the condition (
autosomal dominant inheritance
). Symptoms include migraine headaches and repeated strokes.
CARASIL (cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy)
: A child can inherit CARASIL only if both parents carry the gene (autosomal recessive inheritance). Common symptoms include stiff legs and trouble walking.
Advertisement
Complications of vascular dementia
By the later stage of dementia, it will have a severe impact on most aspects of your or your loved one’s life. People in later stages often need full-time care and daily support.
Late-stage or end-of-life symptoms may include:
Depression and
apathy
Hallucinations
and
delusions
Near or total loss of language skills
Physical challenges that make it nearly impossible to do activities of daily living without help, like eating, washing and dressing
Restlessness, anger or
agitation
Severe memory loss
Your or your loved one’s healthcare team, hospice nurse or palliative care provider is the best to ask about timelines. They can explain what signs to look for and give you a general idea of what to expect.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose vascular dementia
A healthcare provider needs to evaluate you to confirm a diagnosis. There are many types of dementia, and several symptoms are similar to other conditions.
Your provider will:
Ask about the symptoms you have
Ask about your medical history
Review your current medications
Ask about your biological family’s medical history
What tests diagnose vascular dementia?
Your provider will likely recommend a variety of tests. You may also see dementia specialists, like
neurologists
and
geriatricians
, for a diagnosis. The following tests help diagnose this condition:
Advertisement
Laboratory tests: These rule out other causes of dementia symptoms. Sometimes providers order a cerebrospinal fluid test (
spinal tap
) to check for autoimmune conditions or other neurodegenerative diseases.
Brain imaging tests: CT and MRI scans check for stroke, bleeding, tumors or fluid in your brain. An amyloid PET scan can detect abnormal amyloid protein buildup in your brain. This is often seen in Alzheimer’s disease. Providers may recommend this if they suspect Alzheimer’s along with vascular dementia.
Neuropsychological testing
: Written and computerized tests measure thinking skills like memory, problem-solving, reasoning, planning, judgment and language. A
neuropsychologist
reviews the results to better understand the link between brain health and cognition.
Diagnostic criteria for vascular dementia
Healthcare providers use the following criteria to diagnose vascular dementia:
Neurocognitive testing confirms the diagnosis of dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
There’s brain imaging evidence (usually with MRI) confirming a recent stroke or other vascular brain changes. These are consistent with the types of cognitive impairment you have.
There are no signs that other factors may be contributing to cognitive decline.
Advertisement
These criteria suggest the greatest likelihood that mild cognitive impairment or dementia is due to vascular damage and not another cause.
Management and Treatment
Vascular dementia treatment
Vascular dementia isn’t reversible. Brain damage can’t be fully repaired. Instead, the main goal of treatment is to prevent or slow down further damage by managing risk factors. Treatment also involves helping you find new ways of doing things to make up for brain damage.
Medication
Unlike for Alzheimer’s disease, there aren’t any medications that have U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for this condition specifically. But providers may prescribe cholinesterase inhibitors for vascular dementia. Studies show that they may result in slight or modest cognitive improvements by increasing blood flow in your brain.
Memantine
is another medication that’s approved for Alzheimer’s disease and may help with vascular dementia.
Your provider may prescribe other medications to help manage risk factors for stroke. These include medications for high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes.
Rehabilitation and advance care planning
You may work with specialists to manage symptoms of vascular dementia. For example, physical and occupational therapists can help you improve your physical abilities and find new ways of doing everyday tasks. A
speech-language pathologist
can help with speaking, swallowing and learning other ways to communicate.
Other specialists you may work with include:
Clinical
social workers
Geriatric case managers
Recreational therapists
Registered dietitians
Psychologists
or
psychiatrists
These specialists will work with you and your loved ones to make sure you have ongoing care that matches your needs and goals. They’ll help you plan ahead for medical and financial decisions. They’ll also make referrals for
palliative care
or
hospice
when vascular dementia progresses to its later or end stages.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You or your caregiver should call your healthcare provider if you notice any new or worsening symptoms. Your provider or care team will want to assess any changes and adjust your treatment plan if needed.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cognitive Decline Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have vascular dementia?
Vascular dementia may get worse over time. The changes can happen suddenly or gradually. Each person has their own unique journey. Treatments may help slow the progress of the disease. You and your healthcare provider will work together to develop a treatment plan best suited for managing symptoms and the stage of the disease.
Lean on loved ones for support during this time. Together, you can make a plan to ensure your quality of life and wishes are respected as dementia progresses.
Vascular dementia life expectancy
The life expectancy depends on the severity of the disease. Vascular dementia has wide-ranging severity and affects each person differently.
The life expectancy for vascular dementia is lower than it is for people with Alzheimer’s disease. This is because someone with vascular dementia is more likely to die from a stroke or
heart attack
than from dementia itself.
Prevention
Can vascular dementia be prevented?
Vascular dementia is unique from many other forms of dementia in that it’s partly preventable. There are some risk factors that you can’t change, like your age or genetics. But you can manage many others to try to prevent it — mainly those that damage your blood vessels. Steps you can take include:
Keeping your blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar levels within a healthy range
Reaching and maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you
Getting regular physical activity (try to aim for 30 minutes on most days)
Eating heart-healthy foods, like those in the
Mediterranean
or
DASH diets
Quitting smoking
Limiting alcohol consumption
Managing your stress
Seeing your provider regularly for check-ups and taking your medications as prescribed
If you have any of these risk factors, talk to your provider about what you can do to manage them.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Vascular dementia is one of those conditions that doesn’t always follow a clear path. Symptoms may show up suddenly after a stroke or slowly build over time.
But there are steps you can take to manage symptoms and protect your brain health. Managing risk factors like high blood pressure, diabetes and cholesterol can prevent further damage. And if you or a loved one has this diagnosis, know that there are resources and specialists who can support you in staying as comfortable as possible.
Talk with your healthcare provider about what to expect and how to plan ahead. Having those conversations now can make a big difference later.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
It can be unsettling when your brain stops working like it used to. Cleveland Clinic’s cognitive decline experts help you manage the symptoms and provide support.
Cognitive Decline Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment