What Is Family Medicine & What Does a Family Physician Do?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Family Medicine
Advertisement
Advertisement
Family Medicine
Family medicine is a medical specialty devoted to continuous healthcare over your lifetime. Family physicians take a big-picture approach when it comes to your health. They get to know you, and they provide complete healthcare based on your needs. Family doctors may grow with you and your family for years to come.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Family medicine is a branch of medicine that provides constant care throughout your lifetime.
What is family medicine?
Family medicine is a branch of medicine that delivers complete healthcare to everyone in your family — from your newborn to your grandparents. Regardless of age,
sex
or health condition, family medicine aims to provide constant care throughout your lifetime.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Family physicians are medical doctors who are trained to care for you as a whole person. (You may also hear the terms family practice physician, family medical doctor or family medicine physician.) They learn about your background to get a full picture of your health needs. In addition to your medical history, they want to understand how certain
nonmedical factors
may affect your health. Over time, family medicine doctors want to build a strong, trusting relationship with you.
Family medicine doctors provide preventive care and help you set health goals. They take care of you if you have an illness. They’ll help treat and manage any long-term (chronic) conditions you develop. Family medicine doctors work with other healthcare providers on your
primary care team
, like nurses and physician assistants. They also coordinate your care with specialists when needed. They’ll help you navigate the healthcare system. And they want to work with you to achieve the best possible health outcomes.
What does a family medicine doctor do?
Many family practice physicians are
primary care providers
. They’re your go-to doctor for preventive care and medical treatment. Some of the services that family medicine physicians provide include:
Advertisement
Routine checkups
Health-risk assessments
Vaccines
Screening tests
Counseling on making healthy choices
Family physicians can also focus on a specialty. Areas that family doctors may practice in include:
Maternity care
Newborn/nursery care
Pediatric medicine
Sports medicine
Sleep medicine
Urgent/emergency care
Chronic care management
Geriatric medicine
Hospice
/
palliative care
Within these specialties, most family doctors routinely perform medical procedures. These procedures vary by specialty and may include:
Colposcopies
Colonoscopies
Endoscopies
Musculoskeletal injections
Spirometry
Skin procedures, like biopsies
Ultrasound imaging
Vasectomies
Where do family physicians work?
Family practice physicians provide care in a wide variety of settings. They work in large and small cities, as well as in urban and rural areas. You may see family physicians in:
Medical offices
Hospitals
Nursing homes
Community health centers
Urgent care clinics
Emergency rooms
University health centers
You may also work with your family physician virtually through telemedicine.
What’s the difference between a family doctor and a pediatrician?
The difference between family doctors and
pediatricians
is the age of the people they serve. Family physicians deliver care to people of all ages — from birth until the end of life. Pediatricians work specifically with babies, children and teenagers. Once your child turns 18, their pediatrician will help them transition to a new provider, like a family physician.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you want a doctor who will provide ongoing, personal care, family medicine is the way to go. Family physicians care for you as a whole person. They deliver care to entire families across generations. So, you don’t have to juggle different providers for each family member or health condition. You can get it all done in one place.
Because they often see you regularly over many years, they get to know not only your medical history, but you on a personal level. You might feel more at ease because they’re the familiar face you and your family see each time you go in.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider