Underage Drinking: Dangers of Alcohol & Teenagers
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Underage Drinking
Advertisement
Advertisement
Underage Drinking
The minimum legal drinking age can vary depending on where you live. But what experts agree on is that underage drinking can have serious consequences. Understanding how to recognize underage drinking and talk to your child about it can help protect them from some of the dangers.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
What is underage drinking?
Underage drinking happens when someone under the legal drinking age consumes alcohol. In the U.S., the minimum legal drinking age is 21. But the age limit for drinking varies by country or even region. And depending on where you are, there are exceptions to the age limits, like parental permission, where a beverage is served and even drink type.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What are the effects of underage drinking?
Underage drinking is a major health concern for several reasons. One of the top ones is that about 4,000 people under 21 die from excessive alcohol use each year.
Underage drinking can also have lifelong impacts on your health because of how it can
affect
a developing brain. Your brain doesn’t finish developing until you’re around age 25. Until then, it’s vulnerable, and there’s
evidence
that underage drinking can cause long-term or even permanent impairment.
Young people who drink underage are also more likely to experience:
Alcohol use disorder
,
alcohol poisoning
and a higher risk for nonmedical drug use and
substance use disorders
Legal problems, including arrests for infractions like drinking and driving or public intoxication
School difficulties, including lower grades and missing classes
Social struggles, including trouble maintaining friendships or relationships
Unplanned or unprotected sexual activity, along with unintended
pregnancies
or
sexually transmitted infections
(STIs)
Violence (either to others or yourself), including physical and sexual assault
Why do children and teenagers start drinking?
There are many reasons that young people choose to drink alcohol while underage. And often, it isn’t just a single one. Instead, a combination of factors might contribute. Potential factors include:
Advertisement
Curiosity
. Many young people try alcohol because they want to know what it feels like.
Desired effects
. Young people may choose to drink because others describe its uses for relaxing or dealing with
stress
.
Family influence
. Family attitudes about alcohol — positive or negative — can play a role in a young person choosing to drink.
Not understanding the risks or effects
. Many young people try alcohol because they don’t know or fully understand the negative effects it can bring.
Peer pressure
. Whether spoken or not, many young people drink because they want approval from others. They can also feel pressure from family or media (like online, movies, TV).
How can I tell if my child is drinking?
You might find it hard to recognize the signs of underage drinking apart from normal behaviors. Signs of underage drinking, like oversleeping, moodiness, or aches and pains, can be normal occurrences for teens.
But you might have a reason to be more concerned if your child shows multiple warning signs or the signs are severe. The warning signs can include:
Caring less about their appearance or avoiding self-care and hygiene
Changes in their friend groups, especially having new friends they don’t want you to meet
Feeling tired or worn out more frequently
Finding alcohol in unusual or hidden places, especially among your child’s belongings, or noticing alcohol going missing in your home
Hangover symptoms like headache, nausea and bloodshot eyes
Having difficulties with concentration and memory
Loss of coordination or slurred speech
Mood swings, especially big ones, and swinging to anger, irritability or defensiveness
Not being interested in activities they used to enjoy
School-related struggles, like a drop in grades or skipping classes
Smell of alcohol on their breath or noticeable efforts to cover the smell of alcohol
How can I prevent my child from drinking while underage?
Underage drinking isn’t something you can prevent with 100% certainty. But talking to your child about drinking while they’re underage can make a tremendous
difference
. And sooner is better than later. In 2023, only about 1 in 100 children between the ages of 12 and 13 reported trying alcohol within the last month. For teens between 16 and 17, it was almost 1 in 7.
When you talk to your child about underage drinking, it’s a good idea to communicate:
Awareness
. Your child isn’t as likely to try alcohol if they think you’re attentive and might catch them. Let them know you care enough to watch for signs of risky behavior.
Clear expectations
. Make sure your child knows for certain that you don’t approve of underage drinking. Also, talk to them about the consequences they’ll face if they drink while underage.
How to learn more
. Teenagers often learn about alcohol from their friends, the media or other sources of misinformation. Teach them how to find and use reliable sources and share the facts about alcohol risks with them.
Trust
. Your child needs to know you trust them to make the right decisions. Come up with a plan together about avoiding alcohol. For example, you might choose a code word to text if your child needs a ride home from a party.
Why you’re doing this
. Make sure your child knows you’re concerned for their safety. As a parent, the last thing you want is for them to get hurt. And that includes getting hurt by any of the
negative and dangerous effects
of underage drinking.
Advertisement
How common is underage drinking?
Underage drinking is a significant public health concern. In 2023,
researchers found
that:
One in 7 people between the ages of 12 and 20 reported having at least one drink in the last 30 days.
One in 12 people reported binge drinking (five or more drinks per sitting for
men
, four or more drinks per sitting for women),
Girls are slightly more likely to drink underage and slightly more likely to binge drink.
And the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
reports
that:
Almost 1 in 6 have ridden in a car with a driver who has been drinking alcohol.
About 1 in 20 high school students reported driving after drinking alcohol.
What should I do if I suspect my child is drinking?
If you think or confirm your child is drinking, take a breath. It’s understandable to feel upset or worried. But experts recommend having a calm, non-threatening conversation with your child. To do that, you can:
Ask open-ended questions
. That means asking things that take more than a yes/no answer. Some examples include asking about how they feel about drinking and how their friends or peers talk about alcohol.
Let them ask you questions and answer honestly
. It might feel a little uncomfortable to be honest and vulnerable about your own experiences with alcohol. But that honesty can make for a powerful connection and understanding with your child.
Make your expectations clear
. Don’t assume your child knows what you want or how you’ll react. Tell them exactly what you expect of them.
Set boundaries
. Involving your child with this is a good idea. Letting them help set their own boundaries shows you respect and trust them.
Advertisement
If needed, your child’s healthcare provider can also be a resource. They can talk to your child further about alcohol and its risks. They can also recommend treatment, like counseling or rehab, if your child needs more support related to underage drinking.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Your child is already growing up fast, and the thought of them drinking before they’re old enough might feel especially troubling. Talking to your child about underage drinking — especially before they start — might feel daunting. But your words carry more weight with them than you may realize. And if you have reason to believe your child has started drinking while underage, it’s not too late to talk to and help them. If you need further support, talk to their healthcare provider. They can offer guidance and advice on what you can do to help your child.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us