Ebola Virus: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ebola Virus Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ebola Virus Disease
Ebola is a rare but life-threatening infection. It can cause outbreaks of serious disease, especially in parts of Africa. It spreads through contact with the body fluids of infected animals or people. Its early symptoms are flu-like. But they can get more severe. Get medical care right away if you think you were exposed to Ebola and have symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Ebola?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Ebola?
Ebola usually starts with flu-like symptoms. But they can progress to severe vomiting, diarrhea and bleeding.
Ebola is a serious, life-threatening type of
viral hemorrhagic fever
— a
viral infection
that damages your
blood vessels
. Ebola symptoms start off like the
flu
(influenza). But they can progress to:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Severe bleeding (
hemorrhage
)
Neurological disorders
(conditions that affect your
brain
and
nerves
)
Severe
vomiting
Ebola is rare. But outbreaks occur regularly ever since experts first recognized orthoebolaviruses (the viruses that cause Ebola) in 1976 in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo) in Africa. The largest Ebola outbreak was between 2013 and 2016. In total, there were 28,652 cases worldwide, with 11,325 reported
deaths
in 10 countries.
If you believe you could have been exposed to Ebola and have symptoms, go to the ER or seek immediate medical attention
.
Types of Ebola
There are four different Ebola strains that affect people. Experts name the viruses that cause Ebola after the location in which they were first identified (even if outbreaks have occurred in other locations since then). They differ in their ability to cause symptoms and their severity. They include:
Bundibugyo ebolavirus
(Bundibugyo virus). This causes Bundibugyo virus disease (BDBV). It’s less likely to cause death than other types.
Sudan ebolavirus
(Sudan virus). This causes Sudan virus disease (SVD). It’s more likely to be deadly.
Taï Forest ebolavirus
(Taï Forest virus). This causes Taï Forest virus disease (TAFV). This is the rarest cause of Ebola.
Zaire ebolavirus
(Ebola virus). This causes Ebola virus disease (EVD). EVD is the most common cause of Ebola outbreaks and deaths.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What happens if you have Ebola?
Each type of Ebola causes similar symptoms. The symptoms may come in phases. You may have flu-like symptoms at first, including:
Chills
Feeling very tired (
fatigue
) and weak
Fever
Loss of appetite
Muscle pain
Severe
headache
Sore throat
Severe Ebola symptoms can develop a few days later, including:
Black, tarry stool (
melena
)
Bleeding or
bruising
Confusion
Diarrhea
that may be bloody
Rash
or spots of blood under your skin (
petechiae
or
purpura
)
Red or bloodshot eyes
Vomiting that may be bloody or look like coffee grounds (
coffee ground emesis
)
Later Ebola stages can be severe. They may include:
Brain
inflammation
(
encephalitis
)
Organ failure
Seizures
Your body doesn’t get enough blood flow (shock)
How long does it take Ebola symptoms to show up?
Ebola symptoms may appear as early as two days after exposure to as late as three weeks.
Ebola outbreak causes
Ebola outbreaks develop in countries of West, Central and East Africa. Ebola viruses start in:
Antelope
Fruit bats
Nonhuman primates (apes and monkeys)
Each type of Ebola spreads in the same way.
How does Ebola spread?
Orthoebolaviruses spread through contact with body fluids of infected animals (spillover event) or humans. Body fluids include:
Amniotic fluid
Breast milk
Pee
(urine)
Poop (stool)
Semen
Spit
(saliva)
Sweat
You can get Ebola from surfaces, objects or medical devices that come into contact with the virus. You may even get it from eating the meat of infected animals.
Can you get Ebola from sex?
Yes, Ebola can transfer through sexual intercourse that involves the semen of an infected person. It’s possible to get Ebola from:
Anal sexual intercourse
Oral sexual intercourse
Vaginal sexual intercourse
There’s no evidence that Ebola can transfer through the vaginal fluids of an infected person.
Is Ebola airborne?
It’s very unlikely that Ebola is an airborne infection. Airborne infections spread through small respiratory droplets that hang in the air after:
Coughing
Heavy breathing
Laughing
Sneezing
Who is most at risk for Ebola?
You’re most at risk for Ebola if you’re in close contact with an infected person. This includes healthcare workers and family members.
If you’re in close contact with someone who has Ebola, it’s important to use proper personal protective equipment (PPE), like eye protection, face shields and masks.
Complications of Ebola
Even after you recover from Ebola, you may have long-term (chronic) complications. These may include:
Abdominal pain
Eye pain
or redness
Fatigue
Headache
Muscle and
joint pain
Numbness
and tingling (
peripheral neuropathy
)
Peeling skin
Vision problems, including
blindness
,
blurred vision
and
light sensitivity
(photophobia)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Ebola
Ebola can be difficult to diagnose because it shares symptoms with other illnesses, including
yellow fever
,
malaria
and
typhoid fever
. Healthcare providers will first:
Advertisement
Review your health history
Ask about your symptoms
Ask about any recent travel or contact with people or animals that may have had Ebola
If they suspect you have Ebola, they’ll recommend a
PCR test
to diagnose Ebola. PCR tests are a type of
blood test
.
Management and Treatment
Can you get rid of Ebola?
Yes, there are Ebola treatments. Healthcare providers use two
monoclonal antibody treatments
for Ebola virus disease. Monoclonal antibodies work like your
immune system’s
natural
antibodies
. They help fight off the infection while your body builds its own defenses. The monoclonal antibody treatments include:
Ebanga®
. This is a single monoclonal antibody.
Inmazeb®
. This is a combination of three monoclonal antibodies.
Experts have only tested these treatments in
Zaire ebolavirus
infections.
Providers will also work to manage your symptoms and treat any potential complications. They may give you:
IV fluids
to prevent
dehydration
Oxygen therapy
Pain relievers
Vasopressors
to raise
low blood pressure
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re at risk of Ebola exposure and you develop symptoms, see a healthcare provider right away. You may be at risk if you live in an area with animals that carry it, or you’ve traveled to an area with an outbreak.
You may wish to ask a provider the following questions during your appointment:
Advertisement
What symptoms should I look out for?
How can I avoid spreading Ebola to others?
What treatment do you recommend?
How long will I be contagious?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Ebola?
It’s important to get a proper diagnosis and treatment as soon as you can to increase your chances of a full recovery.
If you’re sick with Ebola, it’s best to avoid being around other people (isolate) until you’re no longer capable of spreading the virus. Healthcare providers and others caring for you must use proper PPE to keep themselves and others safe.
After a full recovery, your immune system develops antibodies that will keep you immune from Ebola for about 10 years.
How long does Ebola stay in my body?
Ebola can stay in certain parts of your body for weeks or months, even after your symptoms go away. These include your:
Central nervous system
(including the cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds your brain and
spinal cord
)
Eyes
Semen
How long can Ebola live in semen?
Ebola can live in semen for a long time — between two and three months after you recover. Providers will conduct tests so you can know when you’re no longer contagious. But until then, use
condoms
during sexual intercourse to protect your partners from infection, or abstain from sex entirely.
Can you recover from Ebola?
Yes, you can recover from Ebola. But the different types have different survival rates:
Advertisement
Without treatment, up to 9 out of 10 people who have the Ebola virus can die
The Sudan virus is deadly in about half of all cases
The Bundibugyo virus is deadly in about 3 out of 10 cases
Taï Forest virus has caused Ebola in one person, and it wasn’t fatal
The average survival rate from all Ebola outbreaks is over 50%.
If you have Ebola, it’s important to get treatment as soon as possible.
Prevention
Can Ebola be prevented?
The Ervebo®
vaccine
helps protect people who are at high risk of contracting Ebola virus. This includes people who work with orthoebolaviruses in a lab and healthcare workers who treat people who have Ebola. It can also act as a type of pre-exposure
prophylaxis
for people traveling to areas with Ebola outbreaks. It’s effective during outbreaks, too.
The Zabdeno®/Mvabea® vaccines also help protect adults and children 1 and up against Ebola virus. Zabdeno is the first vaccine dose, and Mvabea is a booster dose that you receive about two months later.
Public health organizations work to contain Ebola outbreaks by looking out for new cases and keeping providers safe who care for people who have Ebola. You can help protect yourself from getting Ebola by:
Avoiding contact with body fluids and tissues of people and animals (dead or alive) who may have Ebola
Avoiding sexual intercourse entirely or using condoms until tests confirm you no longer have Ebola in your semen
Isolating from others if you have Ebola
Not eating wild animal meat
Not touching the body fluids of anyone with Ebola and washing your hands after contact, even if you wear gloves
Not traveling to areas where there’s an Ebola outbreak
Using PPE when caring for someone with Ebola
Additional Common Questions
Is Ebola still around?
Yes, Ebola still exists between outbreaks. It lives in infected animals. But it sometimes spreads to humans.
Has Ebola ever been in the U.S.?
Yes. During the 2013-2016 outbreak that started in Guinea, experts reported Ebola cases in the U.S. and some European countries. Most cases affected medical aid workers whose symptoms started after returning to the U.S. from West Africa. Or they flew to the U.S. for medical treatment after contracting Ebola.
No Ebola strains that can affect people have ever started in the U.S.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ebola outbreaks can generate a lot of scary headlines. It’s a life-threatening virus that can cause lasting health effects. But more and more people are surviving Ebola with advances in vaccines to prevent its transmission and better treatments. If you’re at risk of encountering Ebola, there are steps you can take to protect yourself and prevent the spread. If you think you’ve been exposed, it’s important to keep an eye on your health. Get medical attention right away if you notice symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment