Patellar Tendinitis (Jumper’s Knee): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Patellar Tendinitis (Jumper’s Knee)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Patellar Tendinitis (Jumper’s Knee)
Patellar tendinitis happens when repeated movements (like jumping) gradually weaken the patellar tendon in your knee. Symptoms like pain and stiffness can get worse over time, especially if you push through them to keep playing or training. Rest, over-the-counter pain relievers and physical therapy are the most common treatments.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knee Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Patellar tendinitis usually feels like a dull ache at the front of your knee, just below your kneecap.
What is patellar tendinitis?
Patellar tendinitis is
inflammation
in the patellar tendon at the front of your knee.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The patellar tendon connects your
kneecap (patella)
to the top of your
shin bone (tibia)
. It works with your
quad muscle
to move your knee and lower leg.
Patellar tendinitis happens when you overuse your patellar tendon. Healthcare providers sometimes call patellar tendinitis jumper’s knee because it’s common among athletes who jump a lot for their sports. Other names for it include patellar tendonitis and patellar tendinopathy. These names all refer to the same condition.
No matter what your provider calls it, you should see them if you have pain in your knee that doesn’t get better on its own with a few days of rest or at-home treatments.
Symptoms and Causes
What are patellar tendinitis symptoms?
The most common patellar tendinitis symptoms include:
Knee pain
at the front of your knee.
Tenderness to even a light touch right below your kneecap.
Stiffness (which may make it hard to bend or straighten your knee).
What does patellar tendinitis pain feel like?
Everyone experiences pain differently, but most people with jumper’s knee feel a low, dull ache at the front of their knees. The pain usually gets worse when you use or move your knee, especially when you straighten it. Certain motions like climbing up or down stairs or squatting are usually painful.
What causes patellar tendinitis?
Patellar tendinitis is a
repetitive strain injury
. Overusing your knee and putting too much repeated stress on your patellar tendon causes it. It’s usually a
sports injury
, but any repetitive physical activity, job or hobby can cause it.
Advertisement
Repeated wear and tear (like jumping a lot or sprinting often) can make tiny tears in your tendon. If you keep using your knee for intense physical activities, the tears don’t have time to heal. Eventually, this extra stress makes your tendon weak and sore.
The damage that causes patellar tendinitis builds up slowly over time. Two main types of activities can damage your tendon are:
A sudden, intense increase in physical activity:
If you start a new sport or quickly ramp up how intensely you train, your body may not be ready for the abrupt increase in your activity level.
Not resting enough or doing an activity too often:
Your body needs time to rest and recover between sessions of intense physical activity. Training or using your knees too often doesn’t give your patellar tendon the time it needs to heal. Try to resume activities gradually rather than always training or working at your physical limit.
What are the risk factors?
Anyone can experience patellar tendinitis. But some people have a higher risk, including:
Athletes who jump, sprint or change directions for their sports.
Athletes who compete at professional or elite level.
People with physically demanding jobs or hobbies.
Males
.
People older than 40.
Sports that commonly cause patellar tendinitis include:
Basketball.
Volleyball.
Track sports like hurdles, long jump or high jump.
Gymnastics.
Football.
Soccer.
Figure skating.
What are the complications of patellar tendinitis?
It’s rare, but untreated patellar tendinitis can increase your risk of a patellar tendon tear (rupture). Continuing to use your knee after you start feeling pain or other symptoms puts even more stress on the small tears and makes you more likely to experience a rupture.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do providers diagnose patellar tendonitis?
A healthcare provider will diagnose patellar tendinitis with a
physical exam
. They’ll examine your knee and compare it to your other, uninjured knee. Your provider will ask you when you first noticed symptoms and what you were doing right before they started.
Tell your provider which sports you play, what you do for work or if you do any physical hobbies that you think might have caused the tendinitis. Let them know if any activities or positions make the symptoms better or worse.
Your provider may use imaging tests to take pictures of your knee and the tissue around it, including:
Knee X-ray
.
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging).
Ultrasound
.
Management and Treatment
How is patellar tendinitis treated?
Your provider will suggest treatments to help your patellar tendon heal and manage the symptoms you’re experiencing. The fastest ways to fix patellar tendinitis include:
Advertisement
Rest:
Avoiding the motions or activities that caused the tendinitis will prevent more stress on your tendon.
Icing:
Apply ice or a cold pack to your knee to reduce swelling. You can ice your knee a few times a day, 15 minutes at a time. Wrap ice packs in a thin towel or washcloth to avoid putting them directly on your skin.
Elevation:
Keep your knee above the level of your heart as often as possible. If you’re lying down, you can prop your knee up on pillows or cushions.
Medications:
Over-the-counter (OTC)
NSAIDs
reduce inflammation and relieve pain. Acetaminophen relieves pain but doesn’t manage inflammation. Don’t take these medications for more than 10 days in a row without talking to your provider.
Wearing a brace:
A
knee brace
can support your knee while you recover. Your provider will tell you which type of brace you’ll need and how often to wear it.
Physical therapy (PT)
:
PT will improve your flexibility and strengthen the muscles around your knee. This can help your knees resist the stress from jumping and move better. A
physical therapist
will give you exercises and stretches that are customized to your sport, activities or job.
Patellar tendinitis surgery
It’s rare to need surgery for patellar tendinitis. Your provider will usually only suggest surgery if your patellar tendon is torn. They might suggest surgery if you’re experiencing severe symptoms that other, nonsurgical treatments can’t manage.
Advertisement
Will patellar tendinitis heal itself?
Yes and no. Yes, rest and giving your body time to heal are important parts of treating patellar tendinitis, and your tendon may heal with time. No, in that patellar tendinitis won’t get better if you don’t change your daily routine.
You need to avoid putting more stress on your tendon and take a break from the activities or sports that caused the tendinitis. Your provider will tell you how long that’ll take based on the symptoms you’re experiencing and the tendinitis’s severity.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knee Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does it take for patellar tendonitis to heal?
Healing takes time. The details of your recovery will depend on which symptoms you’re experiencing and the severity of the tendinitis.
You may start feeling better after resting for a few weeks. But more severe patellar tendinitis may take longer to heal.
Don’t rush your recovery. Pushing your body before it’s fully healed can damage your tendon more, which can set your recovery back.
Prevention
How can I prevent patellar tendinitis?
The best way to prevent patellar tendinitis is to avoid overusing your knees. During sports or other physical activities:
Don’t “play through the pain” if your knee hurts during or after physical activity.
Give your knee time to rest and recover after intense activity.
Stretch and warm up before playing sports or working out.
Cool down and stretch after physical activity.
Take a break between seasons of a sport (don’t train year-round).
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a provider if you experience:
A dull ache around your knee
that lasts for a while after you stop activity.
Sharp, severe knee pains
after a sudden movement.
Knee pain that gets worse during physical activity.
Which questions should I ask my provider?
Questions your may want to ask your provider include:
Do I need any tests?
Which treatments will I need?
What can I do to help my body heal?
When can I resume training or other physical activities?
Additional Common Questions
What can be mistaken for patellar tendinitis?
Lots of injuries and health conditions cause knee pain. Some other common knee issues that cause similar symptoms include:
Patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS)
.
Knee
bursitis
.
Meniscus tears
.
Osgood-Schlatter disease
(in kids and teens).
Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrome
(in kids and teens).
Is walking bad for patellar tendinitis?
As long as you’re not doing the activities or motions that caused the tendinitis, you should still be able to walk and move normally. Staying active can help relieve and prevent stiffness. Stop and talk to your provider if any movement hurts or makes the symptoms in your knee worse. Ask your provider which activities you should avoid while you recover.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Recovering from patellar tendinitis can be frustrating. You might feel tempted to cut your recovery short. But pushing your body too hard, too soon can make the injury worse.
Be honest with your provider about your expectations. They’ll help you develop a treatment and plan that matches your goals and prioritizes your long-term knee health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knee pain can keep you from doing the things you love. Cleveland Clinic experts can craft a treatment plan to get you back to the regular pace of your life.
Knee Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/27/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment