Biologics (Biologic Medication & Drugs): What It Is & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Biologics (Biologic Medicine)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Biologics (Biologic Medicine)
Biologics are medications that come from living organisms, like proteins and genes. Only living cells reproduce living organisms. Biologic drugs are harder and more expensive to produce than normal drugs. But they may one day treat previously untreatable conditions, including cancers, genetic disorders and autoimmune diseases.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What are biologics (biologic medication and drugs)?
Biologics are medications that come from organic life. Scientists produce biologic medications by removing organic proteins or
genetic materials
from cellular lifeforms and, when possible, reproducing them. This means scientists might have to clone genes that reproduce the proteins they need. Or they might implant altered DNA into a living cell and then reproduce it through the cell on a large scale.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Biologic medications are an example of biotechnology. That’s when scientists use biology (the study of living things) to develop new products and technology to address human problems. Biologic drugs (biopharmaceuticals) often treat difficult diseases that traditional human-made drugs can’t successfully treat. But biologics are also much more complicated and expensive to make than synthetic drugs are.
What are some examples of biologics?
Biologic medications and drugs include:
Blood
and blood products (like
plasma
) for
transfusion
.
Tissues for
transplantation
, like a
skin graft
or
bone graft
.
Vaccines
that prevent
infectious diseases
.
Insulin
therapy for
diabetes
.
Immunotherapy
treatments for
cancer
.
Stem cell
therapy for
blood disorders
and
blood cancer
.
Gene therapy
to treat
genetic diseases
.
Monoclonal antibody therapy
(cloned
antibodies
).
Biologic
immunosuppressants
for
autoimmune diseases
and
asthma
.
Biologic DMARDs
(disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs) for
arthritis
.
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of biologics in preventing and treating disease?
Some of the advantages of biologic medications are:
Vaccines prevent the spread of infectious diseases
. Routine vaccinations save an estimated 3 million lives each year. Global vaccine efforts have even eliminated
some diseases
. And when a global pandemic like
COVID-19
occurs, they’re essential to controlling the rapid spread. Vaccines are among the oldest biologics in medicine, and they’ve had a huge global impact.
Blood and plasma transfusions save lives
. Blood transfusions don’t only replace critical blood loss due to
hemorrhage
. They can also replace diseased blood with healthier blood or plasma (
plasma exchange
). Healthcare providers are using blood and blood products to treat blood disorders, blood cancers and neurological disorders by removing harmful antibodies in blood.
Biologics are helping people with cancer live longer
. Biologics are at the forefront of cancer treatment innovations, including stem cell therapy, gene therapy and immunotherapy. These treatments can complement other cancer treatments to help fight the disease from multiple angles. Biologics like
G-CSF
can also help you recover from radiation and
chemotherapy
.
Biologics can treat chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases
. Biologics can effectively control chronic inflammation and pain, preventing the need for
corticosteroids
. Corticosteroids can become less effective over time, and their risk of negative side effects increases the more you use them. Biologics are also more selective than non-biologic immunosuppressants. They can block specific inflammatory pathways in your immune system without blocking them all.
Advertisement
What are the disadvantages of biologics?
Some of the disadvantages of biologic medications are:
Production and regulation are difficult
. Biologics are large, complex molecules that scientists can only produce within living cells. Scientists can’t simply manufacture them like normal drugs. Production processes for biologics are much more complicated and sensitive to small changes. Scientists must thoroughly control each step to ensure the product is consistent. This means biologics take longer to bring to the market than other drugs, and they’re much more expensive.
Biologics can trigger an immune response
. Biologics are more likely to raise a red flag in your
immune system
than normal drugs. Since biologics resemble living organisms, your immune system might mistake the medicine for an infection. It might activate to remove the medicine or build antibodies against it, making it ineffective. In some cases, biologics might trigger an allergic reaction.
Allergies
usually target proteins, and many biologics are proteins.
Most biologics are injections
. For the most part, biologics don’t come in pill form. Some are available as self-injections, and some are IV infusions that you get at your provider’s office. Most people don’t have reactions, but injections can cause reactions like pain, swelling or a rash. Some people get a fever or feel nauseous afterward. Most reactions are mild, and you may not have any. But if you do, or if you don’t like needles, you may be less likely to take the medicine.
Immunosuppressants can make it easier for you to get infections
.
Biologic immunosuppressants, like TNF inhibitors, now treat a wide range of chronic inflammatory diseases, from
rheumatoid arthritis
to
inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD). But immunosuppressants (whether biologic or not) have the side effect of making you more vulnerable to infections. They can also slightly raise your risk of getting certain cancers. You and your healthcare provider will weigh these and other risk factors against the potential benefits of the medicine.
When To Call the Doctor
Should I ask my doctor about biologics?
Depending on your condition, your healthcare provider might suggest biologic medications right away. Or they might suggest other treatments first. Other treatments might be easier to get and treat your condition successfully. But biologics have been life-changing for people with certain severe chronic conditions that haven’t responded to other treatments. They could be the next step for you.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
While ordinary drugs will always have a place in healthcare, biologics are, in many ways, the future of medicine. Scientists are using biotechnology to target diseases more precisely and effectively, and often with fewer side effects. Research continues to refine this technology and develop new treatments for new conditions. There’s hope that gene therapy might one day target currently uncurable diseases.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/09/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment