Atrial Flutter: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Atrial Flutter
Advertisement
Advertisement
Atrial Flutter
Atrial flutter is a type of abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia) that’s too fast. This condition can lead to other problems, like a stroke or heart attack. Medications and procedures can help you get your heart rhythm back to normal. Follow-ups are important because atrial flutter can keep coming back.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Atrial flutter is a heart rhythm with a very fast heartbeat. This happens because of abnormal electrical signals.
What is atrial flutter?
Atrial flutter is a common type of supraventricular
arrhythmia
. This means it’s an abnormal heart rhythm that starts in the upper
chambers
of your heart. With atrial flutter, your
heart
beats in a fast but consistent pattern. Faulty
electrical signals
cause this to happen.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A normal heart rate is 60 to 100 beats a minute when you’re at rest. Atrial flutter can make your heart’s upper chambers beat 250 to 350 times a minute. This causes your lower chambers to beat fast in response, commonly as fast as 150 beats a minute or more.
Types of atrial flutter
Typical (most common type):
Abnormal electrical signals go in a counterclockwise circle in your right atrium.
Reverse typical:
Abnormal electrical signals move in a clockwise direction in your right atrium.
Atypical (not common unless you’ve had heart surgery or ablations before):
Abnormal electrical signals can happen in your left or right atrium.
A provider can tell which type of atrial flutter you have based on your
electrocardiogram
(EKG) results.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms?
Some people don’t have atrial flutter symptoms. For others, symptoms include:
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
)
Dizziness
Lack of energy
Heart palpitations
Fast pulse
Chest pain
Passing out
Lightheadedness
What causes atrial flutter?
Electrical signals that are too frequent cause atrial flutter, making the upper chambers of your heart contract (pump) too often.
Atrial flutter causes include:
Heart valve disorders
Congenital heart conditions
(present at birth)
Coronary artery disease
Heart failure
High blood pressure
Overactive thyroid
Advertisement
What are the risk factors?
Your risk of atrial flutter increases as you age. Men are also at a higher risk.
Medical conditions that can raise your risk include:
Other heart issues, like heart failure or a valve issue
High blood pressure
A thyroid that isn’t working right (hyperthyroidism)
Diabetes
Lung disease
A history of
alcohol use disorder
Obstructive sleep apnea
Obesity
What are the complications of atrial flutter?
When you have atrial flutter, your heart isn’t working as efficiently as it should.
Blood flow
through your heart is like an assembly line.
Blood
moves from one chamber to the next before leaving your heart.
But atrial flutter is like having the speed set too fast at an assembly line’s first station. Your heart’s chambers can’t fill with blood fast enough because the contractions are too frequent. Also, there isn’t enough time for your atria (upper chambers) to empty all their blood into your ventricles in the lower part of your heart. This causes your heart to pump less blood to your body than it should.
Some blood stays in your atria because there isn’t time for all of it to move out. Blood clots could form in blood that sits. These clots could cause a
stroke
or
heart attack
.
The fast pulse from atrial flutter can weaken your heart muscle (
cardiomyopathy
).
When your heart beats too quickly, your ventricles can’t fill with blood. Your heart pumps less blood, which can cause heart failure.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is it diagnosed?
A provider may use tests to diagnose atrial flutter, including:
Electrocardiogram
(
ECG
or
EKG
). This test creates a graph of your heart rhythm. If you have atrial flutter, the lines on the graph will look like a sawtooth or picket fence pattern.
Echocardiogram
. This can show blood clots in your atria and allow your provider to look at the condition of various parts of your heart.
Blood tests
. These can check for an overactive thyroid,
electrolyte imbalance
or other issues.
Pulmonary (lung) function tests
. These assess how well your lungs work.
Management and Treatment
How is atrial flutter treated?
Atrial flutter treatment may begin with treating the condition that caused it. Treatment for atrial flutter itself includes medications and procedures.
Medicines work well for many people with atrial flutter. Any medicine can have side effects, but the benefits usually are greater than the risks. When medicines don’t work, your provider may recommend a procedure that can help.
Medications
Medicines for the treatment of atrial flutter include drugs that:
Slow down your heart rate (
calcium channel blockers
and
beta-blockers
)
Stop the abnormal rhythm (
antiarrhythmic drugs
)
Prevent
blood clots
(
anticoagulants
)
Procedures
Procedures to treat atrial flutter include:
Advertisement
Cardioversion
using medicine or electrical shock
Catheter ablation
, a procedure a provider can use to destroy the tissue that’s creating abnormal signals
Temporary change in your pacemaker or
implantable cardioverter defibrillator
(ICD) setting
Complications of the treatment
Rarely, you can have complications from an ablation, including:
Infection
Bleeding
Injury to a
blood vessel
Blood clots
Stroke
How successful are the treatments?
Cardioversion works in 70% to 90% of people. Some people have less than a 5% chance of atrial flutter happening again after a catheter ablation. Others may have less successful procedures because of their type of atrial flutter. People with complex cases of atypical atrial flutter may have only a 70% success rate with ablation.
How long does it take to recover from this treatment?
After having an ablation, you can expect to have some limits for the first week. This means waiting a week before you drive a vehicle or lift more than 10 pounds.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have atrial flutter?
Because there’s no cure for atrial flutter and it carries a high risk of stroke, you’ll need follow-up appointments all your life. It’s important to keep your appointments because it’s common for atrial flutter to keep coming back. People with atrial flutter may have multiple hospital visits because of this.
Prevention
Can atrial flutter be prevented?
Although you can’t prevent some of the risk factors for atrial flutter, limiting your alcohol intake can help. Also, you can get medical care for the problems that cause atrial flutter or put you at risk for it
Advertisement
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Make sure you keep your follow-up appointments with your healthcare provider. Each year, they’ll figure out your stroke risk based on other medical conditions you may have. You may need to take an anticoagulant if your provider believes you’re at risk of a stroke.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll have regular visits with your provider to catch any complications that may happen. Also, your provider may repeat tests they used to diagnose you. Contact your provider if you experience a reaction to a medication or if your symptoms change or worsen.
When should I go to the ER?
You should seek medical care when you have a fast heartbeat (150 beats per minute or more) while at rest.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to consider asking your provider may include:
Do I have atrial flutter or another type of arrhythmia?
What’s the best treatment for me?
What’s my risk of stroke?
Additional Common Questions
Is atrial flutter dangerous?
Atrial flutter isn’t life-threatening, but it is serious. If you don’t treat atrial flutter, you may have life-threatening complications. For example, you may have a stroke or heart attack.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A heart rhythm that’s too fast can make you feel uneasy. But your healthcare provider can help you with treatments for atrial flutter. These treatments may lower your risk of a stroke or heart failure. That’s why it’s important to keep your appointments with your provider. They can figure out your risk of stroke and offer solutions to get your heart rhythm back to normal. Your provider can help you decide which treatment is best for your situation.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart rhythm is out of sync, the experts at Cleveland Clinic can find out why. We offer personalized care for all types of arrhythmias.
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/31/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment