Chickpea Allergy: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Chickpea Allergy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chickpea Allergy
A chickpea allergy isn’t one of the most common allergies, but it’s possible. Chickpeas are in the legume family and you’re slightly more at risk of being allergic if you have an allergy to peanuts or soybeans. Allergic reaction symptoms vary, but some people can experience life-threatening reactions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Food Allergies Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is a chickpea allergy?
A chickpea allergy is when you have an
allergic reaction
to eating (or touching) chickpeas. Chickpeas also go by the name garbanzo beans. They’re a type of legume like peanuts, lentils and soybeans.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Allergic reactions happen when your
immune system
mistakenly believes something is harmful to your body. In the case of a chickpea allergy, your body believes chickpeas are a threat, so it responds by releasing a chemical called
histamine
. The histamine gives you allergy symptoms like
itchy skin
, hives or difficulty breathing. Some people experience life-threatening allergic reactions to foods, although a life-threatening reaction to chickpeas is rare.
People with symptoms of a chickpea allergy should avoid chickpeas and foods that contain them (like hummus). An allergist can determine if you have an allergy to other foods in the legume family. This can occur since all legumes contain similar proteins.
How common are chickpea allergies?
Chickpea allergies aren’t one of the more common legume allergies. Peanut and soybean allergies tend to be the most common. The exact number of people with a chickpea allergy is unknown, but researchers believe it’s more common in countries where eating chickpeas is more prevalent.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a chickpea allergy?
Everyone experiences symptoms a little differently. Some of the most common chickpea allergy symptoms are:
Skin reactions
like itchy skin, redness, hives or swelling.
Diarrhea
, abdominal cramps and
vomiting
.
Changes in blood pressure.
Coughing or wheezing.
Tightness in your throat.
Itchiness or burning in your mouth.
Advertisement
People with severe allergic reactions may experience
anaphylaxis
. This is a medical emergency that requires immediate care. Symptoms of anaphylaxis include:
Swelling in your throat,
trouble swallowing
or feeling like your throat is closing.
Breathing difficulties.
Feeling faint or dizzy,
sudden confusion
or having other signs of a drop in
blood pressure
.
It’s important to note that there’s a difference between an intolerance and an allergy. An intolerance mainly affects your stomach and digestive system. It may cause symptoms like bloating, diarrhea and passing gas. An immune system allergic reaction affects multiple organ systems, including your respiratory system, skin, cardiovascular system and others. So, symptoms affect many different parts of your body.
What causes an allergy to chickpeas?
An allergic reaction happens when your body thinks a food or substance is harmful to your body. It reacts by making antibodies called IgE antibodies (immunoglobulin E). These
antibodies
cause your body to release a variety of chemicals, including histamine, which gives you allergy symptoms.
For chickpeas specifically, researchers believe your immune system reacts to chick pea globulin, prolamin or albumin, which are proteins in chickpeas. The proteins remain in chickpeas even when they’re roasted or cooked.
Who gets chickpea allergies?
Anyone can be allergic to chickpeas. But, you may be more likely to have an allergy if you:
Have an allergy to a legume like
peanuts
or
soybeans
. One study found that 1 in 20 people with an allergy to one legume also had an allergy to another type of legume. This is because all legumes contain similar proteins.
Have other allergies.
Have
asthma
or
eczema
.
Live in areas of the world where chickpeas are more abundant in the cuisine, like India and countries around the Mediterranean.
Do chickpeas trigger a peanut allergy?
No. The two are related because they’re both in the legume family and contain similar proteins. Your healthcare provider is the best person to discuss potential allergies with.
Am I allergic to chickpeas if I’m allergic to peanuts?
No, not necessarily. While they contain similar proteins, you don’t automatically have an allergy to chickpeas if you have a peanut allergy. You should let your healthcare provider know if you have a peanut or soy allergy as this could help with your diagnosis.
What are the complications of this condition?
The most serious complication of a chickpea allergy is going into anaphylactic shock. This involves a severe drop in blood pressure, severe shortness of breath and possible loss of consciousness. If you experience symptoms of anaphylaxis, visit an emergency room immediately. Most allergic reactions to chickpeas are mild and not life-threatening.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a chickpea allergy diagnosed?
Contact a healthcare provider if you believe you have an allergy to chickpeas. They can perform
allergy tests
to diagnose a chickpea allergy. Some of the tests include:
Skin prick test
: This test involves putting chickpea on your skin and watching for an allergic reaction in that area of your skin.
Blood test
: This test involves drawing a sample of your blood to see if eating chickpeas causes your body to release a certain allergy antibody.
Food challenge test
: This type of test involves eating a small amount of a particular food and seeing if you have an allergic reaction. Your healthcare provider performs this test in a clinical setting just in case there’s a severe allergic reaction.
Diagnosing a chickpea allergy can be difficult. You should let your healthcare provider know if you’ve ever had a reaction to other legumes or beans. You may also want to ask them about any other foods you should avoid to prevent further allergic reactions.
Management and Treatment
How is a chickpea allergy treated?
The best way to treat a chickpea allergy is to avoid eating them entirely. Some common foods that may contain chickpeas are:
Hummus.
Falafel.
Soups.
Snack mix or trail mix.
Crackers and breads made with chickpea flour.
Remember, you’ll want to avoid anything that contains garbanzo beans (it’s the same as chickpeas). Read the ingredients labels before buying packaged soups, snacks or other products. If you go out to eat, check with your server before ordering foods that may contain chickpeas. Keep in mind you can have a reaction to even the tiniest amounts of chickpeas, so it’s better to be cautious.
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider may also prescribe you an auto-injector
epinephrine
(EpiPen®) to use in an emergency. Otherwise, over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription
antihistamines
should help treat mild to moderate allergy symptoms.
It may be wise to visit an
allergist
so they can determine the extent of your allergies. People with chickpea allergies may have allergies to legumes and beans that contain similar proteins like peas, black beans and kidney beans. This is known as cross-reactivity.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Food Allergies Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Prevention
Can I prevent a chickpea allergy?
No, you can’t prevent
food allergies
like a chickpea allergy. If you’re allergic to peanuts, soybeans or lentils, you may have a higher chance of being allergic to chickpeas.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of an allergic reaction after eating chickpeas. They can help determine if chickpeas are the cause. Since having a reaction to other legumes is common, they may want to perform additional tests to see how you react to other foods.
If you experience severe symptoms like breathing difficulties or feeling like you may pass out, go to your nearest emergency department for treatment.
Additional Common Questions
Are chickpeas inflammatory?
No, chickpeas aren’t considered inflammatory. Most healthcare providers consider chickpeas to be an anti-inflammatory food. This means they can help fight harmful
inflammation
in your body. They’re also high in fiber and a good source of protein.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
While chickpeas aren’t one of the most common food allergies, having an allergy to them is entirely possible. Some people have mild symptoms, but for a small number of people, the allergic reaction can be severe. Contact a healthcare provider if you notice any allergy symptoms after eating foods containing chickpeas. They can help diagnose the allergy and test you for allergies to similar foods like lentils or soybeans. Avoiding foods that contain chickpeas is the best treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have a food allergy, you might worry a lot about what to eat so you don’t have a reaction. Cleveland Clinic can ease your fears and treat your allergies.
Food Allergies Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/13/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment