Silent Aspiration: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Silent Aspiration
Advertisement
Advertisement
Silent Aspiration
Silent aspiration is when something like food or stomach acid slips into your airway without triggering a cough. It usually goes unnoticed, but if it happens often, it can lead to aspiration pneumonia, a lung infection that needs treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Silent Aspiration?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Silent Aspiration?
Silent aspiration happens when food, liquid, saliva or stomach acid slips into your airway — and you don’t feel it. Normally, your body protects your lungs when you swallow. Muscles, nerves and a small flap called the
epiglottis
work together to guide food to your stomach and air to your lungs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But with silent aspiration, that system doesn’t work like it should. You may not cough or even notice it’s happening. It can occur during meals or with acid reflux.
Anyone can experience silent aspiration, but it’s more common in:
Babies
, who can’t communicate when something feels wrong and are more likely to inhale liquids
Older adults
, especially those with dementia, Parkinson’s disease, stroke history or other conditions that affect swallowing
People with chronic conditions
, like MS or epilepsy, which can change how you swallow
A little aspiration now and then usually isn’t dangerous — your body can clear it with coughing. But if it happens often, it can lead to
aspiration pneumonia
, a lung infection that may become serious without treatment. This risk is especially high for older adults, whose cough reflex or swallowing muscles may weaken over time.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of silent aspiration
Many people don’t notice symptoms of silent aspiration. When signs do appear, they can look different by age.
In babies and young children:
Fast or labored breathing during feedings
Wet-sounding voice or cry after eating
Refusing the breast or bottle
Frequent low fevers or lung infections
In older children and adults:
Breathing faster while eating
Wet or gurgly voice after meals
Frequent respiratory infections, like
bronchitis
Advertisement
Silent aspiration causes
Silent aspiration can happen on its own, but it’s often linked to conditions that affect swallowing, like:
Cleft lip or palate
GERD
(acid reflux), which can cause stomach acid to come into your throat and sometimes enter your airway
Laryngomalacia (a voice box condition in babies)
Feeding or breathing tubes
Neurologic conditions like
cerebral palsy
, MS, epilepsy, stroke or brain injury
Vocal cord paralysis or trouble swallowing
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose silent aspiration
Your provider will start with a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. They’ll check your nose, mouth, throat and lungs.
Because silent aspiration can be hard to notice — and may not trigger obvious symptoms like coughing — testing is often needed to confirm it. These tests help providers see how you swallow and whether anything is entering your airway.
To confirm silent aspiration, they may order one or more of the following tests:
Chest X-ray
: This looks for signs of pneumonia or other lung issues.
FEES (Fiberoptic Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing)
: A thin camera goes through your nose to see how you swallow.
Laryngoscopy
: A small camera checks your voice box.
Upper GI tests
: You drink a liquid (barium), then providers take X-rays to look for problems in your digestive tract, like reflux.
Management and Treatment
How is silent aspiration treated?
Treatment starts with fixing the cause. For example:
If you have GERD
, you may need medication to control stomach acid
If your baby seldom aspirates during feedings
, your provider might recommend feeding them upright
If aspiration is frequent
, your care team may thicken foods and liquids or use a temporary feeding tube until swallowing improves
For cleft palate
, surgery can help improve swallowing
For older adults
, a speech-language pathologist (SLP) may recommend swallowing therapy, posture changes or eating habit adjustments to reduce the risk of aspiration
After treatment, your provider may do follow-up tests to see if your swallowing has improved. Routine checkups can help catch issues early — whether that’s poor weight gain in children or recurrent lung infections in adults.
When to go to the ER
Get emergency care if your baby:
Has blue skin
Struggles to breathe
Has a high fever (over 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit, or 38 degrees Celsius, if under 3 months, or over 102.2 degrees F, 39 degrees C, if between 3 months and 3 years)
Is hard to wake
Go to the ER if you:
Can’t swallow
Have chest pain or trouble breathing
Think something is stuck in your throat or airway
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have silent aspiration?
In babies, silent aspiration may go away as their muscles and nerves develop. In adults — especially older adults — it may be a long-term concern if tied to neurologic or chronic conditions. Managing the cause, working with a swallowing specialist and treating infections early can greatly improve quality of life.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can you prevent silent aspiration?
You may not be able to prevent every case of silent aspiration, especially if it’s tied to a medical condition. But small changes can help lower your risk:
Sit upright while eating or drinking.
Take your time with meals — eat slowly and take small bites.
Swallow fully before taking another bite or sip.
Avoid distractions while eating so you can focus on swallowing.
Choose soft, moist foods that are easier to chew and swallow.
Add sauces or gravies to dry foods to make them easier to manage.
Avoid eating when you’re overly tired or taking medications that cause drowsiness or dry mouth.
Practice any swallowing techniques your provider recommends.
Visit your dentist regularly — oral health affects how well you chew.
If you or a loved one has a condition that affects swallowing, talk with your provider about seeing a speech-language pathologist. They can recommend strategies and therapies to improve safe swallowing.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Silent aspiration can be scary — whether it affects a baby, an older loved one or you. The good news is that treatment is available. Many babies grow out of it, and for older adults, therapy and other interventions can make swallowing safer and reduce complications.
Talk to your provider about your concerns. Together, you can create a plan that supports safe swallowing, better health and peace of mind.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment