Vaginal Boil: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vaginal Boil
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vaginal Boil
A vaginal boil is a pus-filled bump that develops when a hair follicle becomes infected. Boils can occur outside of your vagina on the labia, vulva or pubic area. They can become red, swollen and painful. Most vaginal boils resolve on their own with at-home treatment, but in some cases, you need medical treatment from a health provider.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Vaginal Boil?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
What Is a Vaginal Boil?
Some common at-home treatments for vaginal boils are applying a warm compress, wearing loose clothing and taking medicine for pain relief.
A vaginal
boil
(also called a furuncle or skin
abscess
) is a painful, pus-filled bump that develops under the skin in your genital area. It usually happens when the bacteria
Staphylococcus aureus
(commonly called staph) infects your
hair follicles
. A vaginal boil can also develop when bacteria gets into a cut in your skin.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A boil can develop on the labia (lips of the
vagina
) or in the pubic region (where your pubic hair grows). Some people will get them in the skin fold between their groins and upper thighs. Boils will start out small, like a pimple but can grow as big as a golf ball. Vaginal boils typically get more painful as they grow. Eventually, they rupture (or open), and the
pus
drains.
Vaginal boils are common and typically not serious. Most will clear up on their own within a few weeks with at-home care. If a vaginal boil gets very large and painful, some healthcare providers treat them with antibiotics or drain them in the office.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a vaginal boil
Vaginal boils can start out small and could resemble a pimple or razor burn. Once it grows and becomes painful, you may begin feeling discomfort or seeing signs of infection.
Symptoms of a vaginal boil are a lump that:
Is swollen, red and deep in your skin
Is painful and warm to touch
Develops a white or yellow, pus-filled center that may break open
May ooze fluid or develop a crust
Some people develop symptoms of infection like
fever
and
swollen lymph nodes
.
What does it look like?
The boil may start as a small, red bump. It can develop into a swollen, painful spot with a white or yellow, pus-filled tip. This happens quickly — sometimes over a few days. It can feel tender and warm to the touch. Boils tend to get large — some might get as big as 2 inches or more.
Advertisement
Vaginal boil causes
Boils are most commonly caused by a
Staphylococcus aureus
(staph) infection, a type of bacteria that’s found on your skin and inside your nose. It only causes problems when it gets inside your body. When bacteria get into areas of your skin that are cut or broken open, a lump filled with fluid or pus will form. This is your body’s way of trying to get rid of the infection.
Some causes of boils include:
Having
obesity
, which can cause boils to develop between the folds of your skin
Poor hygiene (wash your genital area with warm water daily and after exercise)
Diabetes
or other conditions that weaken your
immune system
— these reduce your ability to fight infection
Wearing tight-fitting clothes, especially dirty or sweaty underwear
Ingrown hairs due to shaving, grooming or waxing your vaginal area
Other injuries to your skin, like insect bites or acne
Close physical contact with someone who had a boil (the boil contains bacteria that can spread when the boil opens)
What STD can cause boils?
Certain
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
like
genital herpes
or
genital warts
can cause sores or lesions that resemble the beginning of a boil. But you don’t typically get vaginal boils from STIs. Once the infection progresses, it can be clear to your healthcare provider that the infection is due to staph infection. They can also order tests to determine if you have STIs.
Are vaginal boils contagious?
Yes, vaginal boils can be contagious. They can spread from skin-to-skin contact. If you have a boil in your pubic region, you should:
Wash your hands with soap before and after touching the infected area
Practice good hygiene and keep the area clean and dry, especially if the boil begins to drain
Avoid sharing personal items like towels, clothing and washcloths until the boil’s gone
If you have sexual contact with someone who has a boil that’s leaking, it’s best to wash the area with antibacterial soap as soon as possible. If you have a vaginal boil, be aware that you can spread the infection to your partner, especially if you see liquid seeping from the boil.
Who is more likely to get them?
Boils are a bacterial infection. The following factors could make you more likely to get a boil near your vagina:
You shave your pubic region with a razor. Tiny nicks from a razor can make your skin susceptible to bacterial infection.
You have
acne
or other skin conditions that cause breaks in your skin. These can become infected more easily.
You’re in close contact or sharing personal items with someone who has a boil.
You have a weak immune system or medical condition that makes it difficult for your body to fight an infection. Even
pregnancy
can make you susceptible as it tends to lower your immune system to certain bacteria.
Advertisement
What are some complications of a vaginal boil?
Severe complications of a vaginal boil are rare. Bacteria from the boil can spread to other parts of your body or enter your bloodstream (
sepsis
). If this occurs, your heart, bones, brain or other organs could be at risk of infection.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose vaginal boils
Your healthcare provider will diagnose a boil on your vagina after performing a
physical exam
and looking at the boil. Most providers can tell if the bump is a boil relatively quickly.
Most of the time, a boil will heal without any medical intervention. If the infection is severe or causes a lot of pain, your provider may prescribe an antibiotic or drain the boil.
If you have recurring boils, your healthcare provider may collect a sample of the drainage to see what kind of bacteria is causing the infection. Recurring vaginal boils may require a certain antibiotic or be a symptom of an underlying condition.
Management and Treatment
How are vaginal boils treated?
You can treat most vaginal boils at home. For at-home treatment, you should:
Apply a warm, moist compress (like a damp washcloth) to the area three to four times per day (this helps draw the pus to the surface and encourages the boil to drain, but use a new washcloth each time)
Never squeeze, pop or cut open the boil yourself (this can lead to more pain and spread the infection)
Wear loose-fitting clothing to prevent rubbing and irritation
Take an over-the-counter pain medication like acetaminophen for discomfort
Keep your
vulvar
area clean with antibacterial soap and water, and wash your hands before and after touching a vaginal boil
Clean the boil and cover it with a loose bandage after it begins to drain
Advertisement
In some cases, a vaginal boil doesn’t get better with at-home treatment. It can become quite large and painful and interfere with your daily life. In this case, your provider may:
Prescribe
antibiotics
to help the infection heal
. Once healing begins, the swelling goes down and you feel less pain. They may also prescribe antibiotics for recurrent infection.
Drain or lance the boil
. Your healthcare provider will make a small incision (cut) to drain the pus from the boil. They’ll likely cover the boil with a gauze bandage. They may still prescribe an antibiotic to prevent additional infection.
Your healthcare provider will determine if at-home care will treat the boil. If they suspect an antibiotic is necessary to speed up healing, they’ll prescribe one.
What medication is used for boils in the private parts?
There are times when your provider will recommend an oral antibiotic to treat a vaginal boil. They’ll prescribe whichever antibiotic they believe works best for you and your health history. There are several different types of antibiotics that can treat a vaginal boil if one becomes necessary for you. If an oral medication doesn’t help, there are also antibiotics that you can get through an IV in your arm. (This is typically not necessary.)
Advertisement
Can I squeeze a boil near my vagina?
You should never squeeze or pop a boil that develops near your vagina. This can cause the infection to spread to other areas. It’ll also make the pain and inflammation worse. Try home remedies that encourage the boil to rupture and drain on its own, like applying warm compresses several times a day.
How do you get rid of a vaginal boil fast?
There isn’t a quick way to get rid of a boil near your vagina. A boil often takes weeks to resolve completely. Antibiotics from your healthcare provider may help speed up the healing process. Don’t try to squeeze or pop a boil to get rid of it. This can spread infection and cause scarring. Applying a warm compress several times a day to the area is the best way to get rid of a vaginal boil.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does it take for a vaginal boil to go away on its own?
Most boils will heal on their own within three weeks. But there’s no set time for how long it takes for a boil to develop or heal. Applying warm compresses can help the boil drain on its own. Taking antibiotics can help speed up the healing time, but healthcare providers don’t always prescribe antibiotics.
Prevention
How can I prevent getting another vaginal boil?
You can’t always prevent a vaginal boil, especially if you have a weakened immune system. There are some things you can do to reduce the chances of getting another boil near your vagina:
Wash your genital area with antibacterial soap to prevent bacteria from building up and causing infection.
Avoid shaving your pubic area. Don’t share soap, towels, washcloths or other items that touch your vagina.
Wash your hands regularly, especially before and after touching your genitals.
Change your underwear daily and after exercise.
If you have obesity, reaching a weight that’s healthy for you can help because staph bacteria survive on folds of your skin.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you have these symptoms:
Your boil gets large and very painful
Your boil doesn’t get better within two weeks
You get more than one boil
Your boil doesn’t seem any better after several days of at-home treatment
You get recurrent boils near your vagina
You have a fever or swollen lymph nodes
If you have diabetes or a weakened immune system for any reason and develop a boil, contact your healthcare provider.
Additional Common Questions
Why do I keep getting boils on my private area?
Some people are more prone to getting vaginal boils. Bacteria that enter through your skin and infect a hair follicle cause boils near your vagina. Keeping your genital area clean and practicing good hygiene is the best way to prevent recurring boils. If you shave your pubic area with a razor, change your razor often. An old or dull razor can harbor bacteria and cause ingrown hairs.
What do I do if I have a vaginal boil and I am pregnant?
You should tell your healthcare provider if you develop a boil when you’re pregnant. Pregnancy doesn’t cause boils, but certain hormonal and immune system changes could contribute to boils during pregnancy. In most cases, you’ll still follow at-home treatment. Apply a warm compress to the area several times a day to encourage the boil to drain. Depending on your symptoms and the size of the boil, your healthcare provider may prescribe antibiotics.
Can I have sex if I have a boil near my vagina?
If you have a boil near your vagina, it’s best to avoid having sex. Since a boil is an infection, it could spread to your partner during sexual contact. Friction from sex can also irritate the boil.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Vaginal boils can be extremely painful and uncomfortable. Depending on their location and size, they can affect how you walk, what clothing you can wear and if you can be intimate with a partner. Since vaginal boils can look like other skin conditions, it can be difficult to know if the bump you see is a boil, cyst or something else.
If you see a bump in your vaginal area, it’s best to be cautious and not self-diagnose. Call a healthcare provider to share your symptoms and describe what the bump looks like. They can determine if you should go in for an appointment. Your provider will recommend treatment depending on the size, location and severity of the boil. A vaginal boil is a common skin condition, and while it may feel awkward to talk about, it’s not awkward to your provider. They’re there to help you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment