Biventricular Pacemaker: Device & How It Works
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Biventricular Pacemaker
Advertisement
Advertisement
Biventricular Pacemaker
A biventricular pacemaker is for people with moderate to severe heart failure symptoms. This device aligns contractions of your heart’s lower chambers to improve heart function. Many people feel much better in the months after implant surgery. The device helps your heart do a better job of pumping oxygen-rich blood out to your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Heart Failure Treatments
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is a biventricular pacemaker?
A biventricular pacemaker is an implanted device for people with advanced
heart failure
. It helps with abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmias
), like other pacemakers. The difference between a
pacemaker
and a biventricular pacemaker is the number of wires.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Instead of one or two wires (leads), a biventricular pacemaker has three. For lead placement, one goes to each ventricle (lower
heart chamber
). The third goes to your upper right heart chamber (atrium).
When your two ventricles don’t pump at the same time, your
heart
has a hard time getting enough oxygen-rich
blood
to your body. A biventricular pacemaker helps your heart work better because the ventricles beat at the same time. Healthcare providers call this treatment
cardiac resynchronization therapy
.
How does a biventricular pacemaker work?
Providers implant a biventricular pacemaker during an invasive procedure. The device has a pulse generator that contains a battery and a tiny computer. The leads connect to this to get the impulses.
The device sends electrical impulses during each heartbeat that make your two ventricles pump at the same time. These impulses pass through the leads to your heart’s chambers. Most people don’t feel the impulses.
Why would someone need a biventricular pacemaker?
You may need a biventricular pacemaker if:
Heart failure medicines don’t help your symptoms
Issues like
fatigue
and shortness of breath (
dyspnea
) hold you back during daily activities
Your heart isn’t pumping as much blood as it should
Your heart chambers don’t beat together
You may be at a high risk for
cardiac arrest
Advertisement
If you’re at risk for life-threatening heart rhythms, you may receive a biventricular pacemaker along with a defibrillator or
ICD
. This is a CRT-D, which isn’t the same as a biventricular pacemaker (CRT-P) alone. When the ICD detects a dangerously fast rhythm, it delivers a shock to stop it. The
defibrillator
in this device may protect you from sudden death due to dangerous arrhythmias.
What are the benefits of this device?
Benefits of a biventricular pacemaker may include:
Improved symptoms
Better quality of life
Fewer heart-related hospital stays
Improved heart function
Longer survival with heart failure
What are the risks associated with a biventricular pacemaker?
Biventricular pacemaker surgery has risks like other procedures. Once in place, biventricular pacemakers have a risk of complications. A wire can move out of place or disconnect from heart tissue or the pulse generator. A device may also not function as it should.
Heart failure symptoms don’t improve in about
3 out of 10 people
who get this device.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Heart Failure Treatments
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
Are there reasons I can’t get this device?
You may not be able to get a biventricular pacemaker if you have:
Active infection
Bleeding disorder
(trouble forming blood clots)
Dementia
Serious illness that may be fatal within a year
Abnormalities in your central veins
How often do I need to see my healthcare provider?
With a biventricular pacemaker, you can expect to see your provider several times each year. They’ll want to check your health and make sure your device is working well. As it’s a machine, it may need a software update or a new battery now and then. You’ll most likely need to transmit remote check-ups of your device on a monthly basis.
How do I know if something’s wrong with my biventricular pacemaker?
If your device is having an issue, it might make beeping noises or communicate problems during a remote or in-person check. You may also feel symptoms you had before getting the device. Call your provider if you feel:
Dizzy
Faint
Short of breath
Shocks from your defibrillator
Are there devices I should stay away from with a biventricular pacemaker?
Yes. You should keep your distance from things that have a strong magnetic field. Being closer than 6 inches to it can stop your device’s signals. It may not be obvious to you if your device isn’t working right. If you do notice something, take some steps away from the cause of the problem. Even an electric fence for a dog could cause an issue.
Take care around devices like:
Cell phones and headphones:
You can use the speaker phone function or hold the phone to the ear on the side where you don’t have a pacemaker. Don’t carry your phone or headphones in your shirt pocket.
Metal detectors:
Your device can set this off. Show security staff your pacemaker ID card and ask for a special screening.
Devices for medical or dental care:
Talk to your provider before you have surgery, an
MRI
scan,
kidney stone
treatment,
TENS
for pain or
radiation therapy
for cancer.
How long can you live with a biventricular pacemaker?
The length of time you can live with this device depends on several factors. Your healthcare provider is the best person to give you an estimate. They may consider your age,
other health issues
you may have and how well the device is working for you.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be hard to hear that you need more than medicine for your heart failure symptoms. But a pacemaker can provide many benefits. It’s normal to wonder what a biventricular pacemaker for your heart will be like. Your provider will explain their recommendation. Don’t hesitate to ask them questions about what the device will do and how it may affect you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic can diagnose and treat heart failure of any kind, at any stage, with advanced therapies and compassionate care.
Heart Failure Treatments
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment