Canker Sore: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Canker Sores
Advertisement
Advertisement
Canker Sores
Canker sores are a type of mouth sore. They’re not contagious, but they can be painful. Doctors don’t know what causes them. But stress and minor injuries to the inside of your mouth are possible triggers. Treatments include over-the-counter or prescription ointments and rinses. Even without treatment, canker sores usually go away within two weeks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Canker Sores?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Are Canker Sores?
Canker sores show up in your mouth, in places like the inside of your lip. Unlike cold sores, they’re not contagious.
Canker sores — or aphthous ulcers — are small ulcers in the lining of your mouth. A canker sore looks like a white or yellowish
mouth sore
with a red border. You usually get it at the base of your gums, on or under your tongue, or inside your lips or cheeks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are different types:
Minor canker sores
are most common. They’re usually less than one centimeter in diameter (smaller than a pea). They heal within a few weeks without scarring.
Major canker sores
are usually bigger than one centimeter, extremely painful and often leave behind scars. They can take months to heal.
Herpetiform canker sores
are rare. Instead of one sore, tiny pinpoint sores often cluster together. This kind heals within about two weeks and doesn’t usually cause scarring.
These sores are common, and they usually go away without treatment. But they can make eating and talking uncomfortable in the meantime. Luckily, there are things you can do to ease the discomfort of a canker sore.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of canker sores
Common symptoms include:
Burning or tingling in your mouth (a sign that a canker sore is forming)
One or more painful sores on your tongue, the inside of your lips, your inner cheeks or the roof of your mouth
Small, round ulcers that are white, gray or yellow with a red border
Canker sore causes
Cold Sores vs. Canker Sores: Which Is It?
Experts aren’t sure what causes canker sores. They do know that they’re not contagious. Some people confuse canker sores with
cold sores
, which are caused by a
contagious virus
. But canker sores and cold sores aren’t the same.
Advertisement
There are several potential causes of a canker sore, including:
Conditions that involve a weak or dysregulated immune system, like celiac disease, HIV/AIDS and inflammatory bowel disease
Medication side effects from taking beta-blockers, immunosuppressants or NSAIDs
Nutritional deficiencies, especially a lack of Vitamins B12 and D, folate, iron or zinc
Your genes, which may predispose you based on your DNA (canker sores run in families)
Experts have identified factors that can trigger the development of these ulcers, including:
Consuming certain foods and drinks (including acidic foods, spicy foods, caffeine, eggs, cheese, peanuts and almonds)
Changing hormone levels during your period
Injury to the inside of your mouth (like biting your cheek or scrapes from ill-fitting dental appliances)
Toothpastes that contain sodium lauryl sulfate
Stress
Risk factors
Anybody can develop one. But they’re most common in teens and people in their 20s.
Females
are more likely than males to get them. Experts believe this could be related to hormone differences.
It’s common to get a canker sore at an early age and then get them throughout your life. But it’s unusual to get your first canker sore after age 40.
How to lower your risk
There’s no surefire way to prevent canker sores. But if you’ve had them before and want to keep from getting new ones, try to notice triggers that cause them. As best as you can, avoid these triggers.
Here are some general tips that work for lots of people who get canker sores:
Practice good
oral hygiene
. Use a soft-bristled toothbrush and waxed floss to prevent injury.
Steer clear of acidic, salty, spicy or other “trigger” foods.
Talk to your healthcare provider about potential nutritional deficiencies.
Try a “canker sore toothpaste” that doesn’t contain sodium lauryl sulfate. Your dental care provider can recommend brands.
Try stress reduction techniques, like mindfulness and meditation.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose canker sores
Your healthcare provider can diagnose canker sores during a physical exam. They’re easy for providers to identify just by looking. They might also recommend a
blood test
to see if you have another condition that’s causing the ulcers.
Management and Treatment
How do you heal a canker sore fast?
Canker sore treatment may include over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription products to ease your symptoms. Some may help you get rid of the sore faster. Your healthcare provider may recommend one or more of these remedies:
Topical anesthetics
, like benzocaine (found in OTC products like Orajel
™
and Anbesol
®
)
OTC mouth rinses
that don’t contain alcohol
Prescription mouth rinses
like
magic mouthwash
, or rinses containing chlorhexidine or dexamethasone
Corticosteroid
ointments
, like fluocinonide, beclomethasone or hydrocortisone hemosuccinate
Corticosteroids you take by mouth
, like prednisone (if the sore doesn’t get better with the ointment)
Vitamins or supplements
, if you have canker sores related to a nutritional deficiency
Advertisement
For severe canker sores, your healthcare provider may recommend laser therapy or
electrocauterization
. This can get rid of germs in the area, reduce pain and speed up healing.
Does salt on a canker sore help?
Rinsing your mouth with saltwater or a mild mouthwash can help ease the pain. Another option is to use a cotton swab to dab a mixture that’s equal parts water and part hydrogen peroxide onto your sore. (Take care not to swallow the hydrogen peroxide.) Follow by dabbing a small amount of milk of magnesia on it.
You can do this up to four times a day for canker sore pain relief.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Most canker sores go away on their own without treatment. So, you may not need to see your provider. But you should definitely give them a call if you have canker sores that:
Last longer than two weeks
Come with
flu-like symptoms
Are larger than a centimeter (bigger than a pea)
Come back two or three times a year
Interfere with eating, drinking or other daily routines
These signs may mean you have a condition causing your sores that your provider needs to know about. Or your provider may want to do testing to be 100% sure that the growth is a canker sore and not something serious.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long do canker sores last?
Canker sore pain usually improves in a few days. The ulcers typically heal within two weeks, even without treatment. If you have a canker sore that lasts for more than two weeks, schedule an appointment with your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Canker sores can be irritating, and they’re certainly inconvenient. But they’re usually not dangerous. Unlike cold sores, canker sores aren’t related to an infection or contagious. Most people find relief by using over-the-counter canker sore ointments or mouth rinses. But if your symptoms don’t improve after trying these products, you should talk to your healthcare provider. They can tell you how to get rid of canker sores (or at least get some relief) so you can get back to normal.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment