Rapunzel Syndrome: What It Is, Causes & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Rapunzel Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Rapunzel Syndrome
Rapunzel syndrome is when you swallow hair and it makes a hairball (trichobezoar) in your stomach and small intestine. It happens because you have an uncontrollable urge to pull out and swallow your hair. It’s named for the fairy tale about a young girl with very long hair. The syndrome typically affects females ages 13 to 19.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Rapunzel Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Rapunzel Syndrome?
Rapunzel syndrome is a digestive disorder that happens when you have a strong, uncontrollable urge to pull your hair out and swallow it. You may do this without realizing it. Mental health conditions like trichotillomania and trichophagia may lead to Rapunzel syndrome.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Swallowing your hair upsets your digestive system. The hair that you swallow gets stuck in your stomach. When you swallow food, the muscles in your stomach relax and then tighten to move the food for digestion in a process called
peristalsis
. But your hair is smooth and slippery. The muscles can’t grab it to move it out of your stomach.
Over time, tangles of hair in your stomach mix with mucus and food to make a hairball (trichobezoar). This trichobezoar can get big enough to fill your stomach and move into your
small bowel
.
Without treatment, the trichobezoar in your stomach and small bowel can affect your health. Treatment is medication or surgery to remove it. You may need mental health support to help you manage the urge to pull your hair out and swallow it.
This syndrome is very rare. Healthcare providers reported the first case of Rapunzel syndrome in 1968. They’ve reported
fewer than 100 cases
since then. The syndrome typically affects
females
ages 13 to 19. Rarely, toddlers and young children develop it.
Rapunzel syndrome gets its name from the fairy tale about a young woman with very long hair.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Rapunzel syndrome
Rapunzel syndrome symptoms may include:
Abdominal (belly) pain that feels like cramps
Bad breath
Bald spots on your scalp
Bloated belly
Constipation
Diarrhea
Hair in your vomit
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Unexplained weight loss
Advertisement
You may have Rapunzel syndrome for years before you have symptoms. For example, symptoms like belly pain and bloating happen as a trichobezoar forms in your stomach. But you may not notice changes in your body until the ball of hair grows so large that it fills your stomach and small intestine.
Rapunzel syndrome causes
Rapunzel syndrome can happen if you have both
trichotillomania
(pronounced “trick-oh-till-oh-main-ee-uh”) and
trichophagia
(pronounced “trick-oh-fay-gee-uh”). These are mental health conditions.
Trichotillomania is like an
obsessive-compulsive disorder
. If you have it, you have an intense urge to pull out strands of hair from the same spot on your body. People with Rapunzel syndrome pull hair from their scalp. Experts don’t know what causes trichotillomania.
Trichophagia is when you suck on, chew or eat your hair. It’s a type of
pica
. If you have pica, you have an urge to swallow things that aren’t food, like dirt and hair. Like trichotillomania, healthcare providers aren’t sure what causes trichophagia (hair eating disorder).
Complications
A large hairball in your gut can cause complications like:
Bowel obstruction
Hole (
perforation
) in your stomach or small bowel
Jaundice
if the trichobezoar blocks your
bile ducts
Malnutrition
Vomiting blood
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Rapunzel syndrome
A healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and do a
physical examination
. They’ll do tests to see what’s happening in your stomach and small bowel, like:
Abdominal ultrasound
CT scan
MRI
Upper endoscopy
Management and Treatment
How is Rapunzel syndrome treated?
You may have surgery to remove the trichobezoar. If surgery is necessary, your surgeon will talk to you about which procedure is best for your situation:
Endoscopy
:
Your provider uses a long, thin tube (endoscope) to reach the hairball in your stomach and small intestine. The endoscope has small tools that your provider uses to break up and remove the hairball.
Laparoscopy
:
This procedure involves small incisions (cuts) in your stomach. Your provider inserts a tiny camera to locate the hairball and small surgical tools to remove it.
Laparotomy:
Your provider may do surgery that opens your stomach to remove a very large hairball.
Mental health treatment
Your healthcare provider may recommend prescription medication and therapy.
Medications that treat trichotillomania include:
Antidepressants
Antipsychotic medications
Antiseizure medications
Mental health therapies for trichotillomania include:
Cognitive behavioral therapy
(talk therapy)
Habit reversal training
to help you replace behaviors, like pulling hair out
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you had surgery to remove a trichobezoar and have symptoms that may mean there’s an infection in the incision (cut) in your stomach. Common symptoms include:
Incision starts to look deeper, longer or wider (
wound dehiscence
) instead of smaller
Chills
Fever (greater than 101 degrees Fahrenheit or 38.4 degrees Celsius)
Thick, cloudy, white- or cream-colored discharge from the incision
Redness or color changes in your skin that go beyond the edge of the incision
Rapunzel syndrome happens because you have certain mental health issues that make you have the urge to pull your hair out and swallow it. If you’re receiving treatment for those conditions, contact your provider if it’s hard for you to manage that urge.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Rapunzel syndrome?
Typically, a trichobezoar in your stomach and small intestine won’t come back after treatment to remove it. It’s important to remember that a mental health condition may trigger your urge to eat your hair. You may need ongoing mental health support to manage the urge.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having Rapunzel syndrome may make you feel like you’re losing control of your body and your health. You may feel reluctant to tell a healthcare provider that you eat your hair. But your provider will support you without judgement. They’ll understand how Rapunzel syndrome affects your life and recommend treatment that will help you manage the urges that cause the syndrome. Managing those urges will help you take back control of your health.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment