Cracked Nipple (Nipple Fissure) Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cracked Nipples (Nipple Fissures)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cracked Nipples (Nipple Fissures)
Cracked nipples are common when breastfeeding. Your nipples might feel raw, chafed and sore. They may look crusty, flaky and scabbed. Organic nipple balm and warm compresses can help your nipples heal. A lactation consultant can teach you techniques for positioning and latching that reduce pressure on your nipples and prevent cracks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Nipple Fissures?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
What Are Nipple Fissures?
Nipple fissures are painful cracks in your nipple that can appear in one or both breasts. Most people with this issue say they have “cracked nipples.” You’re most likely to have cracked nipples if you’re
breastfeeding
,
especially if this is your first time.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cracked nipples can become so painful that they may keep you from nursing even if you’d prefer to continue. You might feel worried, frustrated or ready to give up. But cracked nipples are common and treatable with home remedies. And they don’t have to stop you from breastfeeding.
Lactation consultants
can teach you ways to adjust your nursing technique to protect your nipples.
In this article, we focus on cracked nipples related to breastfeeding. But it’s important to know there are other causes, too. For example, friction from clothes can irritate and crack your nipples. This happens to runners and cyclists, and it’s known as
jogger’s nipple
. Cracked nipples can also occur from skin conditions like
eczema
.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of cracked nipples
The main symptoms of cracked nipples are pain or
soreness
along with a split in your nipple’s surface. Symptoms often appear during the second or third week after your baby is born.
A cracked nipple can look:
Crusty, with flaky skin or scabs on or around your nipple
Red and dry, sometimes with more pronounced redness at the tip
Darkened or changed in color
A cracked nipple can feel:
Raw, chafed and dry
Irritated or itchy
Sore or painful
Like it’s splitting
Cracked nipple causes
Too much strain on your nipple tissue can cause cracks to develop. Common causes of such strain include:
Advertisement
Engorged breasts
: This is when your
breasts swell up
from extra fluid volume. It’s common in the first week after giving birth. The swelling can cause your nipple tissue to stretch and eventually crack.
Improper latch
:
If your baby isn’t
latching on
well, they may struggle to get more milk. This puts more strain on sensitive nipple tissue. Many things affect your baby’s latch — from their position at your breast to medical conditions like
tongue-tie
.
Breast pump issues
: You can develop nipple pain and fissures if the suction setting on your
breast pump
is too high. Using the wrong size flanges is another possible cause.
Frequent non-nutritive suckling
: This is when your infant latches on and suckles for comfort, rather than for milk.
Complications of this condition
Without treatment, cracked nipples can open up and bleed. It’s also possible for germs to enter the cracks in your skin, causing bacterial
mastitis
or an
abscess
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider can diagnose cracked nipples during a physical exam. They may suggest you see a lactation consultant or breastfeeding medicine specialist.
It’s not too difficult for your provider to identify nipple fissures. But the cause isn’t always so obvious. Providers will talk with you and may observe a breastfeeding session. They may also examine your baby’s mouth to check for issues like tongue-tie.
Knowing what’s causing your cracked nipples can help you and your provider treat them. This is because soothing the damaged skin will only help temporarily. You may need to make some changes to your breastfeeding technique to keep the fissures from coming back.
Management and Treatment
How are nipple fissures treated?
You can treat cracked nipples at home by:
Applying nipple balm that doesn’t contain lanolin
: You can buy this at your local store. Apply it liberally. Be sure to look for lanolin-free formulas. Lanolin is derived from sheep’s wool and may cause an allergic reaction, further irritating your nipples.
Applying MediHoney®
: This is a gel that can help heal your nipples. But don’t be misled by the name. This is a special medical formula with sterilized honey. Never apply honey from a jar to your nipples while breastfeeding as it can cause
botulism
in infants.
Using warm compresses and/or hydrogel nipple pads
: These can soothe nipple pain and promote healing.
Using unscented soaps, shampoos and conditioners
: This won’t directly treat cracked nipples from nursing. But scented products could cause
contact dermatitis
on your already irritated nipples. So, opt for fragrance-free whenever possible.
While your nipples heal, you might find nursing painful. It may help to alternate breasts so that you’re not putting too much strain on either nipple. You may also choose to pump and bottle feed as your skin heals. A lactation expert can advise you on how long to pump and how to use the pump correctly to prevent nipple soreness.
Advertisement
Your lactation expert may also suggest changes to your breastfeeding technique. For example, they can help you with:
Position
: You shouldn’t have to reposition yourself or shift your body while your baby’s nursing. Your baby shouldn’t have to turn their head to find your nipple. Small
position
changes can help reduce strain on your nipple.
Latch:
Your baby shouldn’t just suckle on your nipple. Their mouth should cover your entire nipple and most of your areola. This way, the suckling doesn’t place too much pressure on your nipple.
Pumping
: Setting the suction too high can hurt your nipples. Finding a comfortable yet effective level of suction eases strain on your nipples. It’s also important to use the correct flange size.
A proper position and latch can help your nipples heal and protect them from future damage.
How long do cracked nipples last?
It can take anywhere from a few days to a few weeks for cracked nipples to heal. But the soreness may improve much sooner.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if:
The cracks in your nipple aren’t healing
Your nipple feels swollen or warm to the touch
You have
flu-like symptoms
Your symptoms are making it hard to nurse or pump
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Cracked nipples can make the early bonding moments with your baby difficult to enjoy. When your nipples are raw and hurting, you may also wonder how long you’ll be able to continue breastfeeding.
Advertisement
That’s why it’s so important to reach out to a healthcare provider. Even if home remedies heal your nipples, your provider will still want to find the cause. Addressing the cause of cracked nipples is the only way to keep the issue from coming back or getting worse.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider