Aortic Valve Surgery: Replacement & Repair
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Aortic Valve Surgery
Advertisement
Advertisement
Aortic Valve Surgery
Aortic valve surgery is a lifesaving treatment for aortic valve disease. A surgeon repairs or replaces a damaged valve that connects your heart to your aorta. This improves heart function in people with a narrowed or leaky aortic valve. Surgeons use open-heart or minimally invasive methods. New valves come from animal tissue or human-made materials.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Aortic Valve Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Aortic valve surgery repairs or replaces your aortic valve to improve blood flow through your heart. Treating aortic valve disease allows your heart to pump blood out to your body more efficiently.
What is aortic valve surgery?
Aortic valve surgery is a treatment for
aortic valve disease
. It involves repairing or replacing your
aortic valve
. This “door” manages blood flow from your heart’s main pumping
chamber
(left ventricle) into your main artery (
aorta
). Your aorta sends oxygen-rich blood to your entire body, so it’s important that your aortic valve works well.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Aortic valve disease prevents your aortic valve from functioning as it should. Your valve opening may be too narrow, which limits how much blood can flow through. Or your valve may be leaky, which means some
blood
flows backward each time your valve closes. Some people are born with
congenital heart conditions
that may affect valve function.
Cardiac surgeons perform aortic valve surgery to treat:
Aortic valve regurgitation
(leaky valve)
Aortic valve stenosis
(narrowed valve opening)
Although the thought of aortic valve surgery may be overwhelming, an operation can address the valve issue you have. It can also lower your risk of complications of valve disease, like
heart failure
and
cardiac arrest
. Thousands of people have had successful aortic valve surgery.
How serious is aortic valve surgery?
Since aortic valve surgery takes multiple weeks of recovery afterward, it falls into the “serious” category. It also qualifies as “serious” because of the important role your aortic valve plays in getting oxygen-rich blood to your body.
Types of aortic valve surgery
There are two main types of aortic valve surgery:
Aortic valve repair
. Your surgeon fixes damaged parts of your valve while keeping as much of the natural tissue as possible.
Surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR)
. Your surgeon removes your damaged valve and puts a new one in its place. SAVR is an option for some people who aren’t candidates for
transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR/TAVI
). Instead of working through an incision in your chest, surgeons use a catheter that goes through your blood vessels for TAVR.
Advertisement
Many factors determine the type of surgery you need, including:
The results of your diagnostic tests
Your age
The structure of your
heart
The presence of other medical conditions
Your surgeon will talk to you about your options and explain the most appropriate treatment plan for you. If you’re getting a
heart valve replacement
, you may receive a valve made of animal or human tissue. Another option is a mechanical valve. Each type has its pros and cons, so be sure to discuss these with your surgeon.
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for aortic heart valve surgery?
In addition to giving you a
physical exam
, your healthcare provider may order tests before your surgery. Possible tests include:
Cardiac catheterization (heart cath)
Chest X-ray
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Echocardiogram (echo)
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Lab tests, including
blood tests
and
urine tests
Your provider will give you instructions that you should follow closely. These instructions will tell you:
When you should begin fasting (stop eating and drinking), which is usually after midnight the night before your surgery
Whether you should make any changes to your medication schedule
When to arrive at the hospital
Ask your provider if anything is unclear. It’s important to understand exactly what you need to do before your surgery.
What happens during aortic valve surgery?
To perform aortic valve surgery, your surgeon and care team will:
Give you
anesthesia
so you’ll be asleep and pain-free during the surgery
Make one or more cuts in your
skin
(incisions) to access your heart
Connect you to a
heart-lung machine
Stop your heart so your surgeon can work on it
Repair or replace your aortic valve
Restart your heart
Disconnect you from the heart and lung machine
Close your incision(s)
Move you to a recovery area
The exact details of your surgery depend on the surgical approach.
Approaches to aortic valve surgery
Approaches to aortic valve replacement or repair surgery include:
Traditional open-heart surgery
. Your surgeon makes a
6- to 8-inch incision
down the center of your chest to access your heart.
Minimally invasive heart surgery
. Your surgeon uses smaller, 2- to 4-inch incisions without opening your whole chest. This typically involves a “J” incision. This approach reduces blood loss, trauma and length of hospital stay. You may also have a faster recovery.
The most suitable method for you depends on many factors, including:
The nature of your valve disease (for example, how complex it is)
Other heart problems that require treatment
Your overall health
Considerations based on the anatomy of your chest
Advertisement
Your surgeon will talk to you about the approach that’s best for you, and why.
How long does it take?
Aortic valve surgery takes at least two hours. The length of time varies by the type of surgery you have.
What happens after aortic valve surgery?
Here’s what you can expect after your surgery:
You’ll recover in the intensive care unit (ICU) and then a regular hospital room. The total hospital stay after heart valve surgery is typically five to seven days.
Your care team will monitor your
vital signs
and encourage you to start moving around a little more each day.
Your provider may recommend
cardiac rehab
to help you continue your recovery and regain your strength.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Aortic Valve Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of aortic valve surgery?
Aortic valve surgery is lifesaving. It fixes problems with your heart valve that, over time, could be fatal without treatment. Aortic valve disease is the deadliest form of valve disease. It accounts for more than 60% of all deaths from any type of valve disease.
So, surgery to repair or replace your aortic valve can help you live longer. It can also relieve symptoms so you feel better day to day.
What is the success rate of aortic valve surgery?
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) has a 92%
success rate
. For aortic valve repair,
multiple studies
have reported high survival rates without the need for a second operation for most people.
Advertisement
What are the risks or complications?
Like all surgeries, aortic valve surgery has some risks. Possible complications include:
Allergic reaction
to anesthesia
Bleeding
Heart attack
Heart failure
Infection in your wound, heart valve,
bladder
or
lung
Blood clots
Stroke
Abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia)
, which is usually temporary
Kidneys
not working as well as usual, which is temporary
Risks are higher for some people compared to others. Factors that influence your risk for complications include:
Your age
Your medical conditions
The method of surgery (open vs. minimally invasive)
Talk to your healthcare provider about your level of risk and how to lower it.
Can you repair an aortic valve without surgery?
Nonsurgical treatments like medications may help manage your aortic valve disease for a long time. But you may need surgery if you have symptoms, evidence of heart damage or heart failure. That doesn’t mean you need open-heart surgery, though. You may be a candidate for a type of aortic valve replacement your surgeon can do without opening your chest.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time?
Recovery from aortic heart valve surgery generally takes four to eight weeks. It may be shorter if you have minimally invasive surgery.
You can expect to feel tired for a few weeks after your surgery. That’s normal, and it’s important not to push yourself. Still, it’s also important to follow your healthcare provider’s guidance for exercise, including cardiac rehab. A gradual, safe return to movement will support your recovery and long-term health. Your provider will tell you when it’s safe to drive or lift heavy objects.
Advertisement
Remember that each person’s recovery is unique. Try not to compare your recovery or how you’re feeling to others who’ve had heart surgery. If you need more time to feel normal again, that’s OK. Give your body the time it needs to rest and heal.
You can expect to have a follow-up appointment with a healthcare provider during the first week after your surgery. You’ll have another visit about six weeks after surgery. After that, you’ll return as often as your provider recommends.
Some people experience
depression
after heart surgery. This is common and treatable. Talk to your healthcare provider or a counselor if you have symptoms of depression. These may include feeling very sad or hopeless or losing interest in your usual activities.
When can I go back to work?
You can return to work in about six to 12 weeks. This can vary depending on the type of surgery you have and the type of work you do. If you have a job that’s physically demanding, you’ll need more time to recover.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your healthcare provider if you have signs of complications, like:
Chest
pain
or
pressure
Drainage or pus around your
incision
site
Fever
or chills
Heart palpitations
Pain near your incision
Swelling or redness around your incision site
Swelling (
edema
) in your legs or feet
Weight gain of more than 3 pounds in one week
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The thought of someone operating on your heart can make you uneasy. Talk to your healthcare provider about the benefits and risks of aortic valve surgery in your situation. Make sure you understand exactly what’s involved and what your outlook will be after the surgery. You may also want to ask your surgeon about the number of surgeries they’ve performed and their success rate. Having surgery at a high-volume hospital that commonly treats aortic valve disease can help you get the best possible outcome.
As you plan your surgery, talk to your family and friends about it. Offer them chances to help you prepare and recover. Having a support system close by can aid your physical and emotional recovery from this major life event.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have aortic heart valve disease, you want the best care. Cleveland Clinic is number one in the nation for heart health. We’re ready to help you.
Aortic Valve Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/27/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment