Tumor Lysis Syndrome (TLS)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tumor Lysis Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tumor Lysis Syndrome
Tumor lysis syndrome is a group of potentially life-threatening conditions that may happen within hours after cancer treatment. The condition can rapidly become a medical emergency. Treatment is medication and IV hydration. Healthcare providers focus on preventing tumor lysis syndrome before it can happen.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Tumor Lysis Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Tumor Lysis Syndrome?
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) is a serious complication of
cancer treatment
. In TLS, dying cancer cells flood your bloodstream with toxic substances, as well as high levels of uric acid, potassium and phosphate. You also have low calcium levels. This condition is a medical emergency because it may cause kidney failure and cardiac arrest.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of tumor lysis syndrome
Tumor lysis syndrome may develop during treatment or within 12 to 72 hours after you receive treatment. Your care team will check on issues during and right after your treatment. But if you’re recovering at home, get help right away if you have the following symptoms:
Nausea and vomiting
Shortness of breath
Diarrhea
Peeing less than usual
Weakness and lethargy
Blood in your pee
Seizures
Muscle cramps
Fainting
Irregular heartbeat
Low blood pressure
Joint pain
Tumor lysis syndrome causes
Receiving chemotherapy for cancer is the most common cause. But you may develop tumor lysis syndrome if your treatment includes steroids, targeted therapy or immunotherapy.
TLS happens when substances inside dying cancer cells get into your bloodstream and flow into your kidneys. Normally, your kidneys filter and get rid of these substances. When cancer treatment kills lots of cancer cells, your kidneys can’t filter substances fast enough. You then develop the following conditions:
High levels of
uric acid
that damage your kidneys and cause
kidney failure
High phosphorus levels, which may affect your kidneys
High
potassium levels
that affect your heart rate and cause
cardiac arrest
Low calcium levels
, which can lead to cardiac arrest or muscle cramps and contractions
Advertisement
Who could be affected by this?
Not everyone treated for cancer will develop tumor lysis syndrome. It most often affects people receiving treatment for certain types of cancer that grow quickly, including:
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma, including Burkitt lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
Small cell lung cancer
Testicular cancer
Risk factors
Some health issues and conditions increase your risk of tumor lysis syndrome. Your cancer care team will take steps to reduce your risk before you receive treatment. Issues that may increase risk include:
Dehydration
High uric acid levels before treatment
High white blood cell count
Preexisting kidney issues
A large amount of cancer before treatment initiation
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose the condition
Healthcare providers diagnose tumor lysis syndrome by checking for changes in your uric acid, phosphorus levels, potassium levels and calcium levels. Providers may use the term “tumor lysis syndrome hallmarks” or “tumor lysis syndrome cardinals.” They’ll do blood tests and imaging tests.
Blood tests
Your care team will do the following blood tests:
CBC
CMP
BUN test
CK test
LDH test
Uric acid
Imaging tests
They’ll do imaging tests to look for issues with your kidneys that TLS may cause. Sometimes, you may get a CT scan to determine the amount of cancer you may have.
Other tests
Your care team will do urinalysis to check for abnormalities in your pee and an
ECG
to look for signs of an irregular heartbeat.
Management and Treatment
How is tumor lysis syndrome treated?
Your cancer care team treats the syndrome conditions with medication, dialysis and diuretics:
Medication
: You may receive
allopurinol
(Aloprim
®
),
rasburicase
(Elitek
®
) and
sodium bicarbonate
. These drugs remove excess uric acid or break up uric acid in your kidneys.
Hydration
: You’ll receive a large amount of hydration to flush the kidneys of toxins.
Dialysis
: You may have this treatment if you have severe kidney damage. Dialysis helps remove excess minerals.
Diuretics
: This makes you pee a lot. Frequent peeing helps remove excess minerals and uric acid.
Outlook / Prognosis
Can people survive tumor lysis syndrome?
Yes, but tumor lysis syndrome can be life-threatening. That’s why your cancer care team will constantly check to see how your body reacts to treatment. Your team will act right away to manage any signs of TLS. The type of cancer you have and your overall health affect the impact that TLS may have. As with all cancer treatments, your care team will explain the risks and side effects of the treatment you’ll receive.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Cancer treatment can be tough, especially when it works so well that it rapidly kills cancer cells and causes tumor lysis syndrome. Before you start treatment, your cancer care team will let you know if there’s a chance treatment will cause tumor lysis syndrome. If you’re at risk, they’ll take steps to prevent it. Your team will understand if you have questions and concerns. Don’t hesitate to ask if you need more information about what to expect.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/06/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials