Liver Lesions: What They Are, Types, Symptoms & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Liver Lesions
Advertisement
Advertisement
Liver Lesions
A Iiver lesion is an abnormal growth on your liver. The growth may be benign (noncancerous) or malignant (cancerous). A benign liver lesion may not cause symptoms. Cancerous liver lesions may cause a lump below your rib cage, abdominal pain or symptoms of jaundice. Early diagnosis and treatment can help you live longer with liver cancer.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Liver Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What are liver lesions?
Liver lesions are abnormal growths that develop in your liver. A healthcare provider may refer to the growths as masses or tumors. A liver lesion may not cause changes in your body. You may find out you have one when you have tests for another health issue.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Liver lesions may be benign (noncancerous) or cancerous (
malignant
). Benign lesions occur for a variety of reasons and are typically not a cause for concern. Malignant lesions (liver cancer) are more serious health issues.
Benign liver lesions
Types of benign liver lesions include:
Focal nodular hyperplasia
. This is a mass of abnormal cells. The mass develops when something increases blood flow in your liver.
Hemangioma
. This is a group of abnormal
blood vessels
that develop into a cluster or group of blood vessels.
Liver
adenomas
. These are benign tumors. They typically develop near the surface of your liver.
Liver cysts
. These are fluid-filled sacs on your liver.
Malignant liver lesions
Malignant (cancerous) liver lesions can start in your liver. Healthcare providers may call this primary liver cancer.
Hepatocellular carcinoma
and
cholangiocarcinoma
(bile duct cancer) are the most common types of primary liver cancer.
But you can have a liver lesion if cancer from another area of your body
spreads
to your liver.
Colorectal cancer
and
lung cancer
are examples of cancers that spread to your liver.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of liver lesions
Benign liver lesions typically don’t cause symptoms. Very rarely, a benign liver lesion may get big enough to press on your stomach or gallbladder. For example, liver hemangiomas can grow to be 30 centimeters (about 12 inches). Pressure from a large, benign liver lesion can cause
abdominal pain
.
Advertisement
Malignant liver lesions cause very different symptoms, including:
A lump below your rib cage
Pain on the right side of your abdomen or under your right shoulder
Yellow skin and whites of eyes from j
aundice
Liver lesion causes
Experts aren’t sure what causes benign liver lesions. Some potential causes are:
Estrogen in
birth control pills
or
hormone replacement therapy
Scarring (fibrosis) from chronic
liver disease
Smoking
that puts stress on your liver
A malignant liver lesion happens when normal liver cells develop into abnormal cells that multiply uncontrollably. Having
cirrhosis
or chronic (long-term)
hepatitis B
and
hepatitis C
increases your risk.
Complications of liver lesions
Some benign liver lesions grow big enough to cause
belly pain
. Malignant liver lesions are types of liver cancer. Hepatocellular carcinoma can lead to
liver failure
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose liver lesions
A healthcare provider will ask you to describe your symptoms. They’ll ask questions about your health. They may ask if you’re receiving treatment for a liver disease.
They’ll do a
physical exam
. They may do certain tests to diagnose liver lesions. Tests may include
Imaging tests like
CT scans
,
liver ultrasounds
or
MRI scans
Blood tests
that detect
tumor markers
Liver biopsy
Management and Treatment
Treatments for liver lesions
Treatment is different for benign and cancerous liver lesions. You may have surgery to remove a large benign liver lesion that causes symptoms. Potential treatments for malignant liver lesions may include:
Ablation therapy
Chemotherapy
Hepatectomy (liver resection)
Liver transplantation
Can a liver heal a liver lesion on its own?
Your liver is the only organ that can make new cells (regenerate) to replace liver cells. For example, if you have surgery to remove part of your liver, it can make enough new liver cells to restore it. And your liver may be able to heal some of the damage from liver disease that causes benign liver lesions. But your liver can’t heal a malignant liver lesion.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Both types of liver lesions can cause belly pain. Pain in your belly that lasts for more than a few days is a reason to talk to a healthcare provider.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Liver Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a liver lesion?
The outlook for a benign liver lesion is good. These lesions rarely grow large enough to cause symptoms. The situation is very different if you have a malignant liver lesion (liver cancer). In some cases, treatment can cure hepatocellular cancer. Bile duct cancer in your liver is more challenging to treat. If you have liver cancer, ask your healthcare provider to explain what you can expect.
Prevention
Can liver lesions be prevented?
There’s no known way to prevent benign liver lesions. Malignant liver lesions happen when conditions like cirrhosis damage your liver cells. You can keep your liver in good health by:
Avoiding
viral infections
that lead to
hepatitis
Avoiding things that put stress on your liver like
alcohol
and tobacco
Eating well
by planning meals that are a balance of fruits, vegetables and lean protein
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Many things can cause belly pain. A liver lesion is just one of several potential causes. You can have one without having symptoms. So, learning you have a liver lesion can be an unwelcome surprise. You’ll need more tests before a healthcare provider can say if the growth on your liver is cancer. Your healthcare provider will explain why they recommend specific tests.
You may have questions about what tests may show and next steps. Don’t hesitate to ask questions. Your provider will be glad to explain their recommendations.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic providers compassionately diagnose and treat all liver diseases using advanced therapies backed by the latest research.
Liver Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us