Microscopic Colitis: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Microscopic Colitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Microscopic Colitis
Microscopic colitis is a type of inflammatory bowel disease, which is chronic inflammation in your colon. It causes frequent, watery diarrhea and abdominal pain. Changing what you eat and taking medication can help manage flare-ups when they occur.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Inflammatory Bowel Disease Treatment
Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Microscopic Colitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Microscopic Colitis?
Microscopic colitis (MC) is an
inflammatory disease
that causes frequent, watery
diarrhea
. It can be hard to diagnose because imaging tests often look normal unless your provider analyzes tissue samples from your colon.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
“
Colitis
” refers to inflammation of the inner lining of your colon (large intestine). It’s called “microscopic” because it can only be seen under a microscope.
If you have microscopic colitis, the cells in your intestinal lining are irritated. Microscopic colitis may come and go. It may flare up in reaction to certain triggers, then subside on its own, and then return. While it’s a lifelong condition, it’s usually manageable with medication and by avoiding certain foods.
Types of microscopic colitis
Healthcare providers diagnose microscopic colitis by looking at a sample of your colon tissue under a microscope. When they do, they’ll recognize certain features in the cells. Different features suggest different types of the disease. There are two main types:
Collagenous colitis
:
Collagen
and
elastin
make up the connective tissue of your colon lining. With this type of MC, collagen bands under the surface lining of your colon are thicker than usual.
Lymphocytic colitis
: The surface layer of your colon lining has a high level of white blood cells. The layer of collagen under the surface is normal or only slightly thicker than usual.
These two variations of microscopic colitis have the same symptoms and treatment. Their differences only appear under the microscope.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of microscopic colitis
The main symptom of microscopic colitis is having
watery diarrhea
around five to 10 times per day.
Other common symptoms include:
Abdominal pain and cramping
Abdominal distension
and bloating
Urgency to poop and trouble holding poop in
Noisy digestive system
Microscopic colitis causes
Scientists aren’t exactly sure what causes microscopic colitis. But they suspect it may involve the following factors:
Exposure to certain bacteria, toxins or viruses
Immune system dysfunction (
autoimmune disease
)
Genetics
Some research suggests that certain medications may contribute to the problem, including:
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
Beta-blockers
Statins
Can stress trigger microscopic colitis?
There’s some
evidence
that anxiety and depression can trigger colitis symptoms. Stress can impact your hormone levels and activate your fight-or-flight response, which can affect your digestive system. Your brain and your gut use many of the same
neurotransmitters
.
Risk factors for microscopic colitis
Anyone can get it, but it’s more common in people who:
Are
females
over 60
Have autoimmune diseases(especially
celiac disease
)
Smoke
Complications of microscopic colitis
MC doesn’t usually cause serious complications. But persistent diarrhea could lead to
dehydration
, weight loss or
malnutrition
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose microscopic colitis
A
gastroenterologist
diagnoses the condition. They can only diagnose microscopic colitis after they take and analyze a tissue sample from your colon. This usually comes during a
colonoscopy
and
biopsy
.
They may also order blood tests,
stool tests
or imaging tests, depending on your symptoms.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for microscopic colitis?
Treatment can vary depending on your symptoms and how severe they are. They range from food and lifestyle changes to over-the-counter and prescription medications. Symptoms may flare up and then go away on their own. You may be able to manage your symptoms with food changes alone, or you may need to use medication at times.
Common medications include:
Bulking agents
, such as
psyllium
, to make your poop more solid
Anti-diarrheals
like
loperamide
or
diphenoxylate
to slow down your poop
Bismuth subsalicylate
(Pepto Bismol
®
) for diarrhea
Budesonide
, a corticosteroid that reduces inflammation
Other recommendations for treatment could involve:
Adjusting your usual medications
Quitting smoking
Identifying any
food intolerances
What kind of diet is helpful for microscopic colitis?
What you eat can play a role in managing your symptoms. Reducing foods that trigger your symptoms is usually one of the first recommendations your provider will give you. Your trigger foods will be specific to you, and identifying them can take some trial and error.
Advertisement
Some common food-related suggestions are:
Eliminating triggers
: Some of the most common trigger foods include alcohol, caffeine, gluten, dairy and sugar.
Low fat and low fiber
: To manage flare-ups, some healthcare providers recommend a
gastrointestinal soft diet
, which is made up of low-fat and low-fiber foods. Reducing fat and fiber in your diet gives your digestive system less work to do.
Elimination diet
: One way to isolate trigger foods is to try an elimination diet, such as the
low-FODMAP diet
. This short-term diet eliminates certain foods and then reintroduces them in a systematic way.
Anti-inflammatory diet
: Certain foods may reduce inflammation. The Mediterranean diet is a good example of a diet that promotes anti-inflammatory foods.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of microscopic colitis — frequent diarrhea and abdominal pain. They can examine you and determine if microscopic colitis is causing your symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Inflammatory Bowel Disease Treatment
Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Does microscopic colitis ever go away?
Not forever, but it may go away for a while. When it does, it’s called being in remission. Remission might last for months or years. But certain triggers can cause it to return. You can minimize these flare-ups by learning to recognize your triggers.
How long will my microscopic colitis flare-up last?
It’s different for everyone, but flare-ups typically last for days to weeks. Many people find that they can reduce their flare-ups by avoiding triggers or taking medication.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Microscopic colitis isn’t as well understood as some of the other inflammatory bowel diseases. But it doesn’t mean it’s not manageable. If your provider gives you a diagnosis, you may feel relief at having answers. But you may also wonder if you’ll always have unpredictable symptoms like diarrhea.
It may take some trial and error, but the right combination of medication and food changes can usually help you feel better. Talk to your healthcare provider about your symptoms and how they affect your daily routine. They can help find a solution.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
You don’t have to let inflammatory bowel disease control your life. Cleveland Clinic is here to help you feel like yourself again.
Adult Inflammatory Bowel Disease Treatment
Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us