Alien Hand Syndrome: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Alien Hand Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Alien Hand Syndrome
Alien hand syndrome can feel like someone else is controlling your hand’s movements. Your hand may perform goal-directed activities that you don’t tell it to do, like grabbing objects or buttoning a shirt. This can happen after an injury or surgery to your brain or with certain conditions. Some cases don’t last long, but others can persist for years.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is alien hand syndrome?
Alien hand syndrome occurs when your hand or limb (arm) acts independently from other parts of your body. It can feel like your hand has a mind of its own. Though rare, it can also sometimes affect your legs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
With this condition, you aren’t in control of what your hand does. Your hand doesn’t respond to your direction and performs involuntary actions or movements.
Your hand may lift and levitate in the air. It may grab objects and not let them go. Your hand can undo previously completed actions, like untying your shoes after you just finished tying them. Your leg may move or step involuntarily.
This phenomenon can be a terrifying experience. You might feel like you’ve entered a horror movie and someone or something else is controlling this part of your body.
Alien hand syndrome can happen with several underlying conditions or trauma, as well as after some types of brain surgery.
This condition isn’t common. You may hear a healthcare provider refer to it as alien limb syndrome or “Dr. Strangelove syndrome” (named after a character in a 1964 film of the same name).
What are the types of alien hand syndrome?
There are five types of alien hand syndrome:
Diagnostic dyspraxia (intermanual conflict)
. One of your hands acts independently from the other.
Alien hand sign
. You believe that your hand isn’t your own.
Anarchic hand syndrome
. Your hand performs a task that you have no control over.
Supernumerary hand
. You feel like you have an extra limb.
Levitating hand
. Your hand raises on its own.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of alien hand syndrome?
The symptoms of alien hand syndrome vary but could include the following involuntary actions or tasks performed by one hand outside of your control:
Touching parts of your body, clothing, objects, etc.
Holding objects and not being able to release them
Raising your hand
Waving or moving your fingers
Difficulty performing tasks using both hands
Walking or stepping (if it affects a leg)
You might try to turn on a light switch with one hand, and your affected hand turns it off. Your affected hand might pick up an object, and you need to use your unaffected hand to pry the object out of it. You could be reading a book, and your affected hand lifts up from the binding and rests in the air like it’s floating above your head. Your affected hand could slap you repeatedly and potentially cause injury.
Other symptoms that can happen with alien hand syndrome may include:
Weakness in an arm or leg
Difficulty speaking (
aphasia
)
Trouble identifying touched and seen objects (anomia)
Difficulty reading and writing (when previously able to)
Which hand does alien hand syndrome affect?
The affected hand varies based on the location of a
lesion
or injury in your
brain
, for example:
Left medial
frontal lobe
: Right hand
Corpus callosum
: Left hand
Right
parietal lobe
: Left hand
Some cases can affect a leg. Other cases can affect both hands.
What causes alien hand syndrome?
A lesion or injury to one of the following areas of the brain causes alien hand syndrome:
Corpus callosum
: The middle of your brain between the right and left hemispheres
Parietal region
: The top, back part of your brain, under the crown of your skull
Frontal region
: The part of your brain behind your forehead
Any type of trauma to these areas of your brain may happen after:
Surgery (like a
corpus callosotomy
,
deep brain stimulation
or removing a
tumor
in the frontal lobe)
An underlying condition
When you want to move your hand, a network of neurons (
nerve
cells) in your brain turn on (activate). If you have alien hand syndrome, the activation only happens in certain areas of the brain (isolated activation). This shows that nerve cells aren’t activating or communicating as they should.
What conditions cause alien hand syndrome?
Several conditions can lead to alien hand syndrome, including but not limited to, the following:
Alzheimer’s disease
Brain tumor
Corticobasal syndrome (CBS)
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(CJD)
Intracranial hemorrhage
Migraine aura
Multiple sclerosis
Parkinson’s disease
Parry-Romberg syndrome
Subdural hematoma
While extremely rare, a few reported cases occur with
stroke
.
Advertisement
What are the risk factors for alien hand syndrome?
You may be more at risk of developing alien hand syndrome if you have a condition that targets:
Nerve cells (
neurodegeneration
)
The protective cover (
myelin
) around nerve cells (
demyelination
)
Prion proteins (prion disease)
Most cases of alien hand syndrome affect adults, but it can also affect children.
What are the complications of alien hand syndrome?
Involuntary actions can have a major effect on how you feel about your body and your mental health. When you can’t regulate the actions of part of your body, you might stop recognizing the affected hand or limb as your own. This can cause:
Depression
Anxiety
Fear or paranoia
In addition, alien hand syndrome can cause injury. Your affected hand may grab objects that you shouldn’t touch, such as a hot pan or a sharp knife blade. You may also physically injure yourself with a slapping or punching movement.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is alien hand syndrome diagnosed?
There isn’t a specific test to diagnose alien hand syndrome. A healthcare provider will review your symptoms and observe your movements during a
physical exam
. Let them know if you had brain surgery or a head injury.
Several medical conditions can cause involuntary movements. Tests can rule out conditions with similar symptoms. Your provider may order an imaging test like an
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) to look for lesions in your brain.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is alien hand syndrome treated?
A healthcare provider may offer treatment options to manage any underlying conditions or reduce symptoms of alien hand syndrome, like:
Medications
. A provider may treat involuntary movements with
antiseizure medications
or neuromuscular blocking agents. Other medications may be an option depending on what symptoms you experience.
Botulinum toxin injections
.
Botulinum toxin
(Botox
®
) can temporarily prevent muscle movement in an area of your body. This can help with involuntary movements, but repeat treatment is necessary after several months.
Mirror box therapy
. A mirror can create an illusion to convince your brain to believe that one of your limbs moved voluntarily and is within your control.
Distractions
. If your affected hand grasps objects often, you can place a ball or soft object within reach to distract it. You can also place this hand in a pocket to prevent any unanticipated actions.
Therapies
. A provider may recommend
physical therapy
,
occupational therapy
or
cognitive behavioral therapy
to improve your physical and mental health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is there a cure for alien hand syndrome?
There is no known cure available for alien hand syndrome.
How long does alien hand syndrome last?
The length of this phenomenon varies from person to person. The shortest reported case lasted for 30 minutes. Other reports note alien hand syndrome can last for several days to years. Treatment can help you manage symptoms and better your mental health.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can alien hand syndrome be prevented?
There isn’t a known way to prevent alien hand syndrome. It happens after conditions, surgeries or injuries to your brain. You can protect yourself from injury by wearing a helmet when applicable, for example.
You may be able to reduce how often symptoms affect you by:
Occupying your affected hand (giving it something to hold on to)
Putting your hand in your pocket or wearing a glove or mitten
Giving your affected hand verbal commands
Following muscle relaxation techniques
Some of these may work better than others. Each person’s body reacts differently.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
If you experience involuntary movements, contact a healthcare provider. While rare, some cases of alien hand syndrome can indicate a stroke. If you experience stroke-like symptoms (one-sided weakness, vision changes, confusion, etc.), contact 911 or your local emergency services number.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
What caused this condition?
What treatment options do you recommend?
Are there side effects of treatment?
How can I improve my mental health?
How can I distract my affected hand?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Alien hand syndrome is not only frustrating and annoying, but it is also a very scary condition to experience. Your hand moves as if it has a mind of its own and doesn’t listen to you when you tell it to stop. It could feel like someone else is controlling a part of your body. This sense of helplessness can have a major effect on your physical and mental health. A provider can help you find ways to treat this condition. They can also recommend tricks or relaxation techniques so when involuntary movement happens, it’s less of a distraction.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/09/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment