Pain Medications After Surgery: Types, Benefits & Risks
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Pain Medications After Surgery
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pain Medications After Surgery
You’ll feel some pain after having any type of surgery. It’s part of your body’s healing process. No option is automatically the best for everyone, but your surgeon will suggest a combination of medications to help you feel comfortable while you recover.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Your surgeon will recommend the right medications to help you manage pain safely.
How can I plan ahead to manage pain after surgery?
Everyone feels some pain after surgery. It doesn’t matter whether you’re having a planned operation or emergency trauma surgery. You’ll feel pain from the surgery itself and as your body heals. Managing that pain is an important part of the healing process.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you know you’re going to need surgery, talk to your surgeon about pain management ahead of time. They’ll answer any questions you have and help you know what to expect. You may want to talk to your surgeon about:
How much pain you should expect
Your natural pain tolerance (especially if you’ve had surgery before)
Any allergies or reactions you’ve had to medications
Which medications or over-the-counter supplements you’re taking
If you have a
substance use disorder
Potential side effects or complications of any pain medications they may prescribe
Your surgeon will suggest a combination of pain management techniques to help keep you comfortable and safe after surgery. For most people, that includes at least one kind of medication.
Types of pain after surgery
How your body responds to a surgery will depend on lots of factors. The type of surgery you have, your natural pain tolerance and age can all affect how you feel after an operation. You’re probably expecting to feel pain around your surgery site, but you might also feel:
Muscle pain
.
You may feel pain in muscles throughout your body. It can be from the surgery itself, but many people clench their muscles without thinking about it (unconsciously) when they feel pain or stress after surgery.
Throat pain
.
Your throat may feel sore or scratchy, especially if your care team
intubated
you.
Movement pain.
Sitting up, walking and coughing are all important after surgery, but they may cause increased pain.
Advertisement
Pain can cause a variety of different feelings. The pain may feel:
Sharp
Stabbing
Throbbing
Aching
Burning
Tell your care team where it hurts and how the pain feels. This will help them understand what’s going on inside your body so they can manage the pain.
What is the best pain medication for after surgery?
There’s no single medication that’s best for everyone. Your body, health and post-surgery healing process are unique. Something that’s a good option for you may not work for someone else.
There are several kinds of pain medications your surgeon may give you after surgery. They may give you IV (intravenous) infusions of medications if you’re staying in the hospital. Many of the most common pain medications you’ll need are pills that you’ll take by mouth (orally).
Some of the most common types of post-surgery pain meds include:
NSAIDs
NSAIDs
relieve pain and reduce
inflammation
. Your surgeon may suggest over-the-counter NSAIDs or a prescription-strength version. Common NSAIDs include:
Aspirin
(Bayer®, St. Joseph®)
Ibuprofen
(Motrin®, Advil®)
Naproxen sodium
(Aleve®)
Indomethacin
(Indocin®)
Ketorolac
(Toradol®)
Opioids (narcotics)
Opioids
are prescription medications that bind to receptors in your
brain
and body to reduce pain signals. Opioids are powerful medications and can be
addictive
. Many healthcare providers are prescribing opioids less often or in smaller doses to reduce the risks of complications. There are more than 100 types of opioids, including:
Hydrocodone (Vicodin®)
Oxycodone
(OxyContin®, Percocet®)
Codeine
Fentanyl
Methadone
Topical anesthetics
Topical anesthetics are medications that numb a specific part or area of your body. Providers sometimes call them local anesthetics. Your surgeon may prescribe a topical anesthetic that keeps the area around your surgery site numb. These can include patches, creams or ointments that you put on your skin. Common local anesthetics include:
Lidocaine
Benzocaine
Dibucaine
Phenol
Pramoxine
Other pain medications
Your surgeon may suggest other medications alongside some of the types above. For example, you might need over-the-counter or prescription acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or a
muscle relaxer
.
If you’re staying in the hospital after a major surgery, your care team may use specific pain medications like:
Nerve blocks
Post-surgery
anesthesia
A
patient-controlled analgesia pump
Epidurals
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of pain medications after surgery?
It might seem obvious, but reducing how much pain you feel is the biggest benefit of taking pain medication after a surgery. This isn’t just about keeping you comfortable. Although that’s an important part of
pain management
. Your body heals faster when you’re not in pain. Reducing your pain can actually help speed up your recovery.
Managing pain can also reduce the risk of complications after a surgery. If the pain is well-managed, it will be easier for you to walk, move or breathe deeply. This can reduce your risk of
pneumonia
,
blood clots
and other issues.
Advertisement
What are the risks of post-surgery pain meds?
All medications can cause side effects. Some of the most common side effects of pain medications can include:
Nausea and vomiting
Drowsiness
Dizziness
Itching
Internal bleeding (
hemorrhage
)
Liver
damage
Opioids can be habit-forming and cause
opioid use disorder
. If you take too many at once (or too often), you can experience an
opioid overdose
, which can be fatal. Your surgeon will check your medical history and addiction risk before giving you opioids. Tell them if you or anyone in your biological family has a history of substance use disorders.
Your care team will discuss the risks of side effects and complications of any medications you’ll need. Tell them if you’re worried about any specific risks or if you’re unsure about how you’ll respond to medications. They’ll help you find safe, effective options to manage the pain.
Recovery and Outlook
How soon will I feel better after starting pain medication?
How quickly a pain medication starts working can vary. Most medications should start reducing the pain within an hour or two. Ask your care team how quickly you should feel your medicine working. They’ll let you know what to expect.
How often can I take pain medication?
Your surgeon will give you specific instructions about taking pain medicine. They’ll tell you how much medicine you can take and how often it’s safe for you to take it.
Advertisement
You may not feel enough pain to need medicine as often as you’re allowed to take it. That’s OK. If you aren’t feeling pain, it’s usually safe to skip a dose and wait until the pain gets worse or it’s the next scheduled time to take your medication. Ask your surgeon if it’s safe for you to skip doses if you’re not in pain.
Your surgeon may also suggest that you take your medications on a set schedule, whether or not you feel intense pain. This can help you “stay ahead” of pain to avoid feeling a lot all of a sudden.
Ask your surgeon which pain management plan they think is best based on the surgery you had and the medications you’re taking.
Can I ask for more pain meds after surgery?
Talk to your surgeon if you feel like you’re in more pain than you should be. They might be able to adjust your dose. Post-surgery pain meds can have complex interactions with medications you have at home.
Your surgeon can also adjust which type of medication for pain you’re using. Some medications (especially opioids) have a limited dose and you may not be able to get more after you’ve finished the initial course.
Don’t feel guilty about calling or talking to your care team if you’re hurting. Some people feel like they’re “bugging” their care team with questions. It’s always OK to ask your doctor these questions. Your providers are there to help, no matter what. Making sure you’re healing properly is always important to them.
Advertisement
Never take more medication than your care team says is safe. You’re much more likely to experience severe complications if you take too much pain medicine.
How can I control pain at home?
Most of your pain management will happen at home after you leave the hospital or surgery center. Taking your medications will be part of your pain management plan, but you may also want to:
Get enough rest.
Sleep
is extremely important to help your body heal. Talk to your surgeon if you aren’t sleeping well after surgery.
Make sure you’re comfortable.
Plan ahead to move pillows, cushions or other supportive devices into your bed or wherever you’ll be spending lots of time throughout your day. You may need to adjust to sleeping or sitting in a different position than usual. You can practice these new positions ahead of time to help your body get used to the changes before your surgery.
Take pain medication before activity or at bedtime.
Your pain medication schedule will probably have a little flexibility in it. You may want to take pain meds before you do movements, exercises or other physical activities. Taking your medications right before bedtime can help you get to sleep more easily. Remember, never take extra medication unless your care team says it’s safe to.
Use ways to
relieve pain without medication
.
Breathing exercises,
meditation
, listening to relaxing music or watching a comforting movie or TV show can all help manage pain. Your care team may suggest heat therapy or cold therapy, too. They’ll tell you how to safely apply heating pads, ice or cooling pads. Heat or ice can be good ways to manage pain in between doses of medication.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your surgeon will tell you how often you’ll need follow-up visits. They’ll make sure you’re healing properly and that your recovery is going smoothly.
Call your surgeon or care team if you notice any signs of complications, including:
Bleeding at your surgery site.
A feeling of heat or warmth.
Leaking fluid, pus or a foul odor.
Discoloration or redness on your skin around your surgery site.
Side effects of your medication.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having surgery hurts. But even though you’ll experience some pain after an operation, that doesn’t mean you need to be in agony while you recover. Your surgeon will suggest pain medications to help you feel comfortable. They’ll tell you how to take them, how much is safe to take and when it’s OK to take more. All medications can have side effects, but your surgeon will help you understand all the risks ahead of time.
Ask your care team any questions you think of before and after your surgery. They’ll explain everything you need to know. It might help to have a loved one take notes if they’ll be with you. You can always ask your care team for a printout of instructions and guidelines so you can reference them later.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sometimes you have surgery planned. Other times, it’s an emergency. No matter how you end up in the OR, Cleveland Clinic’s general surgery team is here for you.
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7246
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment