Types of Breast Surgery for Cancer, Cosmetic & Preventive
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Breast Surgery: Options
Advertisement
Advertisement
Breast Surgery: Options
“Breast surgery” is the overarching term for surgery that affects your breasts. There are many types of breast surgeries. Some surgeries help diagnose breast cancer. Others treat the condition. Surgery to change the size or shape of your breasts is another example.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What are breast surgeries?
Breast surgeries treat tumors in your breasts or change your breasts’ appearance. You may have breast surgery if you have:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Breast cancer
A noncancerous
lump
in your breast
A high risk of breast cancer because you have a family history of the condition or carry variations of the
BRCA1
or
BRCA2
gene
Back, neck or shoulder pain that a breast reduction procedure can ease
A personal desire to change what your breasts look like
Breast cancer surgeries
Surgery is a common procedure to diagnose and treat cancerous tumors in your breasts. Breast cancer surgeries include:
Axillary lymph node dissection
Breast biopsy
Lumpectomy
Mastectomy
Prophylactic (preventive) mastectomy
Cosmetic breast surgeries
Cosmetic breast surgeries change your breasts’ size and shape. Surgeries include:
Breast augmentation
Breast reconstruction
Breast reduction
Treatment Details
What happens before breast surgery?
You’ll meet with your surgeon before your surgery. That includes breast surgeries for medical issues or cosmetic breast surgery.
If you’re having breast cancer surgery, your surgeon will:
Review your medical history to confirm the tumor’s size and location
Discuss your treatment options, including recovery time
Explain potential side effects and complications that the specific surgery may cause
If needed, discuss breast reconstruction after breast cancer surgery
Measure your breasts
Take pictures of your breasts
Surgeons and other care providers will refer to the photographs to check your breasts as they heal after surgery. Your care team are the only people who’ll have access to the photographs.
Advertisement
If you’re having cosmetic breast surgery, your surgeon will:
Review your medical history to confirm you’re physically able to have cosmetic surgery
Discuss why you’re considering cosmetic breast surgery
Explain potential outcomes
Discuss the potential side effects and complications that the specific surgery may cause
Measure and photograph your breasts
This is a good time to ask questions about the procedure. For example, you may want to ask:
What will my breasts look like right after surgery? What about over time?
What will my breasts feel like?
Will I be able to breastfeed?
What happens during breast surgery?
There are different specific steps for each type of breast surgery. But all breast surgeries involve:
Anesthesia
You’ll receive general
anesthesia
or local anesthesia. You’ll receive general anesthesia for certain types of breast biopsies, breast cancer surgery or cosmetic surgery. General anesthesia means you’re asleep during surgery.
You’ll receive local anesthesia if you’re having a core needle or
fine-needle aspiration
biopsy. Local anesthesia numbs a small area of your breast.
Incisions
Breast surgeries involve incisions (cuts) in your skin. Surgeons make cuts to get to your breast tissue so they can:
Obtain a tissue sample
Remove a cancerous
tumor
Remove breast tissue
Place a
breast implant
A medical pathologist will examine the tissue sample under a microscope and look for signs of cancer.
Your surgeon will close the incision with sutures. They may place gauze over the incision site or take other steps to protect it.
Surgical drains
Breast surgery can cause blood and other fluids to build up under your skin. Fluid buildup can lead to a surgical wound infection. Your surgeon may place a
surgical drain
in certain incisions (cuts) in your breast. Surgeons typically place surgical drains if you have a:
Mastectomy
Breast reconstruction
Breast reduction
What are the potential risks of breast surgery?
All major surgeries have risks. Breast surgery risks vary depend on the surgery type. Your surgeon will explain the potential issues that you may experience. Common potential risks include:
Anesthesia complications
Excessive
bleeding
Experiencing more pain than you expect
Surgical
scars
Surgical wound infection
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What should I expect after breast surgery?
Your healthcare team will explain the specific things you’ll need to do to support your recovery. For example, they’ll:
Explain what kind of bra or elastic bandage you’ll wear after surgery
Show you how to
care for your incision
after you go home
Demonstrate how to empty a surgical drain
Your team will understand that this is a lot of information to process. Don’t hesitate to ask questions about the processes.
Advertisement
You’ll need to take it easy during the early part of your recovery. Your team will discuss any activities you should avoid. For example, they may tell you to arrange for transportation for a few weeks after surgery.
It takes time for your body to recover from breast surgery. How much time depends on the type of surgery that you have. For example, it can take a month to fully recover from breast reconstruction surgery. It will take more time — often, several months — to fully recover from a mastectomy.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your surgeon if you experience:
Bleeding from the surgical wound that’s more than you expect
Broken sutures that cause your incision to open (
wound dehiscence
)
Fever
of 101 degrees Fahrenheit (38.33 degrees Celsius) or higher
Pain that persists even after you take pain medication
Redness at the incision site
Swelling in your arm or hand, under your arm or near the incision
Tenderness at the incision site
Additional Common Questions
What is the most common type of breast surgery?
Breast augmentation is the most common type of cosmetic surgery. Lumpectomy and mastectomy are common surgeries to treat breast cancer.
Do men have breast surgery?
Yes.
Men
may need breast surgery if they have breast cancer. And they may have breast surgery to treat
gynecomastia
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may need breast surgery as cancer treatment. You may want surgery to change how your breasts look and feel. Either way, breast surgery can be an emotional experience. You may have a lot of feelings to process. Your care team will understand those feelings. As you go through surgery and recovery, don’t hesitate to ask for help and support.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need cosmetic or reconstructive plastic surgery, you’ll need skilled, detailed and compassionate providers. At Cleveland Clinic, we’re here to help.
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us