Sensitive Skin: What It Is, Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Sensitive Skin
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sensitive Skin
Sensitive skin is a negative reaction to certain cosmetic or personal care products and environmental changes. Common symptoms include itchiness, dryness and skin discoloration. The good news is that there are many ways to treat it and prevent future symptom flare-ups.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Sensitive Skin?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
What Is Sensitive Skin?
Sensitive skin means you have a reaction to something that doesn’t typically cause skin irritation. This could include the weather, toxins or products like makeup, lotion or soap. If you have sensitive skin, you might notice dryness, itching or skin discoloration suddenly or after use of an irritant.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
To put it simply, your
skin
is selective. It’ll let you know if it doesn’t like an ingredient in a product that touched it or what’s going on with the weather. Your skin will usually stop reacting and return to normal when the irritant goes away and your skin has a chance to calm down.
Sensitive skin is very common. A healthcare provider or a
dermatologist
can help you manage sensitive skin. You may hear your provider refer to this reaction as:
Hyperreactivity
Hypersensitivity
Sensitive skin syndrome
Skin irritation
Types of sensitive skin
There are two types of sensitive skin:
Objective
. You have visible signs of sensitive skin, like skin discoloration and bumps. This is usually associated with an underlying condition like atopic dermatitis or acne.
Subjective
. You have symptoms of sensitive skin that you feel but can’t see, like burning and itching.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of sensitive skin
Sensitive skin may look different on each person. Some common symptoms include:
A raised patch of skin
A rash
Blisters
Bumps
Dry skin
Hives
Peeling skin
Scaling or flaky skin
Skin discoloration
(like redness or a shade darker than your natural skin tone)
Sensitive skin may feel:
Burning
Itching
Pain
Stinging
Tingling
While uncommon, you might not feel any physical symptoms.
You may have sensitive skin with one or a few of these signs or symptoms on any part of your body. They’re most common on your face. Some of your skin is thinner than other areas, like your armpits, groin and genitals. Skin in those areas may react more noticeably and feel more irritated than skin in other areas of your body.
Advertisement
Sensitive skin causes
Healthcare providers aren’t sure of the exact cause of sensitive skin. Research suggests it could happen due to the thinning of your stratum corneum.
The stratum corneum is the outer layer of your skin (
epidermis
) that you can see. It offers protection from light, heat and harmful agents (pathogens). It acts as a barrier for water and other elements.
If you have sensitive skin, the barrier that this layer creates isn’t as strong as it should be. So, things from your environment that usually stay outside of your body can pass through it and irritate the deeper layers of your skin.
What triggers sensitive skin?
Triggers are things in your environment that cause symptoms. Some of the most common sensitive skin triggers include:
Clothing fabrics (wool, polyester, etc.)
Household cleaning products
Makeup
Laundry detergent
Lotions
Soaps
Usually, scented products or products that contain harsh chemicals trigger skin sensitivities.
Other triggers could include:
An underlying health condition
Climate (heat, wind, temperature changes, etc.)
Hormone
changes
Medication side effects
Natural aging
Nutrition and
hydration
Stress
Sun exposure
Toxins in the air
To find out what your triggers are, note when you experience symptoms. Then, make a list of anything that came into contact with your skin, including clothing, skin care products, soaps or cleaners, etc. If you had symptoms after using a new laundry detergent, for example, you may need to switch to one without fragrances to see if that’s the culprit.
If you’re having trouble detecting triggers, talk to a healthcare provider.
What is sensitive skin a symptom of?
There are several skin conditions that cause sensitive skin as a symptom. Some of the most common include:
Acne
Aquagenic pruritus
Atopic dermatitis
Contact dermatitis
Dry skin
Eczema
Psoriasis
Rosacea
Seborrheic dermatitis
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose sensitive skin
A healthcare provider will diagnose sensitive skin after a
physical exam
. They’ll take your medical history and ask you questions about your symptoms (like when symptoms started, how often they happen and what it feels like). Your provider will also take a closer look at your skin. They may use a tool called a dermatoscope, which magnifies your skin and helps your provider get a closer look.
If your provider suspects sensitive skin, they’ll ask you about your daily routine or common products you use on your skin.
Additional tests may rule out conditions with similar symptoms. For example, your provider may suggest a
skin biopsy
or an
allergy patch test
. These can vary based on the symptoms you experience.
How to know if you have sensitive skin
If you notice your skin reacts negatively to certain makeups, skin care products, environmental changes, fabrics, etc., you may have sensitive skin. A healthcare provider can confirm if this is true.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is sensitive skin treated?
You can manage sensitive skin at home by:
Identifying your triggers and avoiding them, which might mean stopping the use of certain products (like makeup, laundry detergent, soaps and others)
Using a mild cleanser or soap and warm water to wash your skin and remove any makeup daily
Moisturizing your skin often (choose a moisturizer that’s fragrance-free and irritation-free)
Wearing sunscreen and/or limiting sun exposure
Staying hydrated and drinking plenty of water
Wearing gloves when using household cleaning products that contain harsh chemicals
If you try to manage sensitive skin at home but it doesn’t work after a week or so, talk to a healthcare provider. They may offer treatment options like:
Managing any underlying conditions or medications that cause sensitive skin
Short-term use of topical
corticosteroids
Topical
immunomodulators
(like
pimecrolimus
or
tacrolimus
)
Light therapy
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you have signs or symptoms of sensitive skin that are very bothersome or don’t go away with at-home treatments. They’ll evaluate your symptoms and help you determine what’s causing skin irritation.
It’s important to note that skin sensitivity may change over time. Pay attention to the symptoms you experience and what may be causing them. Talk to your provider if you’re experiencing new symptoms or if current remedies stop working.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Prevention
Can sensitive skin be prevented?
There’s not much you can do to prevent sensitive skin. But you can take steps to avoid symptom flare-ups. For example, your skin may react to sudden changes in personal care products, like using soaps and shampoos provided at a hotel you stay at while on vacation. You can prevent a flare while traveling by bringing some of your favorite products from home.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
There’s nothing worse than getting a new lotion that smells delicious and realizing your skin can’t tolerate it. Sensitive skin can be frustrating and annoying. But it doesn’t have to ruin your day. A healthcare provider can help you figure out what’s triggering your symptoms.
They may suggest treatment options to help you manage symptoms when they arise, or alternative products that may be just as inviting, so you can look and feel your best.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment