Smoke Inhalation: Symptoms & When To Be Concerned
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Smoke Inhalation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Smoke Inhalation
Smoke inhalation from wildfires, house fires and vehicle fires can damage your airways and lungs. Chemicals in the smoke can keep your body from getting enough oxygen. Symptoms of smoke inhalation include shortness of breath, cough, chest pain, dizziness, confusion and more. Get to fresh air as quickly as possible and seek medical attention.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Smoke Inhalation?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Smoke Inhalation?
Smoke inhalation is when you breathe in large amounts of smoke, like if you’re in a house, vehicle or forest fire. The smoke can damage your
airways
and
lungs
. It can also carry chemicals like
carbon monoxide
and cyanide that can be deadly if you breathe in too much of them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Go to the emergency room or seek immediate medical attention if you’ve been in a fire, have symptoms of smoke inhalation or think you’ve inhaled a large amount of smoke.
Even smaller amounts of smoke, like from wildfires that are far away, can irritate your airways and
eyes
. It’s important to stay inside with the windows closed or wear a mask if there’s smoke in the air. This is especially true if you have a condition that affects your airways, like
COPD
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) or
asthma
.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of smoke inhalation injury
Symptoms of smoke inhalation injuries include:
Shortness of breath
Hoarseness
Chest pain
Sore throat
Cough
Noisy breathing, like
wheezing
or
stridor
Headache
Dizziness
Confusion
Fainting
Seizures
Even small amounts of smoke can sting your eyes,
irritate your sinuses
and throat, or cause an asthma attack.
What happens if you breathe in a lot of smoke?
There are three main ways smoke inhalation can hurt you:
Heat can damage your upper airways.
Chemicals from toxic gases, vapors and fumes can irritate and cause
inflammation
in your lower airways and lungs.
Carbon monoxide, cyanide and other chemicals can prevent oxygen from getting to your tissues and cause organ damage.
Complications of smoke inhalation
Smoke inhalation can quickly lead to life-threatening complications, including:
Advertisement
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS), a type of respiratory failure caused by fluid buildup in your lungs
Asphyxiation
, when your body doesn’t get enough oxygen
Coma
, a long period of unconsciousness
Heart attack
, lack of blood flow to your heart
Methemoglobinemia
, a blood disorder that prevents you from getting enough oxygen to your tissues
Pneumonitis
, inflammation in your lungs
Pulmonary edema
, fluid in your lungs
Stroke
, lack of blood flow to your brain
Risk factors
Breathing in a lot of smoke isn’t good for anyone. But small amounts of smoke are more likely to cause health problems if you have chronic conditions, including:
Asthma
Chronic kidney disease
(CKD)
COPD
Diabetes
Heart disease
Women
who are pregnant and children are also at higher risk.
How to lower your risk
Keep an eye on
air quality alerts
to know if there are high levels of smoke or other pollutants in your area. They’re included on most weather reporting services. On days when the air quality is less than healthy, you can protect yourself by:
Staying indoors with the windows closed (turn the air conditioner on if you have one, as it filters the air it brings in)
Using a HEPA (high-efficiency particulate air) filter in your home
Wearing a well-fitted respirator mask if you can’t avoid going outdoors
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose smoke inhalation injuries
Healthcare providers diagnose smoke inhalation injuries based on your symptoms and tests. These could include:
Pulse oximetry, a small device on your finger that measures your
blood oxygen level
Blood tests
Chest X-rays
or
CT scans
Pulmonary function tests
Arterial blood gas
Bronchoscopy
Management and Treatment
How is smoke inhalation treated?
If you’ve been in a fire or around a lot of smoke, the first step is to get to fresh air as soon as possible. Emergency treatment could include:
Supplemental oxygen
and sometimes,
hyperbaric oxygen therapy
to deliver additional oxygen to your lungs
Bronchodilators
to open up your airways
Mucolytics
to break up mucus
Anticoagulants
(anti-clotting drugs)
Hydroxocobalamin
(a form of vitamin B12) for cyanide poisoning
Methylene blue
for methemoglobinemia
Intubation
and
mechanical ventilation
if you can’t breathe on your own
What should I do if I inhaled smoke?
Seek emergency medical care if you’ve been in a fire or inhaled a lot of smoke — even if you feel OK. Quick treatment can save your life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does it take to recover from smoke inhalation?
Depending on how severe your injuries are, it can take a few weeks to recover from smoke inhalation. Healthcare providers will need to monitor you in the hospital until you can safely recover at home.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Smoke inhalation shouldn’t be treated lightly. You might feel like it’s too much of a fuss to have a doctor look you over, but the effects of breathing in smoke can be deadly. A healthcare provider can check for any concerns, treat you if needed and get you home with peace of mind.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment