What Is Transcendental Meditation (TM)?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Transcendental Meditation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Transcendental Meditation
Transcendental Meditation® is a meditation technique where you mentally repeat a word or phrase until you reach a state of inner peace. After learning the technique from a certified Transcendental Meditation teacher, you practice twice a day for 10 minutes. The benefits of the TM technique include lower blood pressure and reduced stress.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Holistic Medicine Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is Transcendental Meditation?
The Transcendental Meditation technique is a type of
meditation
in which you silently repeat a mantra in your head to quiet your mind. A mantra is a word or phrase you focus intently on.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The focus of the Transcendental Meditation program (also called the TM program) is to settle your body down to a state of restful alertness. You deeply relax your body and quiet your mind while staying wide awake. With this type of meditation, the goal is to eventually transcend to a state of pure awareness that’s beyond the personal
self/ego
. “Transcend” means to go beyond.
Like other forms of mediation, the Transcendental Meditation technique has many potential benefits. It may have a positive impact on your physical and mental health, as well as your emotional well-being. If you’re interested in trying an alternative treatment or
complementary therapy
like the TM program, talk to your healthcare provider. They can help guide you to make the best decision for you.
Who developed the Transcendental Meditation technique?
An Indian teacher named Maharishi Mahesh Yogi developed the Transcendental Meditation technique in the 1950s. Maharishi studied consciousness. He created the Transcendental Meditation program based on ancient meditative
yoga
practices.
But the TM technique doesn’t involve any kind of religion, philosophy or lifestyle. Maharishi introduced the technique as a science. He helped establish the meditative state as the fourth state of consciousness. The first three states are: waking, sleeping and dreaming.
Advertisement
Treatment Details
How does the Transcendental Meditation technique work?
With the Transcendental Meditation technique, you sit comfortably with your eyes closed and practice twice a day for 10 minutes to start. But any amount of time is beneficial. The more consistently you practice, the longer you’ll eventually be able to meditate.
With the Transcendental Meditation technique, you don’t need an app to guide your meditation. Instead, you silently repeat a mantra in your head.
A mantra is a word or phrase that becomes the object of your attention. Your teacher will give you your mantra. You drive your awareness toward your mantra. The Transcendental Meditation mantras aren’t English words for objects, feelings or experiences. They’re sounds that help you take your attention from active thinking to a deeper level of self-awareness.
How can I learn the Transcendental Meditation technique?
To learn the Transcendental Meditation technique, a certified teacher must teach you. Courses are offered in two ways: completely in-person or through a hybrid method of in-person and online training.
Your first session will always be in person and one-on-one with your teacher. They’ll teach you all about the Transcendental Meditation technique, and you’ll learn how to meditate. After this session, you’ll receive your mantra. Your Transcendental Meditation teacher selects your mantra for you.
Then, you’ll participate in three more sessions either in person or online. These sessions will include a mix of meditating under your teacher’s observation and learning more about the TM technique.
After that, you can begin practicing the Transcendental Meditation technique on your own every day, twice a day. If you need help or additional guidance, a certified TM teacher is always available to provide individual support, group sessions and other resources.
Can I learn the Transcendental Meditation technique on my own?
You may find Transcendental Meditation resources in books or videos, or on YouTube, Reddit or various other apps. But to properly learn the technique, a certified Transcendental Meditation teacher must teach you.
Certified teachers have five months of in-residence training. Then, they must maintain their certification through continuing education. Also, they give you personalized attention to train you on the technique.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Holistic Medicine Care
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
Research in the Transcendental Meditation technique supports its effectiveness in several areas.
What are the benefits of the Transcendental Meditation technique?
Research in the Transcendental Meditation technique supports its effectiveness in several areas. It may have physical, mental, cognitive and emotional benefits.
Physical benefits
Improvement in
sleep
Lower
high blood pressure
Pain management
and/or distraction from pain
Mental health benefits
Improvement of
self-esteem
Management of
post-traumatic stress disorder
Reduction in
stress
,
anxiety
and
depression
Advertisement
Cognitive benefits
Enhanced creativity, intelligence and awareness
Improved energy, focus and memory
Increased productivity, performance and problem-solving skills
Emotional benefits
Enhanced clarity of thoughts and feelings
Improved quality of life and inner peace
Increased compassion and gratitude
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have symptoms like high blood pressure or
chronic pain
, or a health condition like depression or anxiety, talk to your healthcare provider. You should always speak with them before starting any new treatment or therapy. Your provider may suggest new options, including other evidence-based complementary therapies. They may be able to point you toward useful resources, like finding a Transcendental Meditation teacher near you.
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between the Transcendental Meditation technique and mindfulness?
With
mindfulness
meditation, you focus on the present moment and note any thoughts or sensations that may arise. When you notice your mind has wandered, you gently and without judgment bring your attention back to the present moment.
With the Transcendental Meditation technique, you repeat a specific mantra to help direct your attention inward. The technique is designed to help your mind settle down and go beyond the present moment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe you’re looking for something to help you sleep. Or you’re experiencing symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder. Perhaps you’re just seeking more clarity and focus each day. Transcendental Meditation may help with all these issues and more. Research has shown the TM program has many possible benefits — for your mind and body alike. You don’t need to know anything about mediation to give it a try. If you’re interested in exploring the TM technique, talk with your healthcare provider about your options.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you want to balance your body, mind and spirit, Cleveland Clinic holistic medicine providers can help you get in sync.
Holistic Medicine Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.448.4325
Appointments & Locations
Sign Up for News & Info