Newborn Care in the Hospital: What To Expect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Newborn Care in the Hospital
Advertisement
Advertisement
Newborn Care in the Hospital
Newborn care in the hospital helps your baby transition to life outside your uterus. Most babies are born without any major issues and need little or no support. But some babies require some sort of medical intervention immediately after delivery. Newborn care also includes tests, screenings and preventive care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
What happens in the hospital immediately after childbirth?
Right after delivery, newborn infant care includes a few steps to welcome your baby into the world. A healthcare provider will:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Dry off your newborn
Clear their airway of mucus with a suction bulb, cloth or small tube
Wrap them in a blanket to keep warm
A pediatric healthcare provider will then quickly check your baby’s health. If they meet the following conditions, they likely won’t require urgent medical attention:
Reached a certain gestational age (length of pregnancy)
Appropriate muscle tone
No trouble breathing
Acceptable
Apgar score
If your newborn is otherwise healthy, you’ll get to experience skin-to-skin contact as soon as possible. This is sometimes known as “
kangaroo care
.” A provider will teach you how to safely position your baby. Skin-to-skin contact can:
Improve your baby’s transition from your uterus to the outside world
Promote infant-mother bonding
Increase your milk production
Regardless of the type of delivery you have, you can request skin-to-skin contact as soon as possible or make it a known priority for you.
What is the Apgar score?
A healthcare provider will perform a routine test called the Apgar score. During the test, a provider will measure your baby’s:
A
— Appearance (color)
P
— Pulse (heart rate)
G
— Grimace (
reflex response
)
A
— Activity (muscle tone)
R
— Respiration (breathing)
The provider will test these five signs one minute after birth. Then, they’ll check them again five minutes after birth. Each test is given a score between 0 and 2. They add the five scores together to make up the Apgar score. These scores give insight to your baby’s doctors about how much immediate attention they may need right after delivery.
Advertisement
What else does a newborn need in the hospital?
New babies need several preventive treatments, including eye drops, a vitamin K shot and newborn vaccines.
Eye drops
Your baby will get antibiotic eye ointment or eye drops. This is to prevent bacterial infections they may have picked up through birth. These can result in vision loss or chronic eye disease.
Vitamin K shot
Babies typically have low levels of vitamin K when they’re born. They need vitamin K for blood clotting. So, your baby should get a vitamin K shot immediately after birth. This is to prevent severe bleeding (
hemorrhage
) that could result in critical organ damage, like permanent brain injury.
Newborn vaccine list
Your baby should start getting vaccines when they’re a newborn. Your baby’s healthcare provider will offer the hepatitis B vaccine immediately after birth. This is to protect your baby against the hepatitis B virus, which can result in chronic liver disease. Regardless of your or your partner’s hepatitis B status, your baby may get the virus through other unexpected events. This is why providers recommend the vaccine at birth regardless.
The hepatitis B vaccine is a series of three shots. Your baby will usually receive the first shot shortly after birth. Then, they’ll get the next two shots by 1 year of age.
Your healthcare provider may also recommend that your baby get a
monoclonal antibody
called
nirsevimab
(Beyfortus®). This can help prevent respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Your baby may only need it if:
They were born during RSV season (October through March)
You didn’t receive the RSV vaccine during your pregnancy
What is routine newborn screening?
Healthcare providers screen all newborns in the United States for certain conditions that you can’t see at birth. If providers find these conditions early, they can prevent or treat them. Your baby’s provider will
prick their heel
to get a sample of their blood. They’ll test for many different conditions, including:
Phenylketonuria (PKU)
Congenital hypothyroidism
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Sickle cell disease
Cystic fibrosis
Inborn errors of metabolism
Primary immunodeficiency
Other tests that may be part of routine newborn screening include:
Hearing test to prevent future speech and language problems
Congenital
cytomegalovirus
(cCMV) testing (for newborns who don’t pass the hearing test)
Pulse oximeter (pulse ox) to look for critical congenital heart disease (CCHD)
Jaundice (bilirubin) screening to check for a buildup of bilirubin in your baby’s blood
If your baby is large or small for their age, overly jittery or you have a history of diabetes, they may also get a hypoglycemia screening to check for low blood sugar.
Advertisement
What else will happen while my baby is in the hospital?
Besides looking cute in the sleeper you
packed in your hospital bag
, your baby may also:
Breast- or bottle-feed
Get their first bath
Poop
meconium
Get
circumcised
Feeding
New babies need to be fed early and often to prevent dehydration. A provider will want to keep track of each time your baby feeds. If you’re breastfeeding, they’ll track how often you feed and how long each session is. If you’re formula-feeding, they’ll also track how much you give your baby. Lactation services are available. You should use them even if you’re an experienced parent.
Before you go home, your provider will want to make sure your baby can feed well. They’ll ensure your baby is wetting at least three or four diapers over a 24-hour period. They’ll also monitor your newborn’s weight.
First bath
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends waiting 24 hours before giving your baby their first bath. Healthcare providers used to bathe newborns shortly after delivery. But
delaying your baby’s first bath
:
Helps control their body temperature
Prevents dry skin
May lead to more success with breastfeeding
Some providers recommend waiting a week to bathe your newborn. This is because their umbilical cord stump usually falls off within a week or two. But you can
bathe your baby
with a sponge to keep their umbilical cord dry.
Advertisement
Meconium
A provider will make sure your newborn passes meconium within 24 to 48 hours after birth. Meconium is a black, sticky substance that your baby poops for the first one to three days.
Circumcision
Within one to two days of birth, you may decide to have your baby circumcised. Circumcision is a surgical procedure that removes the foreskin from your baby’s penis. The procedure takes place before you leave the hospital. This may only be done if your baby received the vitamin K shot.
How long do you stay at the hospital after birth?
Most healthy newborns can leave the hospital after two or three days, depending on how they were delivered. If you or your baby experiences any complications or has any medical issues, you may need to stay in the hospital longer.
How do you take care of a newborn?
Most people feel unprepared when it comes to taking care of babies. Newborns have many needs. And caring for an infant can be nerve-wracking. Your baby’s needs are simple but crucial. It’s important to provide loving care during the first month of your baby’s life.
You can take steps to help yourself get ready for the transition home. You may want to consider taking a newborn care class during your pregnancy. A class can’t always prepare you for the real thing. But it can help you learn about topics like:
Advertisement
Changing your baby’s diaper
Bathing your baby
Dressing your baby
Feeding and burping your baby
Cleaning your baby’s umbilical cord stump
Caring for your baby’s healing circumcision
Soothing your baby
Taking your baby’s temperature
Recognizing signs of illness or infection
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Leaving the hospital with a newborn can be one of the most exciting yet scary times in your life. You may feel overwhelmed with all there is to know. If so, lean on your healthcare providers. Providers who give newborn care in the hospital have seen it all.
You may be in a rush to get home and start your new life with your newborn. But healthcare providers want to make sure your baby’s first day or two go smoothly before sending you home. They want what’s best for you and your baby.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us