Breast Cancer: Symptoms, Types, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Breast Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Breast Cancer
Breast cancer is when breast cells mutate and become cancerous cells that multiply and form tumors. Breast cancer typically affects women age 50 and older, but it can also affect men, as well as younger women. Healthcare providers may treat breast cancer with surgery to remove tumors or treatment to kill cancerous cells.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Breast cancer tumors develop when breast cells mutate and grow.
What is breast cancer?
Breast cancer is one of the most common
cancers
that affects women. It happens when cancerous cells in your
breasts
multiply and become
tumors
. About 80% of breast cancer cases are invasive, meaning a tumor may spread from your breast to other areas of your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Breast cancer typically affects
women
age 50 and older, but it can also affect women who are
younger than 50
. Men may also develop breast cancer.
Breast cancer types
Healthcare providers determine cancer types and subtypes so they can tailor treatment to be as effective as possible with the fewest possible side effects. Common types of breast cancer include:
Invasive (infiltrating) ductal carcinoma (IDC)
: This cancer starts in your milk ducts and spreads to nearby breast tissue. It’s the most common type of breast cancer in the United States.
Lobular breast cancer
: This breast cancer starts in the milk-producing glands (lobules) in your breast and often spreads to nearby breast tissue. It’s the second most common breast cancer in the United States.
Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
: Like IDC, this breast cancer starts in your milk ducts. The difference is DCIS doesn’t spread beyond your milk ducts.
Less common breast cancer types include:
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
: This invasive cancer is aggressive and spreads more quickly than other breast cancers.
Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC)
: This rare, fast-growing cancer looks like a rash on your breast. IBC is rare in the United States.
Paget’s disease of the breast
: This rare cancer affects the skin of your nipple and may look like a rash. Less than 4% of all breast cancers are Paget’s disease of the breast.
Advertisement
Breast cancer subtypes
Healthcare providers classify breast cancer subtypes by receptor cell status. Receptors are protein molecules in or on cells’ surfaces. They can attract or attach to certain substances in your
blood
, including
hormones
like estrogen and progesterone.
Estrogen
and
progesterone
help cancerous cells to grow. Finding out if cancerous cells have estrogen or progesterone receptors helps healthcare providers plan breast cancer treatment.
Subtypes include:
ER-positive (ER+)
breast cancers have estrogen receptors.
PR-positive (PR+)
breast cancers have progesterone receptors.
HR-positive (HR+)
breast cancers have estrogen and progesterone receptors.
HR-negative (HR-)
breast cancers don’t have estrogen or progesterone receptors.
HER2-positive (HER2+)
breast cancers, which have higher than normal levels of the HER2 protein. This protein helps cancer cells to grow. About 15% to 20% of all breast cancers are HER2-positive.
Symptoms and Causes
Common signs of breast cancer and what to look for.
What are breast cancer symptoms?
The condition can affect your breasts in different ways. Some breast cancer symptoms are very distinctive. Others may simply seem like areas of your breast that look very different from any other area. Breast cancer may not cause noticeable symptoms either. But when it does, symptoms may include:
A change in the size, shape or contour of your breast.
A mass or
lump
, which may feel as small as a pea.
A lump or thickening in or near your breast or in your underarm that persists through your
menstrual cycle
.
A change in the look or feel of your skin on your breast or nipple. Your skin may look
dimpled
, puckered, scaly or inflamed. It may look red, purple or darker than other parts of your breast.
A marble-like hardened area under your skin.
A blood-stained or clear fluid
discharge from your nipple
.
What causes breast cancer?
Experts know breast cancer happens when breast cells mutate and become cancerous cells that divide and multiply to create
tumors
. They aren’t sure what triggers that change. However, research shows there are several risk factors that may increase your chances of developing breast cancer. These include:
Age
: Being 55 or older.
Sex
: Women are much more likely to develop the condition than men.
Family history
: If your parents, siblings, children or other close relatives have breast cancer, you’re at risk of developing the disease.
Genetics
: Up to 15% of people with breast cancer develop the disease because they have inherited
genetic mutations
. The most common genetic mutations involve the
BRCA1
and
BRCA2
genes.
Smoking
: Tobacco use has been linked to many different types of cancer, including breast cancer.
Drinking beverages containing alcohol
: Research shows that drinking beverages containing alcohol may increase breast cancer risk.
Having
obesity
.
Radiation exposure
: If you’ve had prior
radiation therapy
— especially to your head, neck or chest — you’re more likely to develop breast cancer.
Hormone replacement therapy
: People who use
hormone replacement therapy
(HRT) have a higher risk of being diagnosed with the condition.
Advertisement
What are the complications of breast cancer?
The most significant complication is
metastatic breast cancer
— breast cancer that spreads to other areas of your body, including your
brain
,
bones
, liver and lungs. Studies show about 1 in 3 women who have early-stage cancer later develop metastatic breast cancer.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is breast cancer diagnosed?
Healthcare providers may do
physical examinations
or order
mammograms
to check for signs of breast cancer. But they do the following tests to diagnose the disease:
Breast ultrasound
.
Breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan.
Breast biopsy
.
Immunohistochemistry
test to check for hormone receptors.
Genetic
tests
to identify mutations that cause breast cancer.
Stages of breast cancer
Healthcare providers use
cancer staging systems
to plan treatment. Staging cancer also helps providers set a prognosis, or what you can expect after treatment. Breast cancer staging depends on factors like breast cancer type, tumor size and location, and whether cancer has spread to other areas of your body. Breast cancer stages are:
Stage 0
: The disease is noninvasive, meaning it hasn’t spread from your breast ducts to other parts of your breast.
Stage I
: There are cancerous cells in nearby breast tissue.
Stage II
: The cancerous cells have formed a tumor or tumors. The tumor is either smaller than 2 centimeters across and has spread to underarm
lymph nodes
or larger than 5 centimeters across but hasn’t spread to underarm lymph nodes. Tumors at this stage can measure anywhere between 2 and 5 centimeters across, and may or may not affect the nearby lymph nodes.
Stage III
: There’s breast cancer in nearby tissue and lymph nodes. Stage III is usually referred to as locally advanced breast cancer.
Stage IV
: Cancer has spread from your breast to areas like your bones,
liver
,
lungs
or brain.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is breast cancer treated?
Surgery is the primary breast cancer treatment, but healthcare providers may use other treatments. Breast cancer surgeries include:
Mastectomy
.
Lumpectomy
.
Breast reconstruction
.
Providers may combine surgery with one or more of the following treatments:
Chemotherapy
.
Radiation therapy
, including intraoperative radiation therapy (
IORT
).
Immunotherapy
.
Hormone therapy
, including selective estrogen receptor modulator (
SERM
) therapy.
Targeted therapy.
What are treatment side effects?
Common chemotherapy and radiation therapy
side effects
include
fatigue
,
nausea
and
vomiting
. Targeted therapy, immunotherapy and hormone therapy have similar side effects, including gastrointestinal issues like
constipation
and
diarrhea
.
People react differently to breast cancer treatments. If you’re receiving treatment, ask your healthcare provider how treatment may affect you, including how it may affect your daily life. Also, ask your provider about
palliative care.
Palliative care helps manage breast cancer symptoms and treatment side effects so you’re as comfortable as possible as you go through treatment.
Complications of breast cancer surgery
All surgeries have potential complications, and
breast cancer surgery
is no exception. As you’re considering your options, it’s important to remember that surgery removes potentially life-threatening
cancer
. In general, the risks of breast cancer outweigh the complications.
Advertisement
If you’re having breast cancer surgery, ask your healthcare provider to explain potential complications, which may include:
Infection at the surgical site.
Blood clots
that can happen after surgery.
Nerve
damage.
Lymphedema
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the survival rate for breast cancer?
Breast cancer survival rates vary based on several factors, like whether the cancer is invasive or noninvasive, the cancer type and the cancer stage. According to data kept by the National Cancer Institute (U.S.), overall, 91% of people with breast cancer were alive five years after diagnosis. The institute organizes breast cancer survival rates by stages:
Local: Cancer hasn’t spread outside your breast.
Regional: Cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes and tissue.
Distant: Cancer is in more distant areas of your body like your liver or lungs.
Breast cancer stage
Five-year survival rate
Local
99%
Regional
86%
Distant
30%
Breast cancer stage
Local
Five-year survival rate
99%
Regional
Five-year survival rate
86%
Distant
Five-year survival rate
30%
As you think about breast cancer survival rates, remember, they’re only estimates based on other people’s experiences. Cancer affects different people in different ways. If you have specific questions about cancer survival rates, talk to your healthcare provider. They’re your best resource because they know your situation.
What’s the outlook for breast cancer?
Right now, more people are being diagnosed with early-stage breast cancer — meaning they’re diagnosed when it’s easier to treat — and fewer people are dying of breast cancer.
Data shows 99% of people with early-stage breast cancer were alive five years after diagnosis. In some cases, they may be considered
cured
of breast cancer. But breast cancer can
come back
, and when it does, it may come back as metastatic breast cancer.
Outlook may also depend on race. According to the American Cancer Society, Black women are slightly less likely to develop breast cancer than white women. But Black women are more likely to die of breast cancer than white women.
Prevention
Can breast cancer be prevented?
You may not be able to prevent breast cancer. But you can reduce your risk of developing it. Just as important, regular
self-exams
and
mammograms
can help detect breast cancer early on, when it’s easier to treat.
How can I lower my risk?
There’s no sure way to reduce breast cancer risk, but the American Cancer Society (ACS) has the following advice for all
females
:
Get to and stay at a healthy weight
: This is a weight that’s right for you. Ask a healthcare provider for information on setting up healthy weight management.
Eat a healthy diet
: Some studies show a diet that includes vegetables, fruit, calcium-rich dairy foods and lean protein may reduce your risk of breast cancer. Avoiding red meat and processed meat may also reduce your risk.
Get moving
: Studies show that regular
physical activity lowers breast cancer risk
.
Avoid beverages containing alcohol
: Research shows a link between breast cancer and alcohol. The American Medical Association recommends women limit alcohol to one drink a day.
Get screened
: Mammograms often detect tumors when they’re too small to be felt.
Do regular self-exams
: Examining your breasts regularly helps to maintain breast health and may allow you to find breast cancer tumors.
Some women have an increased risk for breast cancer because family members have it or they inherited a genetic mutation. If that’s your situation, you may want to consider the following:
Genetic screening
for breast cancer genes.
Medication that may lower breast cancer risk like
tamoxifen
,
raloxifene
or
aromatase inhibitors
.
Prophylactic (preventive) mastectomy
.
Frequent breast cancer
screenings
and physical examinations. If you have an increased risk for breast cancer, ask your provider if you should have additional tests to detect breast cancer, particularly if you’re
under age 40
and have increased risk.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Living with breast cancer may not be easy. You may have days when you feel overwhelmed by your situation. Consider the following suggestions for taking care of yourself as you go through breast cancer diagnosis and treatment:
Get enough rest
: Breast cancer and treatment can be exhausting. Try to remember to rest when you need to, not just when you think you have time.
Eat well
: Treatment may affect your appetite. A diet of
fruit, vegetables, lean protein and healthy grains
can help you stay strong during treatment.
Manage your stress
: Cancer is stressful. Exercise can help, from regular walks to exercise programs.
Find support
: You’re a breast cancer survivor, starting the day you were diagnosed. Ask your healthcare provider about
cancer survivorship
programs, which may help you manage some of the challenges that come with living with breast cancer.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if your symptoms seem to be getting worse or if you have new symptoms, like pain or weakness in a different part of your body.
When should I go to the emergency room?
You should go to the emergency room if your reaction to cancer treatment is stronger than you expected. For example, you should go to the emergency room if you’re severely
dehydrated
from constant vomiting.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Most people have lots of questions when they first learn they have breast cancer. Here are some ideas of questions you may want to ask your provider:
What type of breast cancer do I have?
What’s the tumor stage, size and grade?
What’s my estrogen and progesterone receptor status?
What’s my HER2 status?
Will I need surgery?
What are other treatment options?
Is there a clinical trial available for me?
Additional Common Questions
How long can you have breast cancer without knowing?
You can have breast cancer for years before noticing changes in your breasts like a lump. That said, not all
lumps or bumps
are cancer. Check with a healthcare provider if you have an unusual bump or mass that doesn’t go away after a few days.
How fast does breast cancer spread?
That depends on
several factors
, including the type of breast cancer you have, whether it’s hereditary and, the tumor stage and grade. If you have breast cancer, ask your healthcare provider for information about what you can expect.
Can men get breast cancer?
Yes, men can get breast cancer, but it’s not common. Approximately 2,600 men develop
male breast cancer
every year in the United States, making up less than 1% of all cases.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
In 2023, 1 in 8 women in the United States will learn they have breast cancer. If you’re among those 1 in 8, there are a few more numbers you may want to consider. Nearly 4 million people in the United States are breast cancer survivors. Data show that overall, 91% of people with breast cancer were alive five years after diagnosis. And many experts are actively gathering information that may help providers tailor breast cancer treatment.
You can count on your healthcare team to continually evaluate newly approved treatments that you might be able to use. And here’s something else: If you have breast cancer, you can count on your team to be there for you, from diagnosis onward.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A breast cancer diagnosis can turn your world upside down. At Cleveland Clinic, we offer expertise, compassion and personalized treatment plans.
Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/25/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials