Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL)
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fast-growing blood cancer that starts in your bone marrow and spreads. It mainly affects kids ages 2 to 5, but adults can get it, too. There are different types based on which white blood cells are affected. The good news: Treatment often leads to a cure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment for Children
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia?
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a rare
blood cancer
that affects your
lymphocytes
(a type of
white blood cell
). It starts in your
bone marrow
, but it can spread (
metastasize
) throughout your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Acute lymphocytic leukemia makes up less than 1% of all cancers in the U.S. It’s most common in
children
, but anyone can get it. Most ALL cases affect children ages 2 to 5.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is a serious condition. But treatment can help. In many cases, it can
cure
it.
Types of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
The two main types of acute lymphoblastic leukemia are:
B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
. This is the most common type, affecting
B cells
that make antibodies and fight infection. It accounts for about 85% of childhood cases and 75% to 80% of all adult cases.
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
. This type affects
T cells
, which kill germs and support other
immune
cells. It makes up around 25% of adult cases, and 12% to 15% of childhood cases.
A third type,
natural killer
ALL, is very rare.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia symptoms may include:
Bleeding (like frequent
nosebleeds
or
heavy menstrual periods
)
Bruising
Fatigue
Frequent
infections
Joint pain
Loss of appetite
Night sweats
Paleness
Red, pinhead-sized bleeding spots on your skin (
petechiae
)
Shortness of breath
Swollen lymph nodes
Unexplained weight loss
Having these symptoms doesn’t necessarily mean you have ALL. But you should always talk to a healthcare provider about changes in your body that last longer than two weeks.
Advertisement
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia causes
Genetic mutations
(changes) cause acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Young children with ALL may have had gene changes that happened before they were born. Or you might inherit conditions that make you more likely to develop ALL. In adults, acute lymphoblastic leukemia is linked to some
carcinogens
, including tobacco.
Risk factors
Certain factors can increase your chances of developing acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL):
Age
. The highest risk is in children under 15 and adults over 50.
Genetic disorders
. Conditions like
Down syndrome
or
Fanconi anemia
can raise your risk.
Race
. People who are white have a slightly higher risk.
Radiation exposure
. Risk increases with exposure during
fetal development
or from past radiation therapy.
Sex
. Girls under age 1 are at higher risk than boys. After age 1, the risk is higher for males.
Viruses
. Infections like
Epstein-Barr virus
and human T-cell leukemia virus may raise your risk.
Complications of this condition
If ALL spreads to your brain or spine, it may cause the following complications:
Balance problems
Blurred vision
or double vision
Enlarged liver
Enlarged spleen
Facial muscle weakness or
numbness
Headaches
Nausea
and
vomiting
Seizures
Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose acute lymphoblastic leukemia
A healthcare provider will start with a
physical exam
and ask about your symptoms. They’ll want to know how long they’ve lasted and how they interfere with your everyday life.
To confirm a diagnosis, you may need:
Blood tests
Bone marrow biopsy
Imaging tests, like
CT scans
,
PET scans
or an
MRI
Lymph node biopsy
Spinal tap
Management and Treatment
How is acute lymphoblastic leukemia treated?
Doctors can treat ALL with chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, a bone marrow transplant or a mix of these treatments. The treatment depends on certain markers found on the cancer cells. Kids and adults may get different types of medicine and care.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy
is the main treatment for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. It happens in four phases, with the goal of reaching complete
remission
— when you have no symptoms and no signs of cancer in your body.
Treatment can last several months to a few years and often involves high doses of cancer-fighting drugs.
Palliative care
specialists may help manage side effects.
The four phases of chemotherapy include:
Remission induction therapy (four to six weeks)
. This phase aims to kill as many leukemia cells as possible. Most people stay in the hospital during this time.
Central nervous system-directed therapy
. Often given during remission induction, this phase targets or prevents cancer in your brain, spinal cord or spinal fluid.
Consolidation therapy
. This begins once you’re in remission. You’ll likely be hospitalized for about a week every few weeks over several months to get
IV chemotherapy
.
Maintenance therapy
. This final phase lasts two to three years and usually involves oral anticancer drugs and outpatient IV treatments. Hospital stays aren’t usually needed.
Advertisement
Targeted therapy
Targeted therapy
works by focusing on gene changes that turn healthy cells into cancer.
Healthcare providers use a type of targeted treatment called
tyrosine kinase (TKI) therapy
for people with a specific mutation known as the Philadelphia chromosome — also called t(9;22) or BCR/ABL.
TKI therapy blocks an
enzyme
that cancer cells need to grow. This helps kill the cancer and allows your body to start making healthy blood cells again.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy
helps your body’s own immune system attack cancer cells. For acute lymphoblastic leukemia, it may involve
monoclonal antibodies
or
CAR-T cell therapy
.
Radiation therapy
Healthcare providers may use
radiation therapy
to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia that returns or resists chemotherapy.
Bone marrow transplant
If other treatments don’t stop symptoms, your provider may recommend a donor
bone marrow transplant
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment for Children
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have acute lymphoblastic leukemia?
The outlook for acute lymphoblastic leukemia is generally positive, even with aggressive treatment. Studies show
98% of children
go into remission when treated at a center of excellence.
Recurrence
— when cancer returns — is rare, affecting
less than 1%
of cases. In adults, treatment is less successful and recurrence is more common than in children.
Advertisement
ALL survival rate
The overall five-year
survival rate
for ALL is 72%. That means that 72% of children and adults diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia will still be alive five years later.
Young children have the highest survival rate, around
90%
. The five-year survival rate for adults with ALL is around
30% to 40%
.
It’s important to know that survival rates are just estimates. They can’t tell you how long you’ll live or how you’ll respond to treatment. To learn more about survival rates and what they mean for you, talk to your healthcare provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A cancer diagnosis is life-changing, especially when it’s your child. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is more treatable than many other cancers — and in many cases, it can be cured. Lean on your care team. They’ll create a personalized treatment plan, explain what to expect and support you every step of the way.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) can affect your life in many ways. At Cleveland Clinic, we can help develop a treatment plan for any stage and any age.
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment for Children
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials