Cardiac Amyloidosis: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cardiac Amyloidosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cardiac Amyloidosis
Cardiac amyloidosis is a buildup of abnormal proteins in your heart. These proteins thicken your heart muscle, preventing it from working as it should. This ultimately leads to arrhythmias and heart failure. Treatments include medications to slow protein buildup and manage your symptoms. Early diagnosis and treatment improve your outlook.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Cardiac Amyloidosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Cardiac Amyloidosis?
How amyloid buildup interferes with heart muscle.
Cardiac amyloidosis is a buildup of misshapen proteins in your
heart
. It’s a leading cause of
restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Abnormal proteins build up in your heart muscle. They make the walls of your heart thicken. These changes force your heart to work harder to pump enough blood through your body. The extra effort can weaken and damage your heart. It eventually can lead to
heart failure
.
If you have cardiac amyloidosis, there’s a good chance you have amyloid buildup in other areas of your body, too. But buildups in your heart tend to cause the most severe health problems. The good news is that recent therapies have improved outcomes for people with this condition.
Types of cardiac amyloidosis
The two most common types of amyloidosis that can affect your heart are:
Light-chain amyloidosis
(AL)
: The abnormal proteins come from your
bone marrow
.
Transthyretin amyloidosis
(ATTR)
: The abnormal proteins come from your
liver
. There are two subtypes of ATTR: hereditary (variant) and wild-type.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of cardiac amyloidosis
Cardiac amyloidosis is a condition that gets progressively worse. It can lead to heart failure symptoms that become more severe with time. They include:
Shortness of breath
when you’re active or at rest
Swelling
in your belly and legs
Fatigue
for several days
Heart palpitations
during your normal routine
Amyloid can build up elsewhere in your body. So, you may have other symptoms, like
peripheral neuropathy
(tingling or numbness in your hands or feet) or
dysautonomia
(lightheadedness, dizziness, low blood pressure with changes in position).
Advertisement
Cardiac amyloidosis causes
The cause depends on the type of amyloidosis you have. Bone marrow disorders cause AL amyloidosis. A change in the transthyretin (
TTR
) gene or aging-related changes cause ATTR.
Complications of this condition
Cardiac amyloidosis changes your heart’s structure, and it can disrupt its
electrical system
. Complications include:
Arrhythmias, like atrial fibrillation (
AFib
),
bradycardia
and
ventricular tachycardia
Bundle branch block
Cardiorenal syndrome
Heart failure
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Stroke
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers diagnose cardiac amyloidosis through various tests. Cardiac amyloidosis is part of a systemic (whole-body) disease. So, providers look at the big picture. In addition to zooming in on your heart, they step back and look for symptoms elsewhere.
Your provider may first suspect this condition based on your symptoms, medical history and physical exam findings. They’ll then use several tests to confirm it or rule it out.
Tests may include:
Blood and urine tests
to check for amyloid proteins and markers of heart function
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
to check your heart’s electrical activity
Echocardiogram with strain
to look for thickened heart muscle
Cardiac MRI
to distinguish cardiac amyloidosis from other causes of cardiomyopathy
Nuclear imaging tests
, including “amyloid” scans, to check for amyloid protein buildup in your heart
Biopsy
to check for amyloids in your
heart
or elsewhere
Genetic testing
to check for genetic changes as the cause of amyloidosis
Cardiac amyloidosis red flags
Your healthcare provider will look for “red flags” that point to cardiac amyloidosis. In addition to heart failure symptoms, they include:
Atrial fibrillation (AFib)
Thickness in the wall of your
left ventricle
Conduction system disease
Elevated
cardiac biomarkers
High levels of
protein in your pee
History of
carpal tunnel syndrome
Lumbar
spinal stenosis
Peripheral or autonomic neuropathy
Prior
shoulder surgery
Hip
or
knee replacement
Management and Treatment
How is cardiac amyloidosis treated?
Treatment depends on the type of amyloidosis. In general, there are three main groups of treatments:
Amyloid-specific medications to slow or stop the production of abnormal proteins
Treatments that manage your symptoms
Organ transplantation
to replace an organ that amyloidosis damaged
Currently, there’s no
cure
for cardiac amyloidosis. But early diagnosis and treatment can help limit long-term damage to your heart.
Researchers are currently studying other medications that target the underlying causes of cardiac amyloidosis. Ask your healthcare provider if you can join a
clinical trial
.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see your healthcare provider regularly if you have cardiac amyloidosis. You may need frequent appointments to monitor the condition and get treatment.
Ask your providers which symptoms are warning signs that you need emergency care. Share this information with your loved ones so they can get help for you if needed.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
How cardiac amyloidosis will affect you depends on many factors, including:
The type of amyloidosis
Your age
How long you had the disease before you got a diagnosis
How quickly you begin treatment
Other health conditions you have, including complications from amyloidosis
The outlook (
prognosis
) is generally worse in light-chain amyloidosis due to how quickly it progresses. ATTR has a slower — but still significant — course. Regardless of the type, cardiac amyloidosis is the leading cause of death in people with amyloidosis.
Your healthcare provider can give you a better idea of what to expect. In general, the sooner you receive treatment, the better your outlook and
life expectancy
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Cardiac amyloidosis is a life-changing diagnosis. But with each year that passes, researchers learn more about this disease and how to slow it down. Ask your healthcare provider how you can connect with other people who have this condition. Amyloidosis organizations can offer you resources and communities of shared experience. Such support can be vital as you navigate your path forward.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment