Fuchs’ Dystrophy: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Fuchs’ Dystrophy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Fuchs’ Dystrophy
Fuchs’ dystrophy is an eye disease that affects your corneas. In this disease, certain cells in your corneas die off, causing your corneas to swell with fluid. This can cause blurred vision. Without treatment, it could lead to vision loss. Depending on how severe it is, your provider may recommend a corneal transplant.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Fuchs’ Dystrophy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Fuchs’ Dystrophy?
Fuchs’ dystrophy is a disease that affects your corneal endothelium, the innermost layer of your cornea.
Fuchs’ dystrophy (pronounced “fyooks DI-struh-fee”) is a disease that usually affects the
corneas
of both of your eyes. Your cornea is the clear, tough, protective tissue that covers your
iris
and
pupil
. Other names for this
corneal dystrophy
are Fuchs’ corneal dystrophy and Fuchs’ endothelial dystrophy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In Fuchs’ dystrophy, your corneal endothelium (the innermost layer of your cornea) gradually stops working as cells die. When it’s healthy, your endothelium acts like a pump to remove fluid from your cornea so it stays clear.
As your endothelium cells stop working, your cornea may swell from excess fluid, which can cause
blurred vision
or a haze over your eye. Small blisters may appear on the surface of your cornea, causing pain and irritation.
What are the stages of Fuchs’ dystrophy?
The two main stages of Fuchs’ corneal dystrophy are:
Early stage.
In this stage, you have blurred vision in the morning that gradually clears up during the day.
Late stage.
As the disease worsens, swelling becomes more consistent, and your
vision
may be blurry at all times.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Fuchs’ dystrophy
In the early stage, you might not have any symptoms. If you do have an early symptom, it might be that your vision is blurred in the morning but gets better as the day goes on.
Later, Fuchs’ endothelial dystrophy symptoms may include:
Poor
night vision
, like seeing a glare and halos around lights
Difficulty seeing on rainy days
Problems seeing objects against a background (poor contrast sensitivity)
Sensitivity to bright light
Feeling like you have something like sand or dirt in your eyes
Eye pain
from blisters that form on your cornea and then break open
Scarring that affects your central cornea first
Advertisement
Fuchs’ dystrophy causes
You can inherit Fuchs’ dystrophy from one of your biological parents during conception (
autosomal dominant inheritance
). But some cases happen randomly (sporadically) without a history of the condition in your biological line.
Some things can make Fuchs’ corneal dystrophy worse, including:
Smoking
Being exposed to ultraviolet (UV) light
Having
diabetes
Risk factors for Fuchs’ endothelial dystrophy
Certain factors can determine whether you have an increased risk for developing Fuchs’ dystrophy. These risk factors include:
Age.
The earliest signs of Fuchs’ dystrophy may be visible in people in their 30s and 40s. But the disease doesn’t normally affect vision until you turn 50 or older.
Sex.
Fuchs’ dystrophy is more common in
females
.
History.
It’s also more common in people who have a biological family history of Fuchs’ dystrophy.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Fuchs’ dystrophy
An
eye care specialist
will begin by taking a medical history, asking questions about your symptoms and doing a thorough
eye exam
.
Your provider will be able to see things in your eye exam that will point to a diagnosis of Fuchs’ dystrophy. These include:
Thickening of certain membranes
Changes in the way your endothelium looks
Bumps called guttae on the inside of your cornea
Tests to diagnose Fuchs’ corneal dystrophy
Your provider may use the following tests to diagnose Fuchs’ dystrophy:
Microscopy.
These types of exams use microscopes to make diagnoses. Examples include a
slit lamp
and a confocal/specular microscope.
Pachymetry
.
This painless test measures how thick your cornea is.
Optical coherence tomography
.
This is a noninvasive imaging method that uses reflected light to create pictures of the back of your eye.
Management and Treatment
Fuchs’ dystrophy treatment
A healthcare provider can treat Fuchs’ endothelial dystrophy, but they can’t cure it. Your provider may choose observation during the early stage. Other Fuchs’ dystrophy treatments may include:
Ointments and
eye drops
.
For mild symptoms, these medications reduce swelling of your cells by helping to dry up excess fluid. The improvement is usually temporary.
Handheld hair dryer.
Using a handheld dryer to blow warm air at your face can help the fluid dry up. This may be helpful for morning blur.
Corneal transplant
.
When Fuchs’ starts to limit your vision, surgery is the definitive treatment. You may get a partial corneal transplant (endothelial keratoplasty) or a full corneal transplant.
Descemet’s stripping only (DSO).
A newer procedure involves stripping away the diseased cells in the center to allow your own, healthier cells from the sides to replace them.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider about Fuchs’ endothelial dystrophy?
It’s important to develop a good relationship with your eye care specialist. Keep your scheduled appointments and contact them if you have any new or worsening symptoms.
You may want to ask your provider:
When should I contact you about symptoms?
What treatment do you recommend?
Are there
clinical trials
I can join?
Are there low-vision aids that can help me?
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Fuchs’ dystrophy?
Depending on how severe it is, Fuchs’ dystrophy may cause extreme pain,
low vision
or
blindness
if you don’t seek treatment.
With treatment, your expected outcome is much better. Your vision may improve to
20/20
within days of surgery (with
glasses
). That’s why it’s important to work with your provider to find the right treatment for you.
Prevention
How can I prevent Fuchs’ dystrophy?
There’s currently no way to prevent Fuchs’ corneal dystrophy. But you can help yourself by
quitting smoking
if you do smoke. If you have diabetes, work with your healthcare provider to
manage your blood sugar
levels.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Experiencing symptoms of any eye condition can be scary, and that’s true of Fuchs’ dystrophy. If you do have symptoms like pain or blurred vision, see a healthcare provider as soon as possible. Remember that early detection and treatment often offer the best outcome. Researchers continue to develop new ways to manage and treat Fuchs’ corneal dystrophy and other conditions.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment