Pathogen: Types, Causes, Effects on Body & Control
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Pathogen
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pathogen
Pathogens are tiny organisms that can make you sick if they get inside your body. Viruses, bacteria, fungi, parasites and prions are pathogens. They’re commonly called germs. Handwashing, disinfecting surfaces and safe food preparation can reduce your risk of getting infected with a pathogen.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Pathogen?
Additional Common Questions
What Is a Pathogen?
Coughing and sneezing, bug or animal bites, contaminated food or objects and close contact can all transmit pathogens.
Pathogens are microorganisms that can make you sick. A microorganism is something that’s so small, you need a microscope to see it. Pathogens can cause
illnesses
like common colds,
food poisoning
, stomach bugs, tickborne illnesses,
STIs
— and almost anything else that you can catch from other people or from the environment around you. They’re commonly called
germs
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Pathogens can infect people, animals and plants. Even pathogenic organisms, like
bacteria
and
fungi
, have their own pathogens. For instance, some
antibiotics
are made from fungi that kill bacteria.
Most pathogens only infect specific species, like one type of animal. But some can jump from one species to another, like from an animal to a human (
zoonotic diseases
). Bugs — like mosquitoes, ticks or fleas — can also spread some pathogens by biting you. When this happens, the bugs that spread them are called vectors.
Types
Types of pathogens include:
Viruses
: These are pieces of genetic information (RNA or
DNA
) in a shell (capsid). They use your cells’ machinery to make more copies of themselves.
Bacteria
: These are one-celled, living organisms. Many release toxins that make you sick.
Fungi
: Yeasts and molds are types of fungi that can infect you. They spread through the air and the environment in spores (reproductive parts).
Parasites
: These include protozoa and parasitic worms. They need another living thing (host) to survive.
Prions
: These are proteins that don’t work properly. When they infect you, they cause other proteins in your body to malfunction, too.
Some types of these organisms live on or inside your body without making you sick. They can even be helpful by protecting you from the harmful germs. Only the germs that hurt us are called pathogens.
Advertisement
Examples
There are thousands of human pathogens. Some examples of common ones include:
Flu (influenza) viruses
Norovirus
(“stomach flu”)
SARS-CoV2, the virus that causes
COVID-19
Group A
Streptococcus
, the bacteria that cause
strep throat
Salmonella
, bacteria that can cause food poisoning
E. coli
, bacteria that can cause gastrointestinal and
urinary tract infections
Ringworm
, fungi that cause
athlete’s foot
and
jock itch
Candida
, fungi that cause yeast infections and thrush
Giardia
,
a parasite that causes stomach cramps and diarrhea
How do pathogens infect your body?
Pathogens can enter your body through your mouth, nose or any other
mucous membrane
(part of your body that opens to the outside). They can also enter through cuts in your skin. Once inside your body, they reproduce (make more copies of themselves) and damage your cells. Some, like certain bacteria, also release toxins that make you sick.
You don’t always get sick when you’re exposed to a pathogen. Sometimes — especially if you’ve been infected with it already — your
immune system
can fight it off before you have noticeable symptoms.
How do pathogens spread?
Pathogens can spread through:
Coughing
and
sneezing
Close contact with another person, like cuddling, kissing or sex
Shared utensils or cups
Contaminated objects and surfaces, like doorknobs, phones and countertops
Contact with poop, blood or other body fluids from an infected person or animal
Bites from bugs or animals
Contaminated or improperly prepared food or water
Contaminated soil or sand
Vertical transmission
(from a pregnant
mother
to the fetus)
Medical devices, like a
bladder catheter
or
central venous line
Medical procedures, like
blood transfusions
or surgery
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What symptoms do pathogens cause?
The symptoms you get when a pathogen infects you depend on the type. Some common symptoms include:
Fever
Chills
Runny
or
stuffy nose
Cough
Tiredness (
fatigue
)
Muscle aches
Headache
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
How do you kill pathogens?
Washing your hands
, disinfecting surfaces and safe food preparation (like cooking meats thoroughly) are usually the best ways to get rid of pathogens before they infect you. If you’re sick, your provider might prescribe medications to help get rid of them. Depending on the type of infection, these could include:
Antibiotics
Antivirals
Antifungals
Antiparasitics
Vaccines
can also train your body to recognize specific pathogens so you can fight them off more easily if you’re exposed to them.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
For something so small, pathogens can cause a lot of harm. Fortunately, simple habits like handwashing and safe food prep can go a long way to keep you from getting sick. When a cold virus or stomach bug does get through, your immune system is there to help get you healthy again.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment