Infantile Neuroaxonal Dystrophy (INAD): Symptoms & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Infantile Neuroaxonal Dystrophy (INAD)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Infantile Neuroaxonal Dystrophy (INAD)
Children with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) inherit a gene mutation that causes lipids to build up on nerves. This rare lipid storage disorder affects your child’s vision, motor skills and development. Symptoms like muscle weakness typically appear by age 3. While there isn’t a cure, therapies ease symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD)?
Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) is a rare disease that causes fat substances (lipids) to build up on nerves. It affects nerve signals, leading to a gradual loss of muscle control, vision, speech and intellectual development. These symptoms typically appear in infancy but may occur as late as adolescence.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
An inherited gene change (mutation) causes INAD. It’s a type of lipid storage disorder. Unfortunately, there isn’t a cure for this life-threatening condition.
What is a lipid storage disorder?
Lipid storage disorders are a type of
inherited metabolic disorder
. These disorders affect your
metabolism
, which helps convert food into energy and rids your body of toxins.
Lipids are fatty substances found in cell membranes and the myelin sheath that protects nerves in your brain and
spinal cord
. These are critical parts of your
nervous system
. When you have a lipid storage disorder, your body stores the accumulating lipids. You develop a storage disorder.
Lipid storage disorders like INAD are progressive diseases. The symptoms get worse as lipids continue building up in your body.
What does “infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy” mean?
You may better understand this disease when you break down each word’s meaning:
Infantile:
INAD is present at birth (a congenital disease). Symptoms typically appear during infancy and before a child is 3 years old.
Neuroaxonal:
The disease affects axons in nerve cells. Axons carry messages from your brain to the rest of your body.
Dystrophy:
Dystrophy is the medical term for disorders that cause tissues, organs and
muscles
to waste away.
What are other names for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD)?
Some healthcare providers also use the term “Seitelberger’s disease” to refer to INAD. Dr. Seitelberger first described the disorder in the 1950s. You may also hear the term “
PLA2G6
-associated neurodegeneration” or PLAN.
Advertisement
What are the types of INAD?
Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy is the most common type. Healthcare providers may call it the classic form of INAD. As the name implies, symptoms are evident during infancy.
With atypical INAD (aNAD), symptoms appear around age 4, or more rarely, as late as the teen years. Your child may have speech delays or appear to have
autism spectrum disorder
. The disease progression is slower.
How common is INAD?
INAD is an extremely rare disease. It may affect 1 child out of every 1 million to 2 million children.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD)?
Children with INAD inherit a changed or mutated
PLA2G6
gene from each parent. This gene helps make an
enzyme
(a type of protein) called A2 phospholipase that breaks down fats called phospholipids. This type of fat metabolism keeps nerve cells intact so they function properly.
In children with INAD, the changed
PLA2G6
gene hinders enzyme production and function. Sphere-shaped substances called spheroid bodies build up on nerves. These deposits often accumulate on nerve endings that connect to their
eyes
, muscles and
skin
. Iron may also build up on their brain.
Who is at risk for INAD?
Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy is an autosomal recessive disorder. This means a child must inherit a copy of a changed
PLA2G6
gene from each parent in order to develop the disease. The child’s parents are carriers of the mutated gene, but they don’t have the disease.
When both parents have the mutated gene, each of their children has a:
1 in 4 chance of not getting the mutated gene (no risk of disease).
1 in 4 chance of developing INAD.
1 in 2 chance of being a carrier who doesn’t develop INAD disease.
What are the symptoms of INAD?
With classic INAD, your infant is often on track for normal
child development
for the first six months to three years of life. Then, they slowly begin to lose acquired skills like sitting, crawling, walking and talking. This regression is often due to muscle wasting, which leads to low muscle tone (
hypotonia
). Your child may appear floppy, especially in their trunk area. As the disease progresses, muscle stiffness or
spasticity
occurs.
Children with INAD may also experience:
Ataxia
(coordination and
balance problems
).
Difficulty swallowing
(dysphagia).
Hearing loss
.
Inability to hold up or control their heads.
Loss of cognitive function that leads to
dementia
.
Seizures.
Speech problems (
dysarthria
) due to muscle weakness.
Squinting, wobbly eye movements (
nystagmus
) or other problems like loss of
vision
.
Infants with INAD often have distinct facial changes noticeable at birth, such as:
Crossed eyes
(strabismus).
Large, low-setting ears.
Prominent forehead.
Small nose or jaw.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is INAD diagnosed?
If this disease runs in your family, a prenatal test can determine whether a developing fetus has inherited the mutated gene. A
chorionic villus sampling
(CVS) test checks placenta cells for the genetic mutation.
Tests for infants, children and adults include:
Blood test to look for the mutated
PLA2G6
gene. A genetic test identifies the disease in 8 of 10 children with INAD.
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
to look for seizure activity.
MRI
to look for changes to the brain.
Nerve conduction test like an
electromyogram
.
Skin biopsy
or a
biopsy
on nerves or tissue to look for spheroid bodies in nerve axons.
Management and Treatment
How is infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) treated?
There isn’t a medical treatment or cure for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy. Treatments focus on easing symptoms to keep your child comfortable. These therapies include:
Anticonvulsants (seizure medications).
Feeding tube
(enteral nutrition).
Medications to ease stiff muscles.
Pain relievers
.
Physical therapy and proper positioning to support a child’s head and weakened muscles.
Sedatives.
What new treatments for INAD are in development?
Medical experts are conducting research and clinical trials to find new ways to stop the disease progression and potentially cure INAD. Potential therapies in development include:
Enzyme replacement therapy.
Gene therapy
.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for a child with INAD?
An infant with INAD may appear alert and responsive during their first few years. But as the disease progresses, you’ll notice a regression in vision, speech, motor skills and interactions. The disease can affect breathing, leading to respiratory infections like
pneumonia
. Most children with INAD die before age 10.
Kids who have the atypical form (aNAD) may start to decline when they’re between 7 and 12 years of age. They live longer than children with INAD, but their life span is still shortened.
Caring for a child with a debilitating condition can take a physical and emotional toll. You may be at risk for
depression
or other problems. It’s important to ask for support, take time for yourself and enjoy happy moments with your family.
Prevention
Can you prevent INAD?
If you and your partner carry the mutated gene that causes INAD, you can meet with a genetic counselor to discuss ways to prevent passing it to your children. One method uses preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) to identify embryos that don’t have the changed gene. Your healthcare provider uses in vitro fertilization (IVF) to implant these embryos into your uterus.
Living With
When should I call the doctor?
Call your healthcare provider if your child experiences:
Balance, movement or gait (walking) problems.
Breathing problems.
Muscle weakness or spasms.
Speech or swallowing difficulties.
Vision or hearing problems.
Advertisement
What should I ask my provider?
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of INAD does my child have?
What treatments can help?
What steps can we take at home to ease symptoms?
What medical specialists should we see?
Should my family get tested for the gene mutation?
Should I look for signs of complications?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out your child has an untreatable disease like infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) is life-changing. This lipid storage disorder affects your child’s ability to move, see, eat and talk. While therapies can keep your child comfortable, there isn’t a cure. Although, promising research and clinical trials are underway. If you have the mutated gene that causes INAD, talk to your healthcare provider about ways to lower the chances of passing it to future generations.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/18/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment