Ezetimibe: Uses and Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Ezetimibe Tablets
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ezetimibe Tablets
Ezetimibe is a prescription medicine that helps lower the amount of low-density lipoprotein or LDL (“bad” cholesterol) in your blood. It does this by keeping your small intestine from absorbing cholesterol. Healthcare providers may prescribe ezetimibe for people who can’t take statins or can’t lower their cholesterol enough with statins.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is this medication?
EZETIMIBE (ez ET i mibe) treats high cholesterol. It works by reducing the amount of cholesterol absorbed from the food you eat. This decreases the amount of bad cholesterol (such as LDL) in your blood. Changes to diet and exercise are often combined with this medication.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This medicine may be used for other purposes; ask your health care provider or pharmacist if you have questions.
COMMON BRAND NAME(S): Zetia
What should I tell my care team before I take this medication?
They need to know if you have any of these conditions:
Kidney disease
Liver disease
Muscle cramps, pain
Muscle injury
Thyroid disease
An unusual or allergic reaction to ezetimibe, other medications, foods, dyes, or preservatives
Pregnant or trying to get pregnant
Breast-feeding
How should I use this medication?
Take this medication by mouth. Take it as directed on the prescription label at the same time every day. You can take it with or without food. If it upsets your stomach, take it with food. Keep taking it unless your care team tells you to stop.
Take bile acid sequestrants at a different time of day than this medication. Take this medication 2 hours BEFORE or 4 hours AFTER bile acid sequestrants.
Talk to your care team about the use of this medication in children. While it may be prescribed for children as young as 10 for selected conditions, precautions do apply.
Overdosage: If you think you have taken too much of this medicine contact a poison control center or emergency room at once.
NOTE: This medicine is only for you. Do not share this medicine with others.
What if I miss a dose?
If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you can. If it is almost time for your next dose, take only that dose. Do not take double or extra doses.
Advertisement
What may interact with this medication?
Do not take this medication with any of the following:
Fenofibrate
Gemfibrozil
This medication may also interact with the following:
Antacids
Cyclosporine
Herbal medications like red yeast rice
Other medications to lower cholesterol or triglycerides
This list may not describe all possible interactions. Give your health care provider a list of all the medicines, herbs, non-prescription drugs, or dietary supplements you use. Also tell them if you smoke, drink alcohol, or use illegal drugs. Some items may interact with your medicine.
What should I watch for while using this medication?
Visit your care team for regular checks on your progress. Tell your care team if your symptoms do not start to get better or if they get worse.
Your care team may tell you to stop taking this medication if you develop muscle problems. If your muscle problems do not go away after stopping this medication, contact your care team.
Talk to your care team if you wish to become pregnant or think you might be pregnant. This medication can cause serious birth defects if taken during pregnancy.
Talk to your care team before breastfeeding. Changes to your treatment plan may be needed.
Taking this medication is only part of a total heart healthy program. Ask your care team if there are other changes you can make to improve your overall health.
What side effects may I notice from receiving this medication?
Side effects that you should report to your doctor or health care provider as soon as possible:
Allergic reactions—skin rash, itching or hives, swelling of the face, lips, tongue, or throat
Side effects that usually do not require medical attention (report to your doctor or health care provider if they continue or are bothersome):
Diarrhea
Joint pain
This list may not describe all possible side effects. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088.
Where should I keep my medication?
Keep out of the reach of children and pets.
Store at room temperature between 15 and 30 degrees C (59 and 86 degrees F). Protect from moisture. Get rid of any unused medication after the expiration date.
NOTE: This sheet is a summary. It may not cover all possible information. If you have questions about this medicine, talk to your doctor, pharmacist, or health care provider.
Advertisement
Copyright ©2025 Elsevier Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Terms of use
.
Note: Introduction and Additional Common Questions written and medically approved by Cleveland Clinic professionals.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad