Myelofibrosis: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Myelofibrosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Myelofibrosis
Myelofibrosis (MF) is a rare blood cancer where scar tissue forms in your bone marrow. It’s a type of myeloproliferative neoplasm, which means that your body makes too many abnormal blood cells. These cells can replace normal cells. Treatment goals mainly involve managing symptoms and conditions that arise, including anemia and an enlarged spleen.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Myelofibrosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Myelofibrosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Myelofibrosis?
Myelofibrosis (MF) is a
blood cancer
where scar tissue builds up in your bone marrow. This reduces its ability to make blood cells.
Bone marrow
is the soft, spongy tissue inside your bones. It makes
stem cells
that mature into red blood cells, white blood cells or platelets.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
With MF, a change in the stem cell’s genes causes it to become a cancer cell that multiplies fast. The cancer causes inflammation that creates scar tissue. The damage makes it harder for your bone marrow to make healthy blood cells. Meanwhile, your spleen (which filters abnormal blood cells) becomes overworked. It can enlarge and cause symptoms.
Myelofibrosis (pronounced “my-low-fi-BRO-sus”) is a lifelong condition that often progresses slowly. But sometimes, it gets worse fast. In some cases, it transforms into an aggressive type of acute
leukemia
. This is why your healthcare provider will manage your care closely once you’re diagnosed.
Types of this condition
There are two types of myelofibrosis:
Primary myelofibrosis
occurs on its own. It’s the most common type.
Secondary myelofibrosis or Post-ET/PV MF
occurs when
essential thrombocythemia
or
polycythemia vera
progresses. These conditions are
myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPNs). MPNs are blood cancers where your bone marrow makes too many blood cells. Primary myelofibrosis is also an MPN.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of myelofibrosis
Myelofibrosis often gets worse slowly. You may not have symptoms for years. When symptoms do start, the first to show are usually severe fatigue (a sign of
anemia
) and an
enlarged spleen
. An enlarged spleen may feel like heaviness in your upper left abdomen. Or the area may hurt.
Advertisement
Other signs and symptoms include:
Bone
and
joint pain
Easy bruising or bleeding
Enlarged liver
Fever
Getting infections easily
Feeling full when you haven’t eaten much
Itching
Night sweats
Problems concentrating
Unexplained weight loss
Myelofibrosis causes
Primary myelofibrosis happens when the earliest form of a blood cell — a stem cell — transforms into a cancer cell. The cell makes malignant copies (clones) that build up in your bone marrow.
The clones crowd out healthy blood cells. They also release substances that damage your bone marrow. The damage leads to scarring inside your bones.
Doctors don’t know what causes this process in the first place. But they do know that many people with MF have common
genetic mutations
. A mutation is a change in a gene. The most common ones are:
JAK2
CALR
MPL
Risk factors
You may be at increased risk of myelofibrosis if:
You’re over 60
You have primary thrombocytosis or polycythemia vera
You’ve been exposed to large doses of ionizing radiation (rare)
You’ve been exposed to high levels of industrial chemicals like benzene (rare)
Complications of this condition
As myelofibrosis advances, it can lead to:
Decreased blood cell production
: The scar tissue can crowd out the normal cells in your bone marrow. This can lead to anemia or low platelets.
Blood cell production outside of your bone marrow
: Blood cells unable to form in your bone marrow may develop in your spleen, liver or other organs.
High blood pressure in your portal vein
: Your portal vein carries blood from your spleen to your liver. Tumors from the out-of-place blood cells can put too much pressure on this vein. This can cause serious bleeding.
Acute myeloid leukemia
(AML)
: MF can progress to AML. This is the most aggressive form of leukemia.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider will do a physical exam and review your medical history. They’ll ask about your symptoms. Tests you may need include:
Blood tests
: They’ll check for abnormal blood cell counts and cells that look atypical. They’ll also check for levels in your blood that may mean an organ is stressed.
Imaging tests
: A CT scan or ultrasound can show if your spleen or liver is enlarged. An MRI can show scarring in your bone marrow.
Bone marrow biopsy
: A provider will analyze cells from your bone marrow to check for cancer. They’ll test for common gene mutations in MF.
Staging and risk scoring
As part of your diagnosis, your healthcare provider may stage MF as either prefibrotic (early) or overt (advanced). Prefibrotic MF involves less scarring in your bone marrow than overt MF.
Your provider may also score your MF. Scoring systems for MF consider your symptoms, test results and the type of mutation. The results range from
low-
to
intermediate-
to
high-
risk. This helps providers estimate your life expectancy after treatment.
Low-risk MF typically requires less-intensive treatments than high-risk MF.
Management and Treatment
How is myelofibrosis treated?
You don’t need treatment if you have low-risk MF and aren’t symptomatic. Instead, your healthcare provider will monitor you.
Advertisement
Common medications used to treat intermediate- and high-risk myelofibrosis include JAK inhibitors like:
Fedratinib
(Inrebic
®
)
Momelotinib (Ojjaara
®
)
Pacritinib
(Vonjo
®
)
Ruxolitinib
(Jakafi
®
)
For most people, the goal of treatment is to manage conditions that cause symptoms. Treatment may also slow disease progression.
Anemia treatments
Treatments that manage anemia include:
Medications
, including
androgens
, chemotherapy drugs, immunomodulators,
corticosteroids
and human-made forms of
erythropoietin
(medicines that aid red blood cell production)
Blood transfusions
Enlarged spleen treatments
Treatments for an enlarged spleen include:
Medications
, including
chemotherapy drugs
and
immunomodulators
or
targeted therapy
(like JAK inhibitors)
Radiation therapy
directed at your spleen (rarely)
Surgery
to
remove your spleen
(very rarely)
Stem cell transplant
A
hematopoietic stem cell transplant
(HCT) is a potential cure for MF. For some people, it’s not a cure, but it helps them live longer. Still, an HCT is a risky procedure with potentially fatal complications. It’s not an option for everyone. Instead, healthcare providers recommend it for people who are diagnosed as high risk.
This procedure involves replacing abnormal stem cells with healthy cells from a donor.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your provider will monitor you regularly. In the meantime, let them know what symptoms you’re experiencing. Report any treatment-related side effects you have.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Myelofibrosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy for someone with myelofibrosis?
People with more advanced scarring in their bone marrow live about
three to seven
years after diagnosis. People with prefibrotic (early) MF live for about 10 to 15 years. About
20 out of every 100
people with primary MF develop acute myeloid leukemia within 10 years of their diagnosis.
But it’s important to remember that your prognosis (outlook) depends on lots of things. Your stage, risk score, the type of genetic mutations you have — they’re just some of the factors that matter.
Ask your provider about what your diagnosis means for your experience of the disease.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Ask your healthcare provider if you could benefit from
palliative care
. Palliative care specialists can help you navigate the challenges of a cancer diagnosis. Unlike hospice care, these providers can help people with chronic illnesses, no matter their prognosis.
You can also ask your provider if you’re a candidate for a clinical trial.
Clinical trials
study the safety and effectiveness of new treatments. Doctors continue to discover new therapies that are improving the lives of people with MF.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
No two experiences of myelofibrosis (MF) are the same. Depending on your situation, you may go several years with no symptoms. Or symptoms may progress fast, and you find yourself suddenly adjusting to new medications. Regardless, an MF diagnosis requires collaboration with your caregivers. Let your healthcare provider know the symptoms you’re experiencing. Report any side effects from treatment. This may be a chronic condition, but there are treatments that can improve your experience of this disease.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a rare blood cancer like myelofibrosis, you want experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’re with you from testing to treatment and beyond.
Myelofibrosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials