Heel Bursitis: What It Is, Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Heel Bursitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Heel Bursitis
Heel bursitis is a type of bursitis that affects the bursae of your heels. Bursitis is swelling and inflammation in your bursae, the cushioning sacs that surround and protect your bones. Heel bursitis can cause pain that affects your ability to move your foot or ankle. Your healthcare provider can provide treatment options to relieve your symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bursitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Heel Bursitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Heel Bursitis?
Heel bursitis is a condition that occurs when a bursa in your heel becomes irritated and inflamed.
Heel bursitis (pronounced “ber-CY-tuss”) is a condition that occurs when a bursa in your heel becomes irritated and inflamed. This
inflammation
can cause foot, ankle and
heel pain
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A bursa is a small, slippery sac in your body that’s filled with fluid. Bursae (plural form of bursa) act as a cushion and lubricant. They protect
bones
from rubbing or sliding against
tendons
,
muscles
or
skin
.
Bursitis
can affect any of the bursae in your body. There are bursae behind both of your ankles near your heel bone (calcaneus). Fortunately, there are at-home and other nonsurgical options to treat the condition.
Types of heel bursitis
There are two main types of heel bursitis:
Retrocalcaneal bursitis
.
This is the more common type. It happens when the bursa between your heel bone and
Achilles tendon
becomes inflamed. It’s also known as Achilles tendon bursitis.
Subcutaneous calcaneal bursitis.
This type of heel bursitis occurs when the bursa between your skin and Achilles tendon becomes inflamed.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of heel bursitis
Heel bursitis symptoms may include:
Pain and swelling in or behind your heel
Tenderness
Increased pain when standing on your toes
Warmth around your heel and the surrounding area
Change in skin color
around your heel
Heel bursitis causes
Heel bursitis has many causes, including:
Standing, walking, running or jumping a lot
Quickly increasing the intensity of your activities or workouts
Not properly stretching
Tight-fitting shoes
Bacterial infection
Advertisement
Risk factors for heel bursitis
Heel bursitis most frequently affects people who overuse their ankles without proper conditioning. A sudden increase in walking, running or jumping can cause heel bursitis.
It’s important to wear proper footwear, especially when practicing a sport or exercising. Tight-fitting shoes can cause heel bursitis.
Heel bursitis can also affect those who have other disorders, including:
Haglund’s deformity
Rheumatoid arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS)
Psoriatic arthritis
Reactive arthritis
(formerly known as Reiter’s syndrome)
Pseudogout
Gout
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose heel bursitis
Before examining your foot, your healthcare provider may ask several questions, including:
Do you stand a lot?
What do you do for physical activity?
What types of shoes do you wear?
Have you had heel bursitis before?
Your provider will examine your foot. They’ll:
Check for swelling
Note any tender or painful areas
Check your foot’s range of motion
Ask you to stand on your toes or flex your feet
If your provider suspects that you have a bacterial infection, they may:
Ask if you have
chills
Check your temperature
Remove some fluid from the heel bursa with a syringe (bursal aspiration)
Test the fluid for the presence of
bacteria
What tests will be done to diagnose heel bursitis?
Imaging tests can help your healthcare provider confirm heel bursitis. These tests may include:
X-rays
. An X-ray will show a detailed image of your heel bone. Your healthcare provider will examine the X-ray for any abnormalities in your heel bone.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
. An MRI can determine if the cause of your heel pain is from something other than heel bursitis, like
Achilles tendinitis
.
Ultrasound
.
An ultrasound can show your bursae, as well as the muscles, tendons and ligaments in your heel.
Management and Treatment
How is heel bursitis treated?
Heel bursitis treatment depends on what’s causing your pain.
You may be able to relieve pain and inflammation on your own with:
Rest
. Stop any activities that cause or worsen pain, including walking, running or jumping. This will give the bursa time to heal.
Ice
. Apply an ice pack covered in a light towel to your heel and ankle for up to 20 minutes three to four times per day.
Proper footwear
. Don’t wear shoes that are too tight or have a stiff heel. Wear shoes with a U- or V-shaped indentation in the back collar to protect your Achilles tendon.
Medications
. Over-the-counter
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs)
, like ibuprofen and naproxen, may reduce the pain and inflammation.
Your healthcare provider may treat heel bursitis with:
Orthotics
. Heel wedges encourage proper walking form and reduce irritation in your heel. You can buy heel wedges in a store. Your
podiatrist
can also make custom heel wedges for your foot.
Physical therapy
. Stretching your Achilles tendon will take pressure off your heel bursa. Calf stretches, toe-to-wall stretches and heel drop stretches — as well as strengthening — may all provide relief.
Antibiotics
. If an infection caused your bursitis, your healthcare provider will prescribe oral antibiotics.
Bursa injections
. In rare cases, your healthcare provider may inject a steroid into your heel. This will decrease inflammation.
Surgery
. Surgery is rarely needed. But if your pain hasn’t improved in six to 12 months, you may have to see a foot and ankle surgeon to surgically remove the affected bursa (bursectomy).
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your provider about heel bursitis include:
What caused heel bursitis?
What can I do to manage my pain?
What treatments do you recommend?
What activities should I avoid? For how long?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bursitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have heel bursitis?
With proper diagnosis and treatment, the outlook for people with heel bursitis is good. Most people feel better after two to three weeks of home treatment. More serious cases may take six to 12 months.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk of heel bursitis?
You can reduce your risk of developing heel bursitis by:
Stretching and warming up before exercising
Wearing proper footwear when exercising
Walking and running on soft surfaces
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Heel bursitis is a common health condition that affects athletes, active people and people who stand a lot. If you develop pain in or around your heel, talk to your healthcare provider. Rest, stretching and strengthening exercises may reduce pain in your ankle and heel. If these methods don’t relieve your symptoms, your provider may recommend other options. While heel bursitis is a frustrating condition, you should be back on your feet again within a few weeks.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bursitis can make your hobby or your job a real pain. Cleveland Clinic experts can help you find relief and get you back to doing the things you love.
Bursitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment