Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Acute Coronary Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Acute Coronary Syndrome
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) refers to a group of conditions that involve sudden, reduced blood flow to your heart. This happens due to a partial or complete blockage in one of your coronary arteries. Common symptoms include chest pain or pressure (angina), shortness of breath and dizziness. ACS is a medical emergency that needs prompt treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Coronary Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Acute Coronary Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Acute Coronary Syndrome?
Unstable angina, NSTEMI and STEMI are the three types of acute coronary syndrome. STEMI is the most severe.
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is an umbrella term that includes unstable angina, STEMI heart attacks and NSTEMI heart attacks. With all these conditions, a blockage in a
coronary artery
reduces blood flow to your heart muscle. This means your heart isn’t receiving the blood it needs to work as it should, which could result in irreversible damage to your heart or even sudden cardiac death. You need treatment right away to open the artery and prevent or limit heart damage.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Acute coronary syndromes are life-threatening. Call 911 or your local emergency number right away if you have
heart attack symptoms
or your angina suddenly feels different than usual. Tell the operator what you’re feeling. Ask if you should take an aspirin.
Types of ACS
There are three acute coronary syndromes:
Unstable angina
: This is chest discomfort that’s different, more severe or happens more often than usual. Unlike stable angina, it occurs at times you wouldn’t expect. It means there’s reduced blood flow in a coronary artery, but no heart damage yet.
Non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)
: This is a heart attack that results from a partial blockage in a coronary artery. It can lead to heart damage.
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI)
: This is a heart attack due to a complete blockage in a coronary artery. It’s the most severe ACS. Your heart could be severely damaged (the muscle starts to die), or you could die without quick treatment.
It’s possible for unstable angina to quickly turn into a heart attack. And for an NSTEMI to turn into a STEMI.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of acute coronary syndromes
ACS symptoms typically occur without warning, even while you rest. You might have:
Chest discomfort, which can feel like pain, aching, burning, pressure or tightness
Pain that spreads to your shoulder, arm, neck, back or jaw
Shortness of breath
Dizziness or fainting
Sudden, excessive sweating
Fatigue
Racing or pounding heart
Upset stomach that may feel like indigestion or heartburn
Advertisement
It’s not always easy to tell if chest pain comes from your heart or
something else
, like acid reflux. That’s why you should always seek medical care for sudden chest pain. Don’t try to guess the cause or wait it out. If it’s an acute coronary syndrome, every minute can make the difference between surviving and not.
What causes acute coronary syndromes?
A
blood clot
in your coronary artery causes ACS. This is generally due to cholesterol plaque rupturing inside your artery, but it can happen due to blood clots coming from other sources. The clot partly or completely blocks the space where blood can flow. This means your heart can’t get enough blood. Severe blockages can damage your heart muscle or even be fatal.
You may develop an acute coronary syndrome if you’re living with
coronary artery disease
. This means you have cholesterol plaque buildup in your arteries. The plaque gradually narrows your arteries over many years. This may cause
stable angina
, or chest discomfort that comes and goes in predictable patterns, usually when you exercise or are physically active. Your provider may give you medicine to treat these episodes.
But things can quickly change if the surface of that plaque wears away (plaque erosion) or breaks open (plaque rupture). When the plaque ruptures or erodes, blood clots form at the spot and reduce blood flow, leading to unstable angina or a heart attack.
Risk factors
You’re more likely to develop ACS if you:
Are over age 45 (if you’re male)
Are over age 50 or past menopause, whichever comes first (if you’re female)
Have a
history of heart disease
in your biological family
Have high blood pressure, high cholesterol or diabetes
Had preeclampsia, high blood pressure or gestational diabetes during pregnancy
Have overweight or obesity
Use cocaine
Drink
too much alcohol
Don’t get enough physical activity
Smoke or use tobacco products
Often eat foods high in sodium, sugar or saturated fat
Have HIV or AIDS
Have other autoimmune or inflammatory conditions
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers diagnose acute coronary syndromes using a physical exam, blood tests and an
EKG
, which records your heart’s electrical activity. The results show whether your condition is a heart attack or unstable angina. Providers also review your medical history, including any medications you’re taking.
Further tests can help rule out other conditions and guide treatment. Possible tests you may need include:
Echocardiogram (echo)
to check your heart structure and function
Heart CT scan or MRI
to see detailed pictures of your heart
Coronary angiogram or CT angiogram
to see blood flow and find blockages
Stress test
to learn how your heart responds when it’s working very hard
Advertisement
If results show that blood flow to your heart is blocked, you’ll receive immediate treatment.
Providers may ask you questions if you’re able to speak. They’ll want to know about your symptoms. The more details you can provide, the better. Consider:
What symptoms do I feel?
When did they start?
What was I doing at the time?
How long did they last?
What made them go away?
Management and Treatment
How are acute coronary syndromes treated?
ACS treatment needs to happen fast. The longer a blockage lasts, the greater your risk of heart damage or death. Treatments involve medicines and procedures that open your coronary arteries to improve blood flow to your heart. You may also need medicines to help your heart work better, manage symptoms and lower your risk of complications.
Treatments that open up blocked arteries include:
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
: This procedure is minimally invasive and quickly opens your blocked artery to let blood reach your heart. It’s a common and very effective treatment for acute coronary syndromes. Providers use catheters to reach your heart through blood vessels in your wrist and/or groin.
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
: This open-heart surgery makes a new path for blood to flow around a blockage. It’s sometimes used in emergency situations when PCI isn’t possible or doesn’t work.
Fibrinolytic therapy
: This means you receive medicines through an IV or catheter to break up blood clots. Providers use this instead of PCI in some situations.
Advertisement
Medicines you may need include:
Antiplatelet drugs
and/or
anticoagulants
: These lower your risk of blood clots.
Nitroglycerin
: This relieves chest pain.
Statins
: These medicines lower blood cholesterol levels.
Beta-blockers
: These slow your heart rate, help your heart pump better, prevent irregular rhythms and lessen damage to your heart.
ACE inhibitors
or
ARBs
: These manage risk factors for heart attacks and strokes, improving your chances of survival.
Recovery time
How long it takes to recover from an acute coronary syndrome depends on the specific condition you have. In general, you may need several weeks or months to feel better.
Follow your healthcare provider’s advice as you recover. Don’t push yourself to get “back to normal” too fast. Your provider will tell you when it’s safe to return to usual tasks, like driving, working or lifting heavy objects. They might also recommend that you engage in a
cardiac rehabilitation
program for monitored exercise after you’ve had an ACS.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll need to see your provider for regular follow-up appointments and testing. They’ll give you a schedule of when to come in. These visits are crucial as you recover. Your provider will:
Check your heart function
See how well treatments are working
Adjust your medicines or doses as needed
Advise you on things like heart-healthy eating and physical activity
Advertisement
Be sure to tell your provider if:
You have new or changing symptoms
You have side effects from your medicines
You’re finding it hard to manage worries or anxiety about your heart
It’s common to feel
depressed or anxious
after having a heart attack or coming close to one. Your provider may recommend counseling or support groups. These can help you learn practical tips for managing any emotions you’re feeling.
Call 911 or your local emergency services number if you think you’re having unstable angina or a heart attack.
Don’t drive yourself to the hospital or let anyone else drive you. First responders are prepared to start treating you as soon as they arrive and while you’re in the ambulance. This saves valuable time and can even be lifesaving.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Coronary Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have an acute coronary syndrome?
Your outlook depends on whether you have unstable angina or a heart attack — and if it’s a heart attack, how severe it is. Unstable angina usually doesn’t damage your heart muscle. But a heart attack can. A STEMI typically causes more damage than an NSTEMI.
Your healthcare provider is the best person to tell you what you can expect. In general, treatments have come a long way over the years.
Many people
live just as long as others their age who don’t have an acute coronary syndrome. You can improve your chances of survival by going to your follow-up visits and sticking to your treatment plan.
Prevention
How can I prevent acute coronary syndromes?
It’s not always possible to prevent ACS. You can’t change many things, like age or family history. But there are some steps you can take to lower your risk:
Don’t smoke or use tobacco products
: If you do, ask your healthcare provider about ways to
quit
, like programs and medicines.
Eat
heart-healthy foods
: Talk to your provider or a registered dietitian about foods to eat or avoid. Small changes add up over time. Providers often recommend the Mediterranean diet and DASH diet.
Limit alcohol use
: Alcohol can raise your blood pressure and cause other
heart issues
. Talk to your provider about ways to limit or avoid alcohol and how this can help you.
Take your medicines
: If your provider prescribes you medicine for high blood pressure, high cholesterol or diabetes, take them exactly as prescribed. Managing these risk factors for heart disease can lower your risk of ACS and other serious issues down the road.
Stay active
: Physical activity helps you manage your weight, strengthen your heart and relieve stress. Talk to your healthcare provider before you start any exercise program.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Acute coronary syndromes are serious — but with quick treatment, there’s a good chance you’ll be OK. The key is to call for help right away. It’s also vital to keep seeing your provider for regular follow-ups. If you’re living with stable angina, make sure you talk to your provider about which symptoms should make you seek care.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you need treatment for coronary artery disease, you want expert care. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create a treatment plan that’s personalized to you.
Get Coronary Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/06/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment