Tubulointerstitial Nephritis: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tubulointerstitial Nephritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tubulointerstitial Nephritis
Tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN) is a type of inflammation that damages the tubules and interstitial tissue in your kidneys. Symptoms may develop suddenly, or you may never have any at all. Treatment involves avoiding or treating the cause, and you may also need corticosteroids to help manage inflammation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Tubulointerstitial Nephritis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Tubulointerstitial Nephritis?
Tubulointerstitial nephritis (TOO-byuh-lo-in-ter-STISH-uhl nuh-FRAYH-tis) is a type of kidney disease. It causes
inflammation
and damage to your
kidneys
. It affects the small tubes (tubules) and surrounding tissues (interstitial tissue) in your kidneys. But it doesn’t affect the tiny
blood vessels
(glomeruli) that remove waste and extra fluid from your blood. Waste and extra fluid eventually leave your body in your urine (pee). So, tubulointerstitial nephritis may not be as severe as other kidney diseases that affect your glomeruli if you get a quick diagnosis and treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN) is a big name. But breaking it down can help you understand how it affects your body:
tubulo-
. This refers to the tiny tubes in your kidneys.
-interstitial
. This word refers to the surrounding interstitial tissues in your kidneys.
nephr-
. This comes from the Greek word “nephros,” which means kidney or something that relates to your kidney.
-itis
. This means inflammation.
Without treatment, TIN often causes
chronic kidney disease
(CKD) and
kidney failure
.
Types of tubulointerstitial nephritis
There are two different types of tubulointerstitial nephritis. They develop at different times:
Acute tubulointerstitial nephritis
: This type develops suddenly, usually as an allergic reaction to certain types of medications.
Chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis
: This type takes longer to develop.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs of tubulointerstitial nephritis?
The signs and symptoms of tubulointerstitial nephritis depend on the type you have. Some people might not have any symptoms, or the symptoms may take a long time to appear. For others, symptoms develop quickly.
Acute TIN symptoms may include:
Peeing a lot more or a lot less than expected
Waking up more than once to pee (
nocturia
)
Pain while peeing (
dysuria
)
Fever
Lower
back pain
Flank pain
Chronic TIN symptoms typically include kidney failure symptoms, including:
Advertisement
Feeling really tired (
fatigue
)
Itchiness
Nausea and vomiting
Loss of appetite
Trouble breathing
Peeing more than usual
Tubulointerstitial nephritis causes
Acute TIN causes include:
Allergic reaction to certain medications
: These may include
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs),
penicillin
,
proton pump inhibitors
(PPIs), sulfa drugs (medications that help treat infections), antineoplastic agents (medications that help treat
cancer
),
diuretics
and
vaccines
. Medications are the most common cause of TIN.
Conditions that affect your
immune system
: These may include
lupus
and
Sjögren’s syndrome
.
Bacterial infections
: Examples include
coli
,
Proteus mirabilis
and
Staphylococcus
. These
bacteria
cause
urinary tract infections
(UTIs) that start in the
urinary bladder
and move up into the kidneys.
Viral infections
: Examples include
COVID-19
,
hepatitis B
,
HIV
and
cytomegalovirus
.
Fungal infections
:
Histoplasmosis
can cause acute TIN.
Parasitic infections
: Examples include
Toxoplasma
and
Leishmania
.
A
kidney transplant rejection
can also cause TIN.
Some chronic TIN causes include:
Certain medications, including analgesics and lithium
Heavy metal exposure, including lead and mercury
Conditions that affect your
metabolism
, including
hypercalcemia
and
hyperoxaluria
Genetic disorders
What is the most common drug to cause acute tubulointerstitial nephritis?
Some of the most common drugs that cause acute TIN include:
Antibiotics
NSAIDs
Proton pump inhibitors
Risk factors
Anyone can get tubulointerstitial nephritis. But you’re more likely to get TIN if you have a:
Hypersensitive reaction to a medication
Condition that affects your immune system
Bad bacterial, viral, fungal or parasitic infection
Job that exposes you to heavy metals
Genetic condition that affects your kidneys
Long history of taking NSAIDs
Complications of tubulointerstitial nephritis
Tubulointerstitial nephritis may continue to get worse. This can eventually lead to kidney failure (end-stage renal disease). Kidney failure treatment includes
dialysis
or a
kidney transplant
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose tubulointerstitial nephritis
Healthcare providers can use
kidney function tests
to look for signs of kidney damage. These are
blood tests
and urine tests (
urinalysis
) that determine how well your kidneys function.
In many cases, the presence of kidney damage symptoms is enough for healthcare providers to determine that something is affecting your kidneys and you need treatment. But the only way to know for sure that tubulointerstitial nephritis is causing kidney damage is to get a
kidney biopsy
. During a kidney biopsy, a provider removes a small sample of your kidney tissue and examines it under a microscope.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the best treatment for tubulointerstitial nephritis?
Tubulointerstitial nephritis treatment includes avoiding or treating the cause. A healthcare provider may prescribe
corticosteroids
to help manage inflammation if your symptoms don’t improve within a week.
Providers may also recommend ways to preserve your kidney function. They may advise you to:
See specialists, including a
nephrologist
Manage your
blood pressure
Manage your blood glucose (sugar) if you have
diabetes
Follow
kidney-friendly eating patterns
Quit smoking
Maintain a weight that’s healthy for you
Is tubulointerstitial nephritis reversible?
If you have tubulointerstitial nephritis, you can restore kidney function if you get a prompt diagnosis and treatment. Without treatment, TIN may cause permanent kidney damage.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Getting a tubulointerstitial nephritis diagnosis as soon as possible helps prevent permanent kidney damage that can lead to kidney failure. Contact a healthcare provider if you:
Have any changes to your peeing habits
Feel more tired than usual
Don’t feel like eating
Have pain in your lower back or sides
Have trouble breathing
Make sure to schedule regular appointments with a kidney specialist if you receive a TIN diagnosis. They can monitor your kidney health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have tubulointerstitial nephritis?
Your outlook depends on many things, including:
What’s causing tubulointerstitial nephritis
How quickly you get treatment
How well your kidneys worked before you got TIN
Advertisement
Many people have improved kidney function once they stop taking the medication that causes TIN or a healthcare provider treats the underlying cause. Though even with treatment, chronic TIN can eventually cause kidney failure.
Prevention
Can tubulointerstitial nephritis be prevented?
Scheduling annual appointments with a healthcare provider throughout your life is a good way to help monitor your kidney health and prevent tubulointerstitial nephritis, especially if you’re at a greater risk of getting TIN.
You can also take care of your kidneys by:
Eating healthy foods every day
Maintaining a healthy weight for you
Being active for at least 30 minutes for at least five days a week
Avoiding
smoking
,
vaping
and using tobacco products in general
Taking medications only as directed
Additional Common Questions
Is tubulointerstitial nephritis the same as pyelonephritis?
No. Pyelonephritis is another name for a
kidney infection
. But pyelonephritis can cause tubulointerstitial nephritis.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hearing you have a kidney disease can be a shock. It can feel like you don’t even have time to process your diagnosis before you must review your health history, schedule more tests or make appointments with specialists. It’s important to get treatment as soon as possible. But it’s OK to pause so you can reflect on your feelings and learn about tubulointerstitial nephritis.
Advertisement
Some cases of TIN are mild — you can make a full recovery without any permanent damage to your kidneys just by avoiding or treating the underlying cause. Others are more serious, and you may need to manage the kidney damage for the rest of your life. But it’s possible to manage TIN effectively while maintaining a fulfilling life and enjoying quality time with friends and family.
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have any questions or notice any changes in your symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your kidneys, you want experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work with you to craft a personalized treatment plan.
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment