What Is a Gynecologic Oncologist & What Do They Do?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Gynecologic Oncologist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Gynecologic Oncologist
A gynecologic oncologist is a doctor who specializes in cancer of the female reproductive organs. They use surgery, chemotherapy and radiation to treat cancer. They provide ongoing care to guide you from diagnosis to recovery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
What Is a Gynecologic Oncologist?
A gynecologic oncologist is someone you may see if you have cancer in your reproductive organs. These doctors specialize in diagnosing and treating cancers of the
female reproductive system
. This includes cancer in your:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cervix
Ovaries
Uterus
Vagina
Vulva
Fallopian tubes
Some gynecologic oncologists also manage complex noncancerous conditions that affect your reproductive system. This includes things like
fibroids
or endometriosis.
They all begin as OB/GYNs (obstetrician-gynecologists). After that, they complete extra training in gynecologic oncology. This is where they learn to diagnose, treat and manage cancers of the female reproductive system. This includes learning to perform more advanced surgeries. They also understand the unique ways these cancers and the treatment affect fertility, hormones and overall women’s health.
Gynecologic oncologists do more than diagnose and treat cancer, though. These specialists take care of your overall well-being when faced with a cancer diagnosis. They look for the best treatment options for your needs and offer support during some of your hardest days.
What does a gynecologic oncologist do?
Here’s a list of some of the things a gynecologic oncologist does:
Diagnose cancer
: They use exams, imaging and
biopsies
to diagnose cancer in your reproductive organs. They create treatment plans based on the type of cancer you have and the stage.
Treat cancer
: They use chemotherapy,
radiation therapy
, targeted therapy and other
cancer treatments
.
Perform surgery
: They perform surgery to remove tumors or tissue on the affected reproductive organs. They may use
robotic surgery
, laparoscopic surgery and
intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT)
.
Monitor recovery
: They check for cancer recurrence with regular follow-up appointments and tests.
Advertisement
Gynecologic oncologists work with a team of other cancer specialists that include:
Radiation oncologists
Surgical oncologists
Why would I need to see one?
You may be referred to a gynecologic oncologist if:
You have signs of cancer in your reproductive organs
A
Pap test
or pelvic ultrasound came back irregular
You need surgery for a gynecologic cancer
You need a doctor to manage
chemotherapy
or other advanced treatments for gynecologic cancer
It’s important to know that just because you’re going to a gynecologic oncologist doesn’t always mean you have cancer. It means that your healthcare providers believe you should see someone who’s an expert in both gynecology and oncology.
What should I expect from my first visit?
Your gynecologic oncologist will:
Talk to you about your health
: They’ll ask what symptoms you have, go over your medical history and do a physical exam.
Review tests or order new ones
: They may order bloodwork or use imaging like a CT scan or MRI to get a better idea of what’s going on inside your body.
Discuss treatment options
: They’ll explain what they believe is going on and which treatment may work best. They’ll discuss each possibility and its pros and cons.
You’ll also have a chance to ask them questions about what you can expect.
Questions to ask your gynecologic oncologist
You’ll probably have a lot of questions and concerns. This is a good time to ask questions like:
What type of cancer do I have?
What treatment do you recommend and why?
What are the risks of that treatment?
How often will I need treatment?
What are the chances of cancer coming back?
What’s the survival rate of this cancer?
How frequently will I be seeing you to check on the cancer?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A cancer diagnosis can turn your world upside down. A gynecologic oncologist is a cancer doctor who will guide you every step of the way. They can explain your diagnosis, answer your questions and create a treatment plan that’s right for you. You don’t have to face a cancer journey alone. Your healthcare team is there to support you and help you through this process.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment