Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental health condition that causes fear, a constant feeling of being overwhelmed and excessive worry about everyday things. These feelings are hard to manage on your own. It can affect children and adults. Talk therapy and medications can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)?
How to identify signs of generalized anxiety disorder.
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a
mental health condition
where you feel excessive worry about everyday situations. It happens often and may be hard to manage. It interferes with your daily activities at home, work or school.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It’s normal to feel nervous occasionally, especially after a major life stressor. Many people worry about things like health, money or family, for example. But with GAD, those feelings happen more often and more intensely, even when there’s little or no clear reason.
These feelings can lead to physical symptoms like restlessness, headaches or unexplained aches and pains. It can make getting through the day very difficult.
Generalized anxiety disorder is common. It currently affects about
3%
of the adult U.S. population and 5% of people at any point during their lives. Only
43%
of those affected are receiving treatment.
A healthcare provider can help you manage GAD.
Symptoms and Causes
Along with excessive worry, generalized anxiety disorder can cause physical symptoms.
Symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
The symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder may include:
Excessive and persistent worry about everyday things
Trouble managing worries
Symptoms may come and go. They’re often worse when you feel
stressed
.
You may feel physical symptoms with ongoing worry, too, like:
Difficulty falling
asleep
and/or staying asleep
Fatigue
Feeling on edge or irritable
Headaches
Heart palpitations
Muscle tension
Restlessness
Shortness of breath
Sweating
Trouble concentrating
Unexplained pains (like muscle aches, stomachaches)
Generalized anxiety disorder causes
Researchers don’t know the exact cause of GAD, but it likely involves a mix of factors:
Advertisement
Brain function.
There may be differences in how your
brain
manages worry and stress.
Genetics
.
GAD may run in families. Genetic differences are thought to lead to changes in important chemical messengers in your brain (
serotonin
,
dopamine
,
GABA
), which affect your thought patterns.
Life experiences.
Stressful or challenging experiences over time may shape how you respond to everyday situations.
Risk factors of generalized anxiety disorder
GAD can affect children and adults. The condition usually begins in childhood or
adolescence
but may start at any age.
You may be more at risk of developing GAD if you:
Are
female
Are biologically related to someone diagnosed with GAD
Experienced a traumatic event or significant stress in your life
Experienced
child abuse
Live with another mental health condition, like
panic attacks
,
depression
or a strong fear (
phobia
)
Manage a
chronic illness
Frequently use
substances
like tobacco, alcohol or
marijuana
Complications of generalized anxiety disorder
GAD may happen alongside other mental health conditions like
substance use disorder
and depression. It’s common to feel significant
mood swings
or changes in your behavior and energy level.
This condition can also raise your risk of
thinking about suicide
or wanting to
hurt yourself
. If you’re ever in a difficult spot, don’t hesitate to reach out for help when you need it.
Call or text
988
. This is the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (U.S.). Someone is available to talk to you 24/7.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
A healthcare provider, like your
primary care physician
, may refer you to a mental health specialist, like a
psychologist
or
psychiatrist
. They’ll ask questions about your mental health and medical history to better understand what you’re experiencing.
It’s OK to feel nervous or unsure, but try to be as open as you can. Your honesty helps your provider truly understand what you’re going through so they can offer the right care to help you feel better.
Your provider may do a
physical exam
, have you complete a mood questionnaire, like the GAD-7, make observations about your facial expressions and speech, and run tests to see if something else is causing your symptoms. These tests may include:
Blood tests
(
thyroid function test
,
blood glucose test
,
drug test
)
Echocardiogram
Generalized anxiety disorder criteria
Providers use the criteria in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(
DSM-5-TR
). To be diagnosed with GAD, you must feel worried most days for at least six months. The worry is hard to manage.
In addition to feeling anxious, adults typically experience at least three of the following symptoms (children only need one):
Feeling restless or on edge
Getting tired easily
Trouble concentrating or feeling like your mind goes blank
Feeling irritable
Muscle tension
Difficulty falling or staying asleep or sleep that doesn’t feel restful
Advertisement
These symptoms interfere with your daily life. They may affect your work, relationships and overall health.
Your provider will check that GAD isn’t caused by drugs or medicine you take. They’ll also make sure symptoms can’t be better explained by another mental health disorder. These may include panic disorder,
social anxiety
,
obsessive-compulsive disorder
or
post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), among others.
Management and Treatment
How is generalized anxiety disorder treated?
GAD is usually treated with psychotherapy, medications or a combination of both. Research shows that the largest improvement happens with combined treatment (medications plus therapy). Your provider will work with you to find the right treatment plan based on your symptoms, needs and overall health.
Psychotherapy for GAD
Psychotherapy
, also known as talk therapy, is a treatment that helps you explore and better understand your thoughts, emotions and behaviors. It involves working with a licensed mental health professional in a safe, supportive setting.
Therapy can also provide tools and strategies to improve your well-being and how you function day to day.
Cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT) is one of the most effective approaches for treating GAD. It helps you notice and change negative thoughts that make your anxiety worse and make you behave in a certain way. Over time, CBT may help reduce excessive worry and build healthier coping skills.
Advertisement
Medications for GAD
Medication may also be part of your GAD treatment plan. Common options may include:
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), like escitalopram, paroxetine or sertraline
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
(SNRIs), like duloxetine and venlafaxine
Benzodiazepines
(recommended for short-term use)
Buspirone
If you don’t respond to those medications, your provider may consider the following:
Tricyclic antidepressants
, like
amitriptyline
Second-generation
antipsychotics
Valproate
When should I see my healthcare provider about generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)?
If you’re taking medication for generalized anxiety disorder, it’s important to see your provider regularly. They’ll check how well the medication works and adjust the dose if needed. Let them know if you have any side effects or new symptoms.
If you’re in therapy, try to attend all of your sessions, and reschedule if you need to miss one. It can take time to feel the full benefits of treatment. But sticking with it is an important part of your treatment.
If at any time you feel overwhelmed or at risk of harming yourself, tell your provider. If you’re in immediate danger, contact 911 or your local emergency services number.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have generalized anxiety disorder?
The outlook can vary from person to person. For some, GAD may be a long-term condition that requires ongoing management. Some days, your anxiety may feel stronger. This is especially true when you’re stressed. Other days, it may feel easier to manage.
Advertisement
Treatment may make a meaningful difference. The right mix of therapy, medication and coping strategies can help you manage symptoms and feel more in control. Your
care team
will work closely with you to find what works best for your body, your lifestyle and your goals. And if your needs change over time, your treatment plan can change with you.
How can I take care of myself with this condition?
If you have GAD, there are steps you can take, alongside medical treatment, to help manage your symptoms:
Make small changes
. Cut back on caffeine, decrease social media use, socialize with friends and family, get enough sleep, eat healthy and stay physically active.
Try relaxation techniques
. Practice
yoga
,
meditation
or mindfulness techniques to
de-stress
.
Avoid addictive substances
. Alcohol and addictive substances may worsen anxiety and interfere with medications you take to manage GAD.
Find support
. Support groups offer a space to share experiences, learn from others and gain encouragement as you manage GAD.
Use
mental health apps
. Different apps can help you track mood symptoms and practice coping strategies.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) can make everyday tasks feel overwhelming. Simple activities, like cooking or leaving your house, may trigger anxiety. By the end of the day, the constant stress can leave you feeling drained.
But you don’t have to manage these symptoms on your own. A healthcare provider can help you explore coping strategies and find a treatment plan that fits your needs. Therapy, medication or a combination of both may offer relief.
Progress takes time. You’ll need to be patient with yourself. You might not feel different right away, but with help, you can start to feel more like yourself.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment