Allergy Shots: Effectiveness, Side Effects & What To Expect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Allergy Shots
Advertisement
Advertisement
Allergy Shots
Allergy shots are a long-term treatment option for allergy symptoms. They’ve very effective and have no long-term side effects. Risks may include allergy symptoms shortly after receiving your shot. You may need regular allergy shots for up to five years.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Details
Overview
What are allergy shots?
Allergy shots are injections that you receive over a long period of time to help reduce or even prevent
allergy
symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Allergens are substances that cause your
immune system
to overreact, which leads to allergy symptoms. Allergy shots contain trace amounts of allergens. They slowly desensitize your body to allergens by changing your body’s reaction from inflammation to tolerance. Over time, the allergen amount in your shot increases. This helps strengthen your immune system so that you have no allergic reaction or a minor reaction the next time you encounter the allergen.
Other names for allergy shots include:
Allergen immunotherapy injections (sometimes shortened to “immunotherapy”).
Subcutaneous immunotherapy (SCIT).
What kinds of shots are given for allergies?
Allergy shots are available for the following allergies:
Airborne allergens
. These include
pet allergies
, pollen from grasses, trees and plants,
mold
and
dust mites
.
Stinging insects
. These include
bees
, yellow jackets, hornets and wasps.
Allergy shots don’t treat
food allergies
,
medication allergies
or
latex allergies
. The most common way to avoid an allergic reaction to food, medication and latex is to avoid them.
How common are allergy shots?
Allergy shots are very common. Healthcare providers have prescribed them more than any other type of allergy immunotherapy for over 100 years.
Who can get allergy shots?
Anyone over 5 years of age can receive allergy shots. An allergist will determine if allergy shots are safe and effective for you or your child.
Advertisement
Treatment Details
What happens during allergy shot treatment?
Before starting allergy shot treatment, an allergist will order
skin tests
or
blood tests
to determine your allergies. You’ll then receive your allergy shots in two phases:
Buildup phase
. You receive allergy shots one to three times a week for six to 10 months. The allergen dosage starts low and gradually increases as your immune system develops a tolerance.
Maintenance phase
. You receive allergy shots about once a month for three to five years. If you have severe allergies, your maintenance phase may last longer than five years.
A healthcare provider will clean your skin with a disinfectant (usually an alcohol pad) before they inject the allergy shot into your upper arm, though they may also administer it in your thigh or hip.
You must stay at your allergist’s office for at least 30 minutes after you receive your shot so they can monitor and treat you for a potential allergic reaction. Allergic reaction symptoms may include:
Itching.
Shortness of breath
(dyspnea).
Wheezing
.
Coughing
.
Hives
.
Severe allergic reaction symptoms may include
anaphylaxis
, which may cause:
A
drop in blood pressure
(hypotension).
An increased
heart rate
.
Unconsciousness
(syncope).
Death
.
Treatment for a severe allergic reaction may include an
epinephrine auto-injector
(EpiPen®).
After your allergy shots, you should avoid exercising or taking a hot bath or shower for at least two hours. Exercise and a hot bath can increase blood flow to your tissues. This can cause the allergens in your shots to spread throughout your body faster. It likely won’t cause a serious problem, but it’s a good idea to wait.
What kind of healthcare provider gives allergy shots?
An
allergist
(immunologist) gives allergy shots. An allergist a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating certain conditions that affect your immune system, including allergies and
asthma
.
When shouldn’t I get allergy shots?
Don’t take allergy shots if you:
Have a
fever
of 100 degrees Fahrenheit (37.7 degrees Celsius) or higher, a
cold
or the
flu
.
Have a sudden (acute) asthma attack. Allergy shots can make your asthma symptoms worse.
Are taking
beta-blockers
. Beta-blockers are a type of medicine that treats conditions that affect your
heart
and
circulatory system
. They can prevent
epinephrine
from working in some people, which is what allergists use to treat a severe allergic reaction. If you’re taking beta-blockers, talk to your allergist about whether it’s safe for you to take allergy shots.
How long until allergy shots start to work?
Once you reach the maintenance phase, an allergy shot lasts about one month. The maintenance phase may last up to five years or longer until you no longer need to receive allergy shots.
Advertisement
Don’t expect your allergy symptoms to improve immediately. For most people, it takes six to eight months to start noticing a reduction in their symptoms. It may take a full 12 months to see the full benefits.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
Are allergy shots safe?
For most people, allergy shots are usually safe. But allergy shots contain tiny amounts of allergens. If you have an allergic reaction to an allergy shot, your allergist will quickly give you medicine to stop it.
What are the potential benefits of allergy shots?
Most people get allergy shots so they have no allergy symptoms or reduced symptoms that they don’t need to treat with medicines. But if you have severe allergy symptoms, allergy shots can help protect you from severe symptoms, hospitalization and death.
Do allergy shots really work?
Yes, allergy shots are usually a good way to reduce long-term (chronic) allergy symptoms. They don’t cure your allergies, but you won’t need to use much or any medicine to relieve symptoms.
Keep in mind that it may take up to a year of regular allergy shots before you start to see an improvement in your symptoms.
How successful are allergy shots?
About 80% of people see significant improvement in their allergy symptoms. This means there’s a reduction in their symptoms, though they won’t necessarily completely go away. About 60% of people have permanent benefits after three to five years of allergy shots.
Advertisement
What is the downside to allergy shots?
You may have an allergic reaction after receiving an allergy shot. Mild reactions include a stuffy nose, sneezing or hives. Severe reactions are rare, but may include difficulty breathing and a feeling of tightness in your chest. An allergist will monitor you for at least 30 minutes after giving you an allergy shot. They can treat you if you develop a reaction.
If you’re
afraid of needles
(trypanophobia), it helps to know allergists use very small needles to give allergy shots — usually 27 gauge, which is about half the size of a ballpoint pen tip.
Are there long-term risks with allergy shots?
No, allergy shots have no long-term risks or complications.
Recovery and Outlook
How long will it take for me to feel better?
It depends. Your body is unique, and how you respond to allergy shots may be different from others. Some people may notice their symptoms improving six to eight months into the buildup phase. Others may take up to 12 months before they have noticeable improvement.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call a healthcare provider?
Reach out to your healthcare provider if:
Your allergy symptoms remain the same or get worse after several months of allergy shots.
You have any reaction or symptoms following your injections.
You need to reschedule your appointment.
You have any questions or concerns.
Additional Details
How much do allergy shots cost?
The cost of allergy shots is usually between $1,000 to $4,000 per year. But the price varies between allergists, medical facilities and health insurance coverage. Talk to an allergist to better understand their exact pricing.
Advertisement
What is the difference between allergy shots and allergy drops?
Allergy drops (sublingual immunotherapy or SLIT) are a type of liquid medicine you take under your tongue to treat allergy symptoms. They don’t have approval from the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), so insurance doesn’t cover allergy drops.
Allergy tablets are another type of SLIT that has FDA approval. Currently, you can only use allergy tablets to treat certain airborne allergens. The following allergy tablets have FDA approval:
Odactra 12
®. This treats dust mite allergies.
Oralair
®. This treats mixed grass pollen allergies.
Grastek
®. This treats Timothy grass allergies.
Ragwitek
®. This treats short ragweed allergies.
Allergy shots are injections that help treat allergy symptoms. An allergist usually gives you the injection in your arm.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Allergy shots are a common, effective treatment for your annoying or even life-threatening allergy symptoms. It can be tough to be patient — you may not notice an improvement in your symptoms for up to a year, and you may need regular shots for five years or longer — but they can provide a great amount of relief from severe allergies. Talk to a healthcare provider about whether allergy shots are a good option for you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergies can wreak havoc on your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our team of experts can help create a treatment plan that’ll help you breathe easier.
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/09/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment