Asperger Syndrome: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Asperger’s Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Asperger’s Syndrome
Asperger’s syndrome is a diagnosis that healthcare providers no longer use. Prior to 2013, it described a brain difference that affects social interactions and certain behaviors. Today, people with the features of Asperger’s receive a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). But Asperger’s is still part of many people’s identities.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Autism Spectrum Disorder Care
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is Asperger’s syndrome?
Asperger’s syndrome was a diagnosis healthcare providers used before 2013. It described what providers viewed as a different type of autism. Now, both
Asperger’s and autism
fall under the broader umbrella of
autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Asperger’s isn’t a medical diagnosis anymore. Most people with a previous diagnosis of Asperger’s have what providers today call “level-one autism.” This means they need a low level of support in their daily lives. But everyone’s different, and some people diagnosed with Asperger’s may need more support than others.
Asperger’s might be a strong part of your identity if you were diagnosed before the medical language changed. For example, you might think of yourself as having Asperger’s rather than ASD. You might use the term “aspie” to describe your identity.
That’s partly why the language changed. The autism spectrum includes a range of features and abilities. An ASD diagnosis is flexible enough to allow everyone on the spectrum to get the support that’s right for them.
Asperger syndrome symptoms
Signs
of Asperger’s traditionally fell into three main groups:
Social interaction:
Trouble using nonverbal communication like eye contact, facial expressions and body language in social situations
Difficulty building
relationships
with peers
Not seeking out others to share things they find enjoyable or interesting
Difficulty engaging in back-and-forth social interactions, like conversations
Communication:
Difficulty starting or keeping up a conversation
Repetitive use of certain phrases or expressions
Less make-believe play than expected for their age
Advertisement
Restricted, repetitive or stereotyped interests and behaviors:
Unusually strong interest in specific topics, like baseball stats or how airplanes work
Needing to follow strict routines
Repeated movements (
stimming
), like hand twisting or flapping, humming or body
rocking
Fascination with an object’s parts
Former criteria for an Asperger’s diagnosis
The DSM-IV-TR (an older version of the
DSM-V-TR
) stated that a person needed to meet all of the following criteria for an Asperger’s diagnosis:
At least two symptoms from the social interaction category
At least one symptom from the restricted/repetitive/stereotyped interests and behaviors category
Possibly some symptoms from the communication category
Trouble doing daily tasks (like learning or making friends) due to symptoms
No
delay
in developing cognitive or adaptive skills
No delay in meeting early language
milestones
(this means they used single words by 2 years of age and phrases by 3 years of age)
Not meeting the criteria for another
pervasive developmental disorder
or
schizophrenia
Healthcare providers usually diagnosed Asperger’s in children. But some people didn’t get a diagnosis until adulthood. If you think you might be on the autism spectrum, it’s never too late to reach out to a healthcare provider and
seek a diagnosis
.
Is there an Asperger’s test?
There’s no test for Asperger’s because it’s not a diagnosis that providers use anymore. You might find some adapted tests online that draw on surveys providers previously used. It’s hard to know if what you’re finding online is current or accurate. To get the most accurate advice, make sure to talk to a healthcare provider.
Today,
pediatricians
screen for ASD at toddlers’ routine
well-checks
. When you bring your child for their appointment, your pediatrician will ask you to fill out a form and then discuss your responses. If your pediatrician notices signs of ASD, they’ll refer you to a specialist for further observations and discussions.
What causes Asperger’s syndrome?
Experts don’t know exactly what causes ASD. But they believe it’s a combination of
genetics
and
environmental factors
.
The diagnoses that now fall under ASD — including Asperger’s — are all considered neurodevelopmental disorders. If you have a neurodevelopmental disorder, you have
brain differences
that shape how you think, act and engage with the world around you.
Is Aspergers genetic?
Yes. Experts believe
gene changes
play an important role in causing ASD. These gene changes often pass down within biological families (they’re
inherited
). But they can also occur for the first time in a child without any family history of ASD.
Advertisement
What should I know about Asperger’s syndrome treatment?
ASD is a
brain
difference, not a disease. So, providers don’t “cure” it. Rather, they offer support and may recommend therapy for managing any challenges you face in your daily life. A range of
therapies
are available, and you and your provider work together to decide what’s best for your needs.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Even as medical lingo evolves, you have the final say over the words that best capture who you are. No two people with Asperger’s or ASD are the same. Just like no two people
in general
are the same. Choose the language that fits you. And if you know someone with ASD, honor their preferences for language use.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
There’s hope and caring for kids with autism spectrum disorder. At Cleveland Clinic, we design compassionate, personalized treatments for them.
Autism Spectrum Disorder Care
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us