Enteropathic Arthritis: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Enteropathic Arthritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Enteropathic Arthritis
Enteropathic arthritis (or enteropathic arthropathy) is a type of arthritis associated with inflammatory bowel disease. The condition causes joint inflammation and tenderness in your arms, legs and sometimes spine. It also involves digestive problems. Certain medications and lifestyle changes can help reduce symptoms and prevent joint damage.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Enteropathic Arthritis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Enteropathic Arthritis?
Enteropathic arthritis (EnA) is a type of
arthritis
that occurs with
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
. Other names for the condition include enteropathic arthropathy and IBD-related arthropathy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Arthritis is a long-term (chronic) condition involving swelling and pain in your
joints
. IBD is chronic
inflammation
of all or part of your
digestive tract
. If you have EnA, you have both chronic pain and swelling in your joints and inflammation in your digestive tract.
EnA is one type of
spondyloarthropathy
, a chronic disease of your joints. The condition can interfere with your quality of life, but there are treatment options available.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of enteropathic arthritis
EnA affects your joints and your gastrointestinal (GI) system.
Enteropathic arthritis symptoms usually affect your arms and legs, but sometimes include your spine. Symptoms affecting your joints may include:
Deformity (for example, fingers that are bent or bumpy)
Discoloration
Pain
Stiffness
Swelling
Tenderness
Warmth
Enteropathic arthropathy symptoms involving your GI system may include:
Abdominal pain
Blood in your poop (stool)
Frequent diarrhea
Unintentional
weight loss
You may experience GI symptoms first, then joint symptoms, or vice versa. Or both types of symptoms may flare up at the same time.
Enteropathic arthropathy causes
Scientists are unsure what causes enteropathic arthritis. They suspect a protein called HLA-B27 on the outside of your
white blood cells
may cause it. The protein can cause your
immune system
to attack healthy cells in your joints. But HLA-B27 isn’t specific to the disease. It can be positive in people who don’t have enteropathic arthritis.
Advertisement
Risk factors for enteropathic arthritis
Enteropathic arthritis occurs in about
1 in 5 people
with IBD. IBD includes conditions like
ulcerative colitis
and
Crohn’s disease
.
It may also be associated with other conditions that affect your
small intestine
, like:
Celiac disease
, an autoimmune disorder
Inflammation after infection with
Salmonella
,
Shigella
or other
bacteria
Intestinal bypass surgery
Whipple disease
, a rare bacterial infection
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose enteropathic arthritis
Your healthcare provider will perform a
physical examination
. Then, they’ll review your personal health history and ask you about your symptoms. They’ll want to know more about your joint pain and if it changes throughout the day. They’ll also ask you about GI symptoms, including
changes in your bowel habits
or
loss of appetite
.
Your provider will also want to know about your family’s medical history. They’ll specifically inquire about any IBD or arthritis in your family.
Tests that are used to diagnose enteropathic arthritis
There’s no specific enteropathic arthritis test, but your healthcare provider may order certain procedures to confirm that IBD and
inflammatory arthritis
are both present. Or tests may identify another cause of your symptoms. These tests may include:
Arthrocentesis
, which takes a sample of synovial fluid from your joints for testing
Bacteria culture test
of your poop
Biopsy
of tissue from your digestive tract
Blood tests
that identify inflammation, like
erythrocyte sedimentation rate
or
C-reactive protein
Blood tests to look for HLA-B27
Colonoscopy
X-rays
of the joints that are tender or painful
Management and Treatment
How is enteropathic arthritis treated?
Enteropathic arthritis treatment aims to relieve symptoms in your digestive tract and your joints. It can also prevent further joint damage.
Treatment options may include:
Glucocorticoids injections
, which can help relieve pain and swelling
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
, which can alter your immune system and slow the disease, like
methotrexate
,
sulfasalazine
,
hydroxychloroquine
and
leflunomide
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors, like
infliximab
Physical therapy
to improve function, as well as prevent joint damage and deformity
Surgery to correct your spine, in severe cases
Lifestyle changes, particularly to what you eat
How do I take care of myself with enteropathic arthritis?
Although EnA can affect your daily life, certain strategies can help you feel better and be more productive:
Apply heat to relax muscles and cold to reduce joint pain
Choose anti-inflammatory foods and beverages
Maintain good
posture
by sitting and standing straight
Participate in support groups to connect with other people who have arthritis, IBS or both
Stop smoking and using tobacco products
Stretch and get regular physical activity
Try
complementary therapies
like massage,
meditation
,
acupuncture
, guided imagery and relaxation
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your provider include:
Advertisement
What treatments do you recommend?
Should I avoid eating certain foods?
What can I do to prevent flare-ups?
Will I pass this condition on to my children?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is my enteropathic arthritis prognosis?
The outlook with EnA varies widely. The symptoms can be constant, or they may come and go. Flare-ups can range from bothersome to debilitating.
But most people with enteropathic arthritis lead productive lives and have normal lifespans.
Prevention
How can I prevent enteropathic arthritis?
Scientists don’t fully understand the causes of enteropathic arthropathy, so you can’t prevent the disease. But there are ways you can help prevent symptom flare-ups.
Focus on a healthy eating plan that includes lots of fresh fruits and vegetables. Try to fit some physical activity into your day. And if you
smoke
, quit. Talk to your healthcare provider about other ways you can reduce the number of flare-ups you experience.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s not enough that you have achy joints. But now, you have digestive issues, too? Enteropathic arthritis can be a painful and disruptive disease. The symptoms can vary, but when you’re having a flare-up, it can affect your entire day. Fortunately, there are treatment options, but it may take some time to figure out what works for you. You’re unique, and what relieved someone else’s symptoms might not do the same for you. Talk to your healthcare provider. They can help design the best treatment plan for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment