Mitral Valve Regurgitation: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Mitral Valve Regurgitation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mitral Valve Regurgitation
Mitral valve regurgitation is a leaky valve in your heart’s left side. This common form of heart valve disease may not cause symptoms if the leak is minor. But a more severe leak can cause symptoms and affect how your heart works. Treatment for a mitral valve that doesn’t close all the way stops your blood from flowing backward.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mitral & Tricuspid Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is mitral valve regurgitation?
Mitral valve regurgitation is the backward flow of
blood
through your heart’s
mitral valve
. This “door” connects the two
chambers
on the left side of your heart. It opens and closes when your heart beats. When your mitral valve opens, it lets blood flow from your top left chamber (atrium) down to your bottom left chamber (ventricle). When it closes, blood flow between those chambers pauses. The sealed door prevents blood from flowing back up into the top chamber so that it can go out of your heart to supply blood to your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But like other doors, your mitral valve can sometimes have trouble closing fully. This might be because of damage to the door itself (in this case, your valve tissue). Or, damage to the walls and structures surrounding the door (the left chambers of your heart) might keep it from working normally. In either case, your mitral valve can’t fully close. And some blood can leak out.
Doors in your
heart
can cause minor or serious issues depending on how wide the openings are. A minor leak in your mitral valve might not make much of a difference or cause you to worry. Your heart can easily compensate and you’ll feel fine. But if too much blood keeps leaking backward, your heart will have to work harder to send enough blood forward in the proper direction. Over time, this can take a toll on your heart, leading to symptoms and complications.
You may hear people refer to this condition by its shortened name, mitral regurgitation (MR). Other names include:
Mitral valve insufficiency.
Mitral valve incompetence.
Leaky mitral valve.
Mitral valve regurgitation is the most common type of
heart valve disease
in the U.S. It’s especially common among people as they get older (over age 65).
Types of mitral valve regurgitation
There are two main types of mitral regurgitation:
Advertisement
Primary mitral regurgitation
. In this type, the problem is the valve itself. Structural damage to one or more parts of the valve prevents it from closing normally. For example, the valve leaflets may become too stretchy to form a tight seal or too stiff to close.
Secondary mitral regurgitation
. In this type, the problem is
heart disease
that affects the heart chambers that support the valve (the left atrium or ventricle). For example,
cardiomyopathy
can cause your heart to grow larger and weaker. These changes can shift the positioning of the different parts of your valve and prevent its leaflets from fully closing.
MR of either type may be:
Acute
, developing suddenly and severely.
Chronic
, developing gradually over time.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of mitral valve regurgitation?
Mild mitral regurgitation may not cause any symptoms. But as the leaky valve gets worse and affects your heart function, a common symptom is
shortness of breath (dyspnea)
. You may feel like you can’t get enough air into your lungs, or you have to work harder to breathe when you’re resting, lying down, trying to sleep or are physically active.
Other mitral valve regurgitation symptoms can include:
Having
atypical chest pain
.
Coughing
.
Swelling
(
edema
) in your legs or feet.
Feeling
extremely overtired
(
fatigue
).
Feeling like you may
faint
without actually fainting (
presyncope
).
Feeling like your heart is flip-flopping in your chest or
skipping a beat
(
heart palpitations
).
Symptoms of mitral valve regurgitation may develop gradually or suddenly.
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have symptoms of
acute heart failure
.
These can happen if your heart is working too hard. Symptoms can come on suddenly and may include:
Breathing heavily.
Feeling like you’re suffocating.
Struggling to breathe while lying down.
Feeling tightness in your chest.
Having a low
blood oxygen
level reading with a home pulse oximeter (pulse ox).
Acute heart failure is a sudden, quick decline in heart function. It’s a medical emergency that can be life-threatening without immediate care.
What causes mitral valve regurgitation?
Mitral regurgitation happens when your valve fails to close completely. Your mitral valve has two flaps (leaflets) that open and close to send blood from your top left chamber (left atrium) into your lower left chamber (left ventricle).
Damage to the leaflets or other parts of the valve, and various medical conditions, can prevent your valve from closing tightly. As a result, some blood leaks backward each time your valve closes.
You might wonder what prevents your valve from closing normally. The specific cause depends on the type of MR you have (primary or secondary).
The causes of primary mitral valve regurgitation include:
Advertisement
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP)
, the most common cause in developed nations.
Rheumatic heart disease
, the most common cause globally.
Connective tissue diseases
.
Cleft mitral valve, a
congenital heart issue
(a heart issue that you have at birth).
Endocarditis
.
Radiation heart disease
.
Traumatic injury.
The causes of secondary mitral valve regurgitation include:
Ischemic cardiomyopathy
(most common).
Atrial fibrillation
.
Dilated cardiomyopathy
with an unknown cause.
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
.
What are the complications of mitral valve regurgitation?
Mitral valve regurgitation can be life-threatening without treatment. Here are some possible complications:
Your heart develops an irregular rhythm (atrial fibrillation), which sometimes leads to a
stroke
.
Your heart can’t pump well enough to send a normal supply of blood to your body (heart failure).
Blood pressure rises in the arteries that carry blood from your heart to your lungs (
pulmonary hypertension
).
Your heart suddenly stops beating (
sudden cardiac arrest
).
Diagnosis and Tests
How is mitral valve regurgitation diagnosed?
A thorough
physical exam
is the first step toward a diagnosis. Your healthcare provider will:
Ask about your symptoms and medical history.
Check your
vital signs
.
Gently feel different areas of your body to look for signs of swelling (edema).
Listen to your heart
and lungs with a stethoscope. A
heart murmur
may be a sign of valve disease.
Advertisement
Your provider may order tests to get more information.
What tests will be done to diagnose mitral valve regurgitation?
Healthcare providers commonly use
transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)
to diagnose mitral valve regurgitation. This painless, noninvasive test can show if you have a leaky valve or other problems with your heart structure or function. If your provider needs to get a closer view of your valve, they can use a
transesophageal echocardiogram
(TEE).
To assess the severity of the condition or plan treatment, your provider may order additional tests, like:
Cardiac CT scan
(computed tomography scan).
Exercise stress echocardiogram
.
Heart MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging).
Cardiac catheterization
(cardiac cath or
coronary angiogram
).
Management and Treatment
How is mitral valve regurgitation treated?
There’s no one-size-fits-all approach to mitral valve regurgitation treatment. Healthcare providers tailor treatment to your needs. They’ll consider:
The type of mitral regurgitation you have (primary or secondary).
The severity of your condition. They may describe it as stage A, B, C or D, with D being the most severe stage.
Your risk of surgical complications.
Your provider will explain the benefits and risks of available treatment options. It’s important to ask questions about anything you don’t understand so you can make an informed decision.
Advertisement
Mitral regurgitation is the second most common reason for
heart valve surgery
in Western nations (
aortic valve stenosis
is the most common).
Treatment options for mitral valve regurgitation include:
Mitral valve repair
Treatment options for
mitral valve repair
include:
Open-heart surgery
.
Minimally invasive heart surgery
(using smaller cuts).
Mitral transcatheter edge-to-edge repair (TEER). Your provider uses a long, thin tube (catheter) to attach a small clip to your valve leaflets. The clip helps the leaflets close more fully.
Mitral valve replacement
Treatment options for
mitral valve replacement
include:
Open-heart surgery to give you a new mitral valve. Your valve may be either mechanical (made of carbon and steel) or bioprosthetic (made of animal tissue).
Transcatheter mitral valve replacement
(TMVR), a less invasive option.
Treatment for heart failure
Treatments may include:
Medications
like
diuretics
.
Placement of a
left ventricular assist device (LVAD)
.
Palliative care
.
Treatment for atrial fibrillation
Possible treatments include:
Medications.
Procedures.
Surgeries.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mitral & Tricuspid Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have mitral valve regurgitation?
Many factors affect your outlook, including:
Your age.
Whether you have symptoms and how severe they are.
The severity of regurgitation.
Whether your valve is repairable.
The extent of damage to your heart.
Because all of these factors play a role, your situation is unique. Your healthcare provider is the best person to ask about the expected course your condition may take. They know you and your medical history, as well as available treatment options that may help.
How fast does mitral valve regurgitation progress?
Mitral valve regurgitation progresses slowly in some people and more quickly in others. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about the progression of your condition and how often they need to monitor you. They can also tell you how the condition may impact your life expectancy.
Prevention
Can mitral valve regurgitation be prevented?
It may not be possible to prevent this condition, but you can work with your healthcare provider to lower your risk for various forms of heart disease. They’ll give you advice tailored to your medical history and risk factors. In general, you can:
Avoid using all
tobacco
products.
Get regular physical activity.
Eat
heart-healthy foods
.
Keep a weight that’s healthy for you.
Visit your provider for yearly checkups to catch any problems early.
Visit a provider if you have frequent
sore throats
with
fevers
or have been diagnosed with
rheumatic fever
in the past.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
It’s always a good idea to manage your
blood pressure
and eat lots of fruits and vegetables.
Cardiac rehab
after heart valve surgery can help you get back to physical activity. Mitral valve regurgitation management includes taking medicine after you get a new artificial valve. You’ll need to take
anticoagulants
for the rest of your life to prevent
blood clots
. You’ll also need to take
antibiotics
before dental appointments or upper respiratory tract procedures. This prevents endocarditis.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your healthcare provider will tell you how often you need to come in for exams. The more severe your condition, the more often you’ll need follow-ups and imaging tests. It’s essential to go to all of your appointments. Your provider will monitor your condition and recommend treatment at appropriate times.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask to learn more about your condition include:
How severe is my mitral regurgitation?
What treatment options do you recommend for me?
What are the benefits and risks of treatment?
What lifestyle changes should I make?
How often do I need follow-up appointments or imaging tests?
What’s my outlook?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hearing you have a heart condition can stop you in your tracks. But as you learn more about your condition and get treatment, you’ll soon be moving forward again.
Mitral valve regurgitation affects everyone a little differently, and your healthcare provider will tailor treatment to your needs. Don’t hesitate to share your questions and concerns with your provider. They’ll help you understand more about the inner workings of your heart. They’ll also recommend treatments and lifestyle changes that can help you feel better and have the best possible quality of life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Problems with your heart can be scary. Our experts can diagnose and treat mitral & tricuspid heart valve disease.
Mitral & Tricuspid Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/22/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment