Seminoma: Stages, Causes, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Seminoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Seminoma
Seminoma is a type of testicular cancer that starts in cells that mature into sperm. There are three stages. If the number is low, it means cancer hasn’t spread. Treatment typically involves removing your affected testicle. You may also need other therapies. Seminoma treatment is usually very effective and can be curative for most people.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is seminoma cancer?
Seminoma is a type of
germ cell tumor
that most commonly affects one or both of your
testicles
(
testicular cancer
). In
males
, germ cells form
sperm
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Although rare, seminoma is very
curable
and has a high survival rate with proper treatment. Treatment typically requires surgically removing your affected testicle. This won’t affect your ability to get an
erection
or
orgasm
, or have biological children. If a provider must remove both testicles, you’ll still retain sexual function and, if you wish to have biological children, you can
bank your sperm
and use an assisted reproductive technique, like
in vitro fertilization
(IVF).
Is a seminoma a cancer?
Yes, testicular seminoma is a type of
cancer
. It usually affects your testicles. But it can also affect other areas of your body, including:
The space in your chest (
mediastinum
) that contains your
heart
.
The space behind your abdominal cavity (retroperitoneum), which includes your
urinary system
and
kidneys
.
What are the types of seminoma?
There are two main subtypes of seminoma. These are:
Classic (typical) seminoma.
Spermatocytic seminoma.
Classic (typical) seminoma
Classic seminoma usually affects people between the ages of 25 and 45. It doesn’t cause your body to make higher levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). AFP is a protein that develops in the
liver
during
fetal development
. High AFP levels in adults may be a sign of some types of cancer, including other subtypes of testicular cancer. But if you have classic seminoma, you don’t have elevated AFP.
Advertisement
Spermatocytic seminoma
Spermatocytic seminoma usually affects people ages 50 and older. It usually grows slowly and isn’t likely to spread to other areas of your body.
How common is seminoma?
Testicular cancer is rare — it affects about 1 in 250 males. But the number of cases is increasing, which is attributed to an increase in seminoma. According to the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), 54% of all testicular cancers diagnosed in the U.S. from 2001 to 2020 are seminomas. The
American Cancer Society
estimates there will be about 9,760 diagnosed cases of testicular cancer in the U.S. in 2024.
Even though testicular cancer overall is rare, it’s the most common cancer in males between 15 and 35 years old. According to the CDC, seminoma most commonly affects people in their 30s to 60s.
Age Group
Percentage of Seminoma Testicular Cancer Cases
Younger than 15
3.9%
15 to 29
32.1%
30 to 44
63.6%
45 to 64
73.2%
65 or older
57%
Age Group
Younger than 15
Percentage of Seminoma Testicular Cancer Cases
3.9%
15 to 29
Percentage of Seminoma Testicular Cancer Cases
32.1%
30 to 44
Percentage of Seminoma Testicular Cancer Cases
63.6%
45 to 64
Percentage of Seminoma Testicular Cancer Cases
73.2%
65 or older
Percentage of Seminoma Testicular Cancer Cases
57%
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a seminoma?
Seminoma symptoms usually include swelling or a painless
lump on your testicle
. Other symptoms may include:
A feeling of heaviness in your testicles,
perineum
or
scrotum
.
A dull ache in your testicles, perineum or scrotum.
Rarely, you may also experience:
Sudden, sharp (acute) pain in or around your testicles.
Blood in your
semen
(
hematospermia
).
If seminoma spreads (metastasizes), symptoms may include:
Lumps on the
lymph nodes
in your neck.
Cough
.
Shortness of breath
(dyspnea).
Nausea and vomiting
.
Gastrointestinal bleeding
.
Bone pain
.
Is seminoma aggressive?
In early stages, seminoma isn’t aggressive. But sometimes, it may grow quickly. If you have seminoma, a healthcare provider will monitor you to make sure it doesn’t spread.
What causes seminoma?
During typical fetal development, germ cells develop and eventually make their way to the fetus’s ovaries (
ova
or egg cells) or testicles (sperm). But if you have seminoma, your germ cells don’t develop into fully formed sperm. They divide and multiply, eventually growing into masses (tumors). Medical experts aren’t sure why germ cells sometimes don’t develop into typical sperm.
Who does seminoma affect?
Seminoma can affect anyone with testicles at any age. But you’re more likely to have seminoma if you:
Are between your 30s and 60s.
Are white.
Have a personal or biological family history of seminoma.
Have a personal history of
undescended testicles
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is seminoma diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can diagnose seminoma. They’ll:
Review your medical history.
Ask about your symptoms.
Perform a
physical exam
, which will include checking your testicles or lymph nodes for lumps.
If they suspect testicular cancer, they may recommend additional tests to make an official diagnosis.
What tests will be done to diagnose seminoma?
A healthcare provider may recommend one or more of the following tests to diagnose seminoma:
Testicular ultrasound
.
Other imaging tests.
Serum
tumor marker
test.
Orchiectomy
.
Advertisement
After diagnosing seminoma, a provider will use
cancer staging
to determine the size of your tumor and if it has spread to other areas of your body.
Testicular ultrasound
A testicular ultrasound is a noninvasive imaging test that uses sound waves to show real-time images or video of your testicles.
Other imaging tests
A
CT scan
(computed tomography scan),
X-ray
or
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) can determine if testicular cancer has spread to other areas of your body.
Serum tumor marker test
This is a type of
blood test
that looks for tumor markers. Tumor markers are substances that cancer cells make, or that healthy cells make in response to cancer. A serum tumor marker test will look for the substances alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-HCG) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Different types of testicular cancers will produce different types and quantities of tumor markers. Having negative tumor markers also doesn’t rule out the presence of testicular cancer. Some tumors don’t make any tumor markers.
Orchiectomy
A surgeon will remove your affected testicle and send it to a
pathologist
to examine it for cancer cells. Providers use an orchiectomy to both diagnose and treat seminoma.
Advertisement
What are the stages of seminoma?
Healthcare providers stage testicular cancer from 0 to 3 for seminomas and non-seminomas. Non-seminomas are another type of testicular germ cell tumor. They grow larger and spread faster than seminomas. Unlike other types of cancer, there isn’t a stage 4. In general, the lower the stage number, the slower the cancer grows. Stages 1 through 3 also have substages (A, B, C or S) to go into more detail.
Providers may also use the TNM system to provide further detail:
Tumor (T)
. The size of the tumor and whether it has spread to nearby areas.
Node (N)
. Whether cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes or your abdomen.
Metastasis (M)
. Whether cancer has spread to distant parts of your body.
Serum tumor markers (S)
. Whether blood tests indicate high tumor marker levels.
This information can be confusing or even overwhelming. But it’s essential information for your providers to diagnose and plan your treatment.
Management and Treatment
How is seminoma treated?
For all seminoma stages, healthcare providers recommend a radical inguinal orchiectomy. During a radical inguinal orchiectomy, a surgeon removes your affected testicle(s) and spermatic cord. Your spermatic cord carries semen from your testicles to your penis during
ejaculation
. It also supplies blood to your testicles and contains nerves,
lymph
vessels and the
vas deferens
. The surgeon will close off the
blood vessels
and lymphatic vessels to prevent cancer from spreading to other areas.
Advertisement
Other seminoma treatments depend on your cancer staging after a radical inguinal orchiectomy. They may involve one or more of the following:
Active surveillance
. A provider may recommend active surveillance after a radical inguinal orchiectomy to treat early-stage seminoma. It involves regular monitoring and tests to see if seminoma spreads.
Chemotherapy
. Chemotherapy uses
medicines
to destroy cancer cells.
Radiation therapy
(radiotherapy)
. Radiation therapy uses high-powered X-rays to destroy cancer cells.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have seminoma?
The outlook for seminoma is very good. It’s usually very treatable:
The overall
survival rate
is higher than 95%.
The survival rate is 99% with early diagnosis and if the cancer doesn’t spread beyond your testicle.
The survival rate is 96% if it spreads to nearby lymph nodes.
The survival rate is over 70% even if it affects other areas of your body.
After seminoma treatment, you’ll need regular checkups for the rest of your life to make sure cancer doesn’t come back. Your checkups may include:
Physical examination of your unaffected testicle (contralateral testicle).
Regular blood tests for tumor markers.
Periodic X-rays or CT scans.
What is the mortality rate for seminoma?
Even though seminoma is usually treatable, there’s still a small chance it could be
fatal
. According to the American Cancer Society, about 1 in 5,000 cases of testicular cancer is fatal.
Prevention
Can seminoma be prevented?
You can’t prevent seminoma. But it’s a good idea to perform monthly
testicular self-exams
to help keep track of any changes to the look and feel of your testicles. Schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider if you notice any lumps or size changes.
You may also be able to lower your overall cancer risk by:
Quitting smoking
and
vaping
.
Getting 20 to 30 minutes of physical activity each day.
Eating lots of fruits, vegetables and whole grains.
Limiting how much alcohol you drink.
Maintaining a healthy weight for you.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Even though seminoma has a very good outlook, finding out you have testicular cancer can stir many different feelings. Whatever you’re feeling is perfectly OK. Some days you may feel confident. Other days you may feel angry or frustrated. It’s important to take the time you need to process your feelings. The following tips may help:
Make sure to rest when you’re tired.
Find a good way to manage your
stress
. This may include physical activity,
yoga
,
meditation
or
art therapy
.
Look into
cancer survivorship
programs.
Find a testicular cancer support group.
Lean on your family or close friends for support.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider if you notice any lumps or other changes to your testicles. They can diagnose what kind of mass you have and, if necessary, recommend additional testing and treatment.
If you receive treatment for seminoma, be sure to schedule regular checkups with a provider to monitor your overall health and ensure it doesn’t return.
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
Here are some questions to ask your healthcare provider after you receive a seminoma diagnosis:
Has the cancer spread to other areas of my body?
Which treatments do you recommend?
What are the benefits and risks of your recommended treatments?
How long will treatment take?
Can I still have biological children?
Can I get a
prosthetic testicle
?
What’s my outlook?
Additional Common Questions
What is worse seminoma or non-seminoma?
Seminoma tumors usually respond to treatment better than non-seminoma tumors. Non-seminoma tumors consist of more than one type of cell and usually grow faster than seminoma tumors.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Seminoma usually has a very good outlook with treatment. Still, getting a cancer diagnosis is a major life change. It’s important to take care of yourself — not just your physical health, but your mental and emotional health, too. Seek out support groups that understand what you’re going through and turn to your loved ones for support. If you have any questions, reach out to a healthcare provider. They can answer any questions and recommend the best possible solutions for you.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/14/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment