Mastoiditis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Mastoiditis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mastoiditis
Mastoiditis is an infection of part of your temporal bone, the large bone behind your ear. It happens when middle ear infections spread to that area. Symptoms include ear pain, drainage and trouble hearing. Healthcare providers treat mastoiditis with antibiotics and by draining the infected middle ear fluid. Serious cases require surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Mastoiditis can cause swollen skin or redness behind the affected ear.
What is mastoiditis?
Mastoiditis is a
bacterial infection
in a part of your temporal bone — the big bone behind your ear. Mastoiditis starts as a
middle ear infection
. It once was a common cause of death in very young children. Now, thanks to vaccinations that prevent infections and antibiotics that
cure
them, mastoiditis is a rare condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But you can still get mastoiditis if you have an untreated middle ear infection. Although anyone can get mastoiditis at any age, children 2 years old and younger are especially vulnerable. It’s important to know the signs of mastoiditis so that you can seek treatment for yourself or your child as soon as possible.
Types of mastoiditis
There are two types of mastoiditis:
Acute mastoiditis
typically occurs a few days after an ear infection. It goes away within a month after treatment and doesn’t come back.
Chronic mastoiditis
is associated with a longstanding ear infection (typically present for at least a month).
Symptoms and Causes
What are mastoiditis symptoms?
Usually, symptoms of mastoiditis develop days or weeks after a middle ear infection. Mastoiditis symptoms include:
Throbbing
ear pain
that doesn’t go away
An ear that looks as if it’s sticking out more than your ear on the other side
Swollen skin or redness (may appear purplish on dark skin tones) behind your affected ear
Doughy or soft-feeling bone behind your ear
Ear drainage
that contains pus
Worsening
hearing loss
Headache
Fever
Vertigo
Confusion
Double vision
In addition to the symptoms above, very young children — children ages 2 and younger — may pull their affected ear and be fussy or
less active
.
Advertisement
What causes mastoiditis?
Mastoiditis typically happens when middle ear infections go untreated, allowing the infection to spread into the nearby bone.
Rarely, people develop mastoiditis without a middle ear infection. This happens when a condition called
cholesteatoma
causes mastoiditis. Cholesteatoma is an abnormal skin growth in your middle ear. It can block fluids that need to drain from your middle ear and lead to mastoiditis.
What are the complications of this condition?
Without treatment, the infection can spread and cause complications like:
Facial paralysis
Partial or complete hearing loss
Inner ear infection (
labyrinthitis
)
Infection of tissues covering your brain (
meningitis
)
Swelling in your brain (
encephalitis
)
Life-threatening inflammation throughout your body (
sepsis
)
Life-threatening complications from mastoiditis are much less common than they once were. Still, it’s important to get treatment immediately to avoid long-term issues.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is mastoiditis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will use an otoscope to look inside your ear. They may also do the following tests:
Blood tests
. They may check your blood for signs of an infection or inflammation.
Ear
culture
. Your provider will test the drainage coming from your ear for signs of the bacteria.
Computed tomography (CT) scan
. This test creates detailed images of the inside of your skull so providers can see where the infection is.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
. Providers sometimes use this test to check the area between your ear and your brain.
Management and Treatment
How is mastoiditis treated?
Often, healthcare providers treat mastoiditis with
antibiotics
and
steroids
. If your middle ear isn’t draining infected fluid on its own, they’ll perform a
myringotomy
. For this procedure, a provider makes a tiny hole in your
eardrum
, so the fluid gathered behind it can drain. They may place small, hollow cylinders called ear tubes into the hole, so the fluid can continue to seep out. The ear tubes usually fall out on their own within six months to a year.
If these treatments don’t help or there’s a pocket of pus (
abscess
) in part of your temporal bone, you may need surgery (
mastoidectomy
) to remove the infected bone.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have/my child has this condition?
Usually, mastoiditis symptoms go away a few days after you or your child starts taking antibiotics. It’s important to finish taking all antibiotics as prescribed so the infection doesn’t come back.
For severe cases, you or your child may need follow-up appointments to check for long-term hearing loss.
Prevention
Can mastoiditis be prevented?
The best thing you can do to reduce your risk of mastoiditis is to get treated for ear infections ASAP. You can also take steps to protect your child from infections. You can:
Vaccinate your child
. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends children up to age 2 receive pneumococcal vaccinations. This vaccine protects against the bacteria that most commonly cause ear infections that lead to mastoiditis.
Limit the use of pacifiers
. Pacifiers may be parents’ go-to for fussy babies and toddlers. But extended pacifier use increases the risk of developing middle ear infections.
Don’t smoke
.
Secondhand smoke
increases the likelihood of ear infections. Be sure no one smokes around your child.
Control
allergies
. Inflammation and mucus caused by allergic reactions can block your child’s
eustachian tube
. This increases the risk of ear infections.
Prevent
colds
. Most ear infections start with a cold, so try to limit your child’s exposure to other kids who are sick as best as you can.
Advertisement
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Follow your healthcare provider’s instructions about caring for yourself or your child after treatment. For example, you may need to avoid swimming for a while to keep water out of your ear. You may need to put a cotton ball lined with petroleum jelly (like Vaseline®) in your ear when you’re bathing or showering to keep water out.
Your provider will tell you what to do.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you or your child has symptoms of an ear infection, like ear pain that doesn’t improve. Ear infections are treatable. But ignoring symptoms can allow the infection to spread.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask include:
What treatments will my child need to get rid of mastoiditis?
Will they need to be admitted to the hospital?
What are signs the infection has returned?
How can I prevent future ear infections?
Will my child need tests to check for hearing-related issues?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Years ago, mastoiditis was a common, serious illness that could be fatal for very young children. Now, we have vaccinations to prevent the middle ear infection that causes mastoiditis. And we have antibiotics to treat those infections. Take steps to protect you and your child from developing ear infections. If you think you or your child has a middle ear infection, contact a healthcare provider to get treatment and reduce the risk of mastoiditis.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have conditions affecting your ears, nose and throat, you want experts you can trust. Cleveland Clinic’s otolaryngology specialists can help.
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment