What Is a Dentist?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Dentist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dentist
A dentist is a doctor who diagnoses and treats oral health conditions. Just as you visit your physician for regular checkups, you should see your dentist at least twice a year for exams and cleanings. Routine dental care reduces your risk for oral health issues and improves your overall well-being.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
General dentists take care of your overall oral health. Dental specialists provide care when you have a specific need.
What is a dentist?
Dentists are healthcare providers who diagnose and treat oral health conditions. They help keep your
teeth
and
gums
in tip-top shape. Like physicians, dentists are doctors who help support your overall health.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A dentist can do a wide variety of procedures, including:
Check-ups
to assess the health of your teeth and gums.
Preventive care
, like
cleanings
,
fluoride
and
sealants
, to keep your
mouth
healthy.
Restorative dentistry
to repair or replace damaged or missing teeth.
Cosmetic dentistry
to enhance the appearance of your smile.
Dentists can also prescribe
medications
when necessary. These can include:
Anti-anxiety medicines
to treat
dental phobias
.
Antibiotics
to prevent and treat
bacterial infections
in your mouth.
Sedatives
to help you relax during dental procedures.
Pain relievers
to reduce side effects associated with oral health conditions.
Types of dentists
General dentists often practice family dentistry. They offer a broad range of services, from sealants and teeth whitening to
fillings
and
dental implants
. General dentists are probably who you imagine when you think about visiting the dental office.
But there are dental specialists, too, including:
Endodontists
:
Root canal
specialists who focus on treating conditions inside your tooth.
Oral surgeons
: Specialists who do
extractions
and other complex surgeries involving your mouth and teeth.
Orthodontists
: Dental specialists who focus on aligning your bite with
braces
, clear aligners and other appliances.
Pediatric dentists (pedodontists)
: Dentists who specialize in treating oral health conditions in children.
Periodontists
: Dental specialists who focus on treating
gum disease
and other conditions affecting the tissues that support your teeth.
Prosthodontists
. Dentists who specialize in making tooth prosthetics like
crowns
,
bridges
and
dentures
.
Advertisement
There are other dental specialties, too. For example:
Public health dentists
develop programs that affect the larger community, including those who don’t have access to regular dental care.
Forensic dentists
work with the legal system to identify victims and analyze crime scene evidence (like bite marks).
How often should you go to the dentist?
The American Dental Association (ADA) recommends visiting your dentist regularly for exams and cleanings. Twice a year works for many people, but you might need more frequent visits if you’re prone to
cavities
or gum disease.
Visiting your dentist regularly helps detect oral health issues before they worsen — saving you time, worry and money in the long run.
You should also schedule an appointment with your dentist if you develop:
A
toothache
.
An
abscessed tooth
.
Bruxism (teeth grinding)
.
Chipped
or
broken teeth
.
Jaw pain
.
Mouth ulcers
.
Persistent
bad breath (halitosis)
.
Swollen
,
bleeding gums
.
Tooth sensitivity
.
What if I’m anxious about visiting the dentist?
Fear of dentists is common. Maybe you even avoid necessary dental care due to
anxiety
. If you’re nervous about visiting the dentist, tell your provider. Many dentists offer
sedation
options to keep you comfortable during procedures.
What’s the difference between a DDS and a DMD?
If you live in the U.S., you may see one of two titles following a dentist’s name:
DDS
: Doctor of Dental Surgery.
DMD
: Doctor of Dental Medicine (Doctor of Medicine in Dentistry).
If you see either of these titles, it means that your dentist graduated from an accredited dental school. A DDS and DMD receive the same amount of training and can do the same dental procedures.
How long does it take to become a dentist?
In the U.S., general dentists usually go to school for eight years. This includes four years for undergraduate studies and four years to complete dental school. Dental specialists go to school for 10 to 11 years. This includes four years for undergraduate studies, four years to complete dental school, plus two to three years to complete a residency program.
What’s a board-certified dentist?
Board certification by organizations like the American Board of General Dentistry and the Academy of General Dentistry means that a dentist commits themselves to excellence in their field. Following graduation from dental school or residency, a dentist who wishes to become certified must pass rigorous testing that includes written, oral and clinical exams.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Healthcare providers have long recognized the connection between oral health and whole-body health. If you have an infection in your mouth, then it’s in the rest of your body, too. In addition to protecting yourself against cavities and gum disease, visiting your dentist regularly gives you the best chance to live a long and healthy life.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Dentistry plays an important role in oral health. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can design a personalized plan that will keep you smiling for the long haul.
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/03/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment