IgA Deficiency: Symptoms, Causes, Diagnosis & Treatments
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
IgA Deficiency
Advertisement
Advertisement
IgA Deficiency
IgA deficiency happens when your immune system doesn’t make immunoglobulin A (IgA). IgA helps you fight infections in your eyes, sinuses, airways and GI tract. It’s a mild form of immunodeficiency. But it can still make you sick more often and more severely than most people. Your provider will suggest ways to manage illnesses when you get sick.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is IgA Deficiency?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is IgA Deficiency?
Getting sick more often than most people is the most common sign of IgA deficiency.
IgA deficiency is a genetic condition that means your body doesn’t produce as many immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibodies as it should. Healthcare providers sometimes call it selective IgA deficiency, SIgAD or low IgA.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Immunoglobulins are proteins your
immune system
makes that protect your body against infections. IgA protects membranes throughout your body, including in your:
Eyes
Ears
Mouth
Airways
Digestive system
SIgAD is a
primary immunodeficiency
disorder. Immunodeficiency disorders suppress your immune system and keep it from working properly. Your immune system is like your body’s built-in security system. Usually, it automatically detects substances that shouldn’t be in your body and sends out special cells to eliminate them. Immunodeficiency disorders weaken your body’s natural ability to defend itself. This can make you more likely to get sick and experience more severe symptoms and complications when you do.
If you have IgA deficiency, your B cells may not work correctly. B cells are a type of
white blood cell
that make infection-fighting proteins called
antibodies
.
The defective
B cells
might cause your body to make significantly less IgA than usual. Or none at all. Either way, your immune system won’t have all the tools it needs to fight infections.
It’s like putting together a puzzle that’s missing a handful of pieces. It might look mostly like the picture on the box when you’re done. But there are some areas not filled in. The missing pieces are your IgA antibodies.
Advertisement
Most people with selective IgA deficiency never experience symptoms or complications. You may not need to worry about it at all. A healthcare provider will help you understand the changes to your immune system and how they may affect you.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of selective IgA deficiency
Getting sick more often and more severely than most people is the most common sign of SIgAD. But it doesn’t usually cause symptoms you can feel or notice.
You may be more likely to get sick from infections that IgA is supposed to fight, including:
Eye infections
, especially
pink eye
Ear infections
Sinus infections
Bronchitis
Upper respiratory infections
Pneumonia
You might also be more likely to have other health conditions that cause
inflammation
in your eyes, mouth, airways and digestive system, like:
Asthma
Allergies
Chronic diarrhea
Gastrointestinal diseases
like
ulcerative colitis
or
Crohn’s disease
IgA deficiency causes
Selective IgA deficiency is usually a genetic condition. That means biological parents pass the
genetic changes
that cause it to their children. It can be both an
autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive
condition.
Some people develop IgA deficiency as a side effect from certain medications, including:
Immunosuppressants
Penicillamine
Phenytoin
Sulfasalazine
Risk factors
Anyone can be born with IgA deficiency. But it’s almost always passed through biological families. You’re 50 times more likely to develop it if one of your biological parents has this condition.
People who are white or have European ethnic backgrounds have a higher risk. They’re more likely to have selective IgA deficiency in their biological family and pass it through generations. Experts estimate that around 1 in 500 people who are white have this disease.
What are the complications of selective IgA deficiency?
You probably won’t experience any complications from having IgA deficiency. Getting sick more often and more severely than usual is the most common issue.
Having this condition can make you more likely to develop some
autoimmune diseases
, including:
Rheumatoid arthritis
Lupus
Celiac disease
Does low IgA cause fatigue?
Having this disease doesn’t cause
fatigue
, but it’s a common symptom of autoimmune diseases you might also have. Low IgA isn’t directly making you tired. But having an autoimmune condition might be.
Talk to your provider if you’re feeling tired or like you don’t have enough energy. They’ll help you find ways to manage the tiredness, no matter what’s causing it.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose this condition?
A healthcare provider will diagnose selective IgA deficiency with a
blood test
. SIgAD is often diagnosed by accident when providers are checking for other conditions. The low levels of IgA may show up in one of your blood samples if your provider is testing you for another health condition.
Advertisement
If your provider thinks you might have IgA deficiency based on your health history, they might order the blood test that checks for it. Tell your provider if you know someone in your family has it.
Immunologists
may order blood tests to evaluate someone who has frequent infections or signs of autoimmune diseases. You might also need to see a
rheumatologist
.
Management and Treatment
What are selective IgA deficiency treatments?
There’s no treatment for IgA deficiency itself. Your provider will suggest ways to manage any symptoms you experience. Or infections that make you sick.
You might need
antibiotics
to treat bacterial infections. Your provider may suggest
IVIG infusions
to strengthen your immune system’s natural defenses. You’ll also need medications or other treatments to manage any autoimmune diseases you may have.
How do you fix this disorder?
There’s no way to fix or correct SIgAD. Some children start producing correct amounts of IgA as they grow and develop. But there’s no way to guarantee this happens.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit your healthcare provider if you feel like you get sick too often. Or if you experience symptoms you can’t explain.
Even if it feels like a small issue, you shouldn’t feel sick all the time. Talk to your provider if it seems like it takes longer than usual to recover after even minor illnesses.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have IgA deficiency?
Most people with selective IgA deficiency don’t experience any complications. It’s the mildest form of immunodeficiency. But it can still impact your daily routine.
You might get sick more often than most people. And you might have to be more cautious about being around people who are sick. Make sure your loved ones know that you have a higher risk of getting sick than most people. They can help you stay healthy by letting you know when they’re sick and helping you avoid catching illnesses they have.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Just because IgA deficiency is milder than other types of immunodeficiencies, that doesn’t mean getting sick more often is easy. Remember to be gentle with yourself. Give yourself credit for managing the condition and dealing with the day-to-day wrinkles many people don’t have to think about.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/09/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment