Ewing Sarcoma: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ewing Sarcoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ewing Sarcoma
Ewing sarcoma is a group of rare cancerous tumors in your bones or your soft tissues. The conditions typically affect people age 10 to 20. Symptoms are bone pain, swollen areas on your bones or lumps that feel warm to the touch. Treatment is chemotherapy followed by surgery to remove the tumors.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Ewing Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Ewing Sarcoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Ewing Sarcoma?
Ewing sarcoma is a rare cancer. It may affect your bones or soft tissue. Ewing sarcoma of the bone is the most common type.
Ewing sarcoma refers to rare cancerous tumors in your bones and soft tissues like your muscles, tendons and ligaments. The condition, which is also known as Ewing tumor or Ewing’s sarcoma, may start in your hip, ribs or shoulder blades, thighbone or shinbone.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The tumors often develop during puberty, when your bones are growing very quickly. It typically affects people between ages 10 and 20, with most people receiving a diagnosis at age 15. But Ewing sarcoma may affect younger children and people in their late 20s to early 30s.
Types of this condition
There are three types of Ewing sarcoma:
Ewing sarcoma of bone
: This is the most common type.
Extraosseous Ewing tumor (EOE)
: These tumors affect the soft tissues that surround your bones. Soft tissues include muscles, tendons and ligaments.
Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PPNET)
: This type of Ewing Sarcoma can start in bone or soft tissue.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Ewing sarcoma
Ewing sarcoma may look like a bump or lump on your arms, legs or chest. Other symptoms that you or your child could have include:
Bone pain that comes and goes and seems to get worse at night
Swelling in the tissue around bones. It may hurt when you touch your bones or the area next to them
Lumps near the surface of your skin that may feel warm and soft to the touch
Fever that doesn’t go away
Broken bones that happen without an injury
Fatigue and unexpected weight loss if Ewing sarcoma spreads
Ewing sarcoma causes
A
genetic mutation
(change) that happens after you’re born causes Ewing sarcoma. The change involves the
EWSR1
gene and the
FLI1
gene. The two genes fuse to create a new gene that causes cells to multiply and create cancerous tumors.
Advertisement
Researchers don’t know what triggers the change. But they’ve ruled out exposure to carcinogens that cause other types of cancer. That’s because Ewing sarcoma typically affects children and young adults who don’t experience long-term exposure to substances that can cause cancer.
Risk factors
A risk factor is something that can increase your risk of getting cancer or other diseases. The American Cancer Society lists the following risk factors for Ewing sarcoma:
Your age
: Anyone can get this disease, but it most often affects people ages 10 to 20.
Your sex
: Ewing sarcoma is slightly more common in
males
than females.
Your race
: The disease is more likely to affect people who are white (Hispanic or non-Hispanic) than people who are Asian American or Black
.
Complications of Ewing sarcoma
Ewing sarcoma complications include
cancer that spreads
,
comes back
after treatment or a second cancer. A
second cancer
is a new and different cancer.
Your child may experience late effects. These are health issues that your child may have months or years after they complete treatment. Cancer and cancer treatment may lead to issues with your child’s:
Organs and tissues
Growth and development
Moods, feelings and mental health
Ability to think, learn and remember information
Ability to have children
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Ewing sarcoma
Healthcare providers will do a physical exam. They may feel for any lumps or bumps. They’ll ask about your symptoms. Tests to diagnose Ewing sarcoma may include:
Imaging tests
:
Imaging tests let providers take a closer look at your bones and soft tissues. Common tests are CT scans, MRI scans, PET scans and bone scans.
Biopsies
: Providers get tissue samples for medical pathologists to examine under a microscope. They may do a needle biopsy or a bone marrow aspiration.
Blood tests
: These tests may show if cancer is spreading. Common blood tests are CBC with differential, CMP to measure enzymes and other substances, and LDH to measure enzyme levels.
Management and Treatment
How is Ewing sarcoma treated?
Chemotherapy
is a common initial or first treatment, followed by surgery to remove the tumor. You may have more chemotherapy or
radiation therapy
after surgery. Other treatments are radiation therapy or surgery. An
autologous stem cell transplant
is a treatment option if the cancer isn’t in your bone marrow.
If your child has Ewing sarcoma, their provider may recommend that you consider enrolling them in a clinical trial. A
clinical trial
is research that studies new ways to treat diseases like Ewing sarcoma. Medical researchers test new treatments or combinations of existing treatments to see if the treatments are safe and effective.
Advertisement
A lot goes into the clinical trial process. You’ll probably have many questions about that process and how a trial may benefit your child. Take time to understand the benefits and potential risks. Your child’s cancer care team is a great resource if you’re considering this treatment option for your child.
When should I seek care?
Talk to your cancer care team if you or your child has:
Treatment side effects that are more severe than you expect
Pain that persists or gets worse even after taking prescription medication
Symptoms that get worse or new symptoms
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Ewing Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the survival rate for Ewing sarcoma?
Cancer survival rates
vary depending on the cancer’s location at diagnosis. According to the American Cancer Society, Ewing sarcoma survival rates are:
Localized tumors
: 81%. This is cancer that hasn’t spread from where it started.
Regional tumors
: 77%, which means cancer is in nearby tissues.
Distant tumors
: 41%. This is cancer that’s spread from where it began to other bones, your lungs or bone marrow.
Survival rate data can be confusing and make you feel anxious. Try to keep in mind that survival rates are estimates that reflect others’ experiences. It’s natural to be concerned and have questions. Your child or your cancer care team understands all those feelings. They’ll take time to explain what survival rate data means in your or your child’s case.
Advertisement
How can I help my child?
Your child’s needs will change as they go through diagnosis, treatment and the rest of their life. For example, Ewing sarcoma typically happens around the time children start puberty. Puberty may feel like you and your teenager are on an emotional rollercoaster with sudden and unexpected twists and turns. A cancer diagnosis may put that emotional rollercoaster into overdrive.
Apart from feeling anxious about their health and coping with side effects, teenagers with Ewing sarcoma may feel frustrated about missing out on everyday activities at school and spending time with friends. They may also feel self-conscious about treatment side effects.
Try to be patient with your child and with yourself. Cancer can turn family life upside down, particularly if it’s cancer in your child. If you or your child feels overwhelmed, reach out to the
child life specialist
on your child’s care team. They’ll give you and your child helpful support and information.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A cancer diagnosis is tough at any age. But it can be especially hard when it’s Ewing sarcoma. This rare condition typically affects people ages 10 to 20. If you have this condition, you may worry about how treatment will affect you. If your child has this condition, you may feel afraid for your child and overwhelmed by their situation.
Advertisement
Your cancer care team understands those feelings, whether you’re living with Ewing sarcoma or your child has the condition. They know this rare disease is a life-changing event. They’ll take time to explain your diagnosis and treatment options. And they’ll be there for you or your child from diagnosis to treatment and beyond.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A Ewing sarcoma diagnosis can be life-changing. But Cleveland Clinic Children’s can help your child with personalized bone cancer treatments.
Ewing Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials