Cardiac Sarcoidosis: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cardiac Sarcoidosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cardiac Sarcoidosis
Cardiac sarcoidosis is when granulomas (clumps of cells) form in your heart. You might feel symptoms like chest pain, coughing, heart palpitations and fatigue — or nothing at all. Medicines can reduce the inflammation in your heart that’s causing the problem. Treatment can also help manage complications like arrhythmias and heart failure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Cardiac Sarcoidosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Cardiac Sarcoidosis?
Cardiac sarcoidosis is a condition in which your immune system triggers inflammation that harms your heart. Clumps of immune cells called granulomas form in your heart. Over time, these may cause scarring. The scars can damage your heart muscle, interfere with your heart’s
electrical
activity and cause
abnormal heart rhythms
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This condition is a less common form of
sarcoidosis
that specifically affects your heart. Most people with sarcoidosis have granulomas in their lungs. But it’s possible to have them in your heart, too, and not know until testing reveals them. Experts believe that
up to 1 in 4 people
with sarcoidosis have heart involvement.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of cardiac sarcoidosis
Cardiac sarcoidosis can disrupt normal heart function and cause symptoms like:
Chest pain or tightness
Coughing
Fainting
Fatigue
Heart palpitations
Shortness of breath
Swelling in your legs
It’s also possible not to feel any symptoms of sarcoidosis in your heart. It depends on where the granulomas form and how much inflammation they cause.
Cardiac sarcoidosis causes
Experts don’t fully understand what causes cardiac sarcoidosis. They believe it’s likely a mix of your
genes
and your environment. Certain genes may make your
immune system
more likely to overreact to triggers like mold, insecticides, silica dust or bacteria — causing immune cells to cluster in your heart.
You have a higher risk of cardiac sarcoidosis if someone in your biological family has the condition.
Complications of this condition
Cardiac sarcoidosis can keep your heart from working as it should. For example, inflammation or scars may block electrical signals from getting where they need to be. This can cause your heart to beat out of sync. Or your heart may be unable to pump enough blood to meet your body’s needs. Without treatment, these issues can be life-threatening.
Advertisement
Possible complications include:
Atrial fibrillation
Heart block
Heart failure
Ventricular fibrillation
Ventricular tachycardia
Sudden cardiac death
Diagnosis and Tests
How healthcare providers diagnose this condition
To diagnose cardiac sarcoidosis, your provider will give you a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. They’ll review your health history and ask about any biological family members who have sarcoidosis. You’ll also need some tests. These allow your provider to check for signs of
heart inflammation
or scarring. Testing also helps rule out other conditions.
Possible tests include:
Blood tests
Chest X-ray
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Echocardiogram
Heart MRI
Holter monitor
Heart PET scan
The exact tests you need can vary. If you’ve already been diagnosed with sarcoidosis elsewhere in your body, your provider may want to “screen” for it in your heart. This may happen even without heart symptoms. If you have symptoms, you’ll need more extensive testing. Providers usually don’t use
biopsies
to diagnose cardiac sarcoidosis.
Early diagnosis gives you the best chance to manage symptoms and protect your heart.
Stages
There’s no single staging system for cardiac sarcoidosis. But providers may use terms like “early stage” or “advanced stage” to describe how much tissue damage they see.
Imaging can help your provider see how far the condition has progressed. Early on, inflammation in your heart may not cause lasting damage. But over time, scars can form. Ideally, providers diagnose this condition in the early stages, before scars damage your heart.
Management and Treatment
How is cardiac sarcoidosis treated?
Treatment involves medicines to reduce inflammation, manage your heart rhythm and treat heart failure. You may also need a device or procedure to lower your risk of dangerous heart rhythms. In severe cases, a
heart transplant
may be a last resort.
Medicines that treat cardiac sarcoidosis include:
Steroids
to reduce inflammation, like prednisone
Immunosuppressants
to calm your immune response, like methotrexate (providers may prescribe these along with prednisone)
Heart failure medicines
to help your heart work better
Antiarrhythmic drugs
to help your heart beat in a normal rhythm
Devices and procedures include:
Pacemaker
to help your heart beat in a normal rhythm
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
to send a shock, when needed, to correct an abnormal rhythm
Cardiac ablation
to block abnormal electrical signals
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you how often you need follow-up appointments and imaging tests. Follow the schedule they give you. Call your provider anytime you have new symptoms, side effects from medicines or questions about your treatment plan.
Advertisement
If possible, seek care at a hospital that has a sarcoidosis center. There, you can receive care from a team of experts in this condition. You may work with heart doctors, lung doctors and other specialists depending on where the granulomas are building up.
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have any of the following signs of a dangerous arrhythmia:
Chest pain
Heart palpitations that aren’t going away
Dizziness
Fainting
Racing or erratic pulse
Shortness of breath
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis for cardiac sarcoidosis?
You’ll typically have the best outcome if your healthcare provider diagnoses your cardiac sarcoidosis early and starts treatment right away. Your outlook may not be as good without prompt treatment. But each person’s experience is a little different. Your provider can tell you what to expect in your situation.
People who only have sarcoidosis in their hearts have a
worse prognosis
than those who have sarcoidosis throughout their bodies. This is because they have a higher risk of
ventricular arrhythmias
. These are abnormal heart rhythms in the lower chambers of your heart.
How long can you live with cardiac sarcoidosis?
Your life expectancy depends on many things, including how early you’re diagnosed and treated. One
study
showed that 95% of people with cardiac sarcoidosis were alive five years after their diagnosis. And 93% were alive 10 years after their diagnosis. Your healthcare provider can help you understand more.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe you knew you had sarcoidosis, but didn’t think it would affect your heart. Or maybe your heart symptoms were your first clue that something wasn’t quite right. No matter where you started, learning that you have cardiac sarcoidosis might make you feel scared and unsure of the future.
The best thing you can do is find a team of providers you trust. They’ll explain how this condition might affect you based on your test results and health history. And they’ll walk you through each step of treatment. Share any concerns and questions with them. It may also help to connect with other people who have sarcoidosis. You can lean on and learn from each other.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment