Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis (VKC): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis (VKC) causes inflammation, itching and other symptoms in your child’s eyes. It happens when allergens get into their eyes and irritate their cornea and conjunctiva. Especially in spring and summer months. Symptoms can be frustrating. But VKC is treatable. Many children grow out of it after puberty.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis?
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis (VKC) is allergic
inflammation
in the cornea and conjunctiva in your
eyes
. VKC happens when allergens in the air get into your eye and irritate your cornea and conjunctiva.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The
cornea
is a clear, dome-shaped cover on your eye. The
conjunctiva
is a clear membrane that covers the inside of your eyelid and the white part of your eye.
Keratoconjunctivitis
is similar to
pink eye
. It happens when both your cornea and conjunctiva are irritated at the same time.
VKC usually affects kids and young adults. Many children grow out of it after
puberty
and don’t have symptoms anymore.
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis is a specific type of keratoconjunctivitis. Vernal is a Latin word that means springtime. That’s where it gets its name. It’s keratoconjunctivitis that affects your child during the
spring
and summer when there are lots of allergens in the air.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of vernal keratoconjunctivitis
VKC symptoms usually happen in both eyes at the same time. They can include:
Red eyes
Itchy or burning eyes
Small, hard bumps under your child’s eyelids (eye doctors call these eye cobblestones)
Light sensitivity
Swollen eyelids
Watery eyes
or
eye discharge
Blurry vision
You might not be able to see eye cobblestones in your child’s eyes. They might say it feels like there’s something stuck under their eyelids. Don’t try to pull their eyelids back to see cobblestoning at home. Tell your eye doctor what they’re feeling. They’ll safely examine your child’s eyes.
Advertisement
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis causes
Allergies
cause VKC. If your child is allergic to something, their
immune system
overreacts to it. When particles of an allergen get in their eyes, it can lead to inflammation.
Pollen
and other plant allergens that are worse in spring and summer usually cause vernal keratoconjunctivitis.
VKC risk factors
Males
are more likely to develop vernal keratoconjunctivitis. This disease typically affects children and young adults between the ages of 5 and 20. Your child might have a higher risk if they have certain health conditions, including:
Seasonal allergies
Eczema
Asthma
Dermatitis
Around half of kids with VKC have a biological family member with it, too. That means it may be
genetic condition
. Experts are still studying this possibility.
Complications of VKC
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis can get worse over time. Each episode can be more severe than the last. That’s why it’s important to get a diagnosis and treatment as soon as you notice symptoms.
It’s rare, but untreated VKC can damage your child’s eyes. The inflammation can lead to:
Corneal ulcers
Cataracts
Keratoconus
Treating the inflammation will help you avoid these complications.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose VKC
An
eye doctor
will diagnose VKC with an
eye exam
. Tell your eye doctor when you or your child first noticed symptoms. Let them know if symptoms seem worse at any time of year or if they come and go.
Most of the time, your eye doctor will be able to diagnose VKC by looking at your child’s eyes and learning about the symptoms. But they might collect a sample of discharge from your child’s eyes. They may swab the cobblestones under your child’s eyelids. This can help them test for signs of infections or elevated
mast cells
. These cells usually help fight infections. But they can also cause allergic reactions.
Management and Treatment
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis treatment
Your eye doctor will suggest treatments. Your child might need:
Artificial tears
: These are usually over-the-counter (OTC) eye drops. They lubricate your eyes. Your eye doctor will suggest the right type for your child.
Medicated eye drops
:
Your child might need drops with a prescription medication in them. This could include
antihistamine
or
corticosteroid
. Your eye doctor might suggest a mast cell stabilizer. These medications calm down overactive mast cells. They might reduce the severity of VKC flares. You may be able to use over-the-counter allergy eye drops.
Cool compresses
: Placing a damp washcloth or towel on your child’s eyes can soothe itching and irritation. Tell them not to rub or press on their eyes. Gently place the compress on their eyes with no pressure.
NSAIDs
: Over-the-counter medications, like ibuprofen and aspirin, reduce inflammation. Talk to your eye doctor before using NSAIDs to manage VKC. They’ll tell you how often it’s safe for your child to take them.
Trigger avoidance
:
It can be hard to avoid allergens. Especially in the spring and summer, when it feels like the air is full of them. But you can track
allergy seasons
. You might plan to avoid being outside when allergens you know affect your child are high. Wearing sunglasses or a hat can help them manage light sensitivity.
A referral to an allergist
: Your eye doctor may refer your child to an allergy specialist. An allergist will test your child for allergies. They’ll prescribe medications or shots to treat any allergies your child has.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider or eye doctor if you notice any new symptoms or changes in your child’s eyes. Especially if redness, sensitivity or other issues last for more than a few days. See an eye doctor right away if your child’s
vision
suddenly gets worse.
Your eye doctor will tell you how often your child will need eye exams in the future. Tell your doctor if your child starts having vernal keratoconjunctivitis symptoms more often. Or if it feels like their VKC treatments aren’t helping as much.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has vernal keratoconjunctivitis?
VKC can be annoying to manage. But the good news is that it’s usually temporary. Most kids stop having symptoms after puberty. If it doesn’t completely go away, your child will probably have fewer flares. And flares that happen after puberty are usually milder.
VKC should have less of an impact on your child’s eyes and daily routine once you find treatments that work for them. Talk to your eye doctor if it ever feels like treatments stop working.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Even if they’re not super outdoorsy, most kids can’t wait for that first warm spring day. If your child has vernal keratoconjunctivitis, that excitement might be cut short by annoying, frustrating eye symptoms.
Anything that affects your child’s eyes can be concerning. You may not be able to prevent allergies, but you can manage them. And you can treat VKC. Your eye doctor will help you find treatments to relieve your child’s symptoms and help them feel like themselves again.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment