Cystic Lung Disease (CLD): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cystic Lung Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cystic Lung Disease
Cystic lung disease is a group of conditions that cause air- or fluid-filled sacs (cysts) in your lungs. Examples include LAM, pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis and Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome. You could be born with cystic lung disease or develop it over time. Causes include genetic conditions, autoimmune disorders, infections and smoking.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Cystic Lung Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Cystic Lung Disease?
Cystic lung disease is a name for many conditions that cause fluid- or air-filled pockets (cysts) in your lungs. The cysts can be the main sign of certain diseases. Other health conditions — like autoimmune disorders, cancer, infections or genetic diseases — can also cause them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Some examples of cystic lung diseases include:
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
(LAM), a genetic condition that causes smooth, muscle-like cells to grow in your lungs
Pulmonary
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
, a rare disease that happens when special cells from your bone marrow (Langerhans cells) build up in your lungs and other parts of your body
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia and follicular bronchiolitis, conditions where immune cells build up in your lungs
Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome, a genetic condition that causes noncancerous skin growths
Bronchogenic cysts
, cysts that form during fetal development
Pulmonary sequestration, an area of nonfunctioning lung tissue you’re born with
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of cystic lung disease
Some people with cystic lung disease have no symptoms. But those who do have symptoms could experience:
Shortness of breath
Cough
Wheezing
Chest pain
Frequent lung infections
Depending on the cause, you may have additional symptoms.
Cystic lung disease causes
There are many causes of cystic lung diseases, including:
Changes to your DNA
— either ones that you’re born with or that happen later in life
Congenital lung conditions (ones you’re born with), like bronchogenic cysts and pulmonary sequestration
Cancers
that start in or spread to your lungs
Lung infections
Interstitial lung diseases
Smoking
Autoimmune disorders
Amyloidosis
and other diseases that cause abnormal proteins to build up in parts of your body
Advertisement
Complications of cystic lung disease
A
collapsed lung
is the most common complication of cystic lung diseases. You may also get
fluid around your lungs
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose cystic lung disease
Healthcare providers can see cystic lung disease on imaging, like
chest X-rays
and high-resolution CT scans (
HRCT
). During pregnancy, your provider might see cysts on a
prenatal ultrasound
. Your provider might also recommend:
Lung function tests
to understand how well your lungs are working
Blood tests
to look for specific proteins, see how well your organs are working and check for other clues that help diagnose a specific cause
A lung
biopsy
to look at tissue samples under a microscope
Genetic testing
to diagnose conditions that cause changes in your DNA
Management and Treatment
How are cystic lung diseases treated?
Treatment for cystic lung disease depends on the type you have. Some treatments could include:
Inhaled
bronchodilators
Pulmonary rehabilitation
Oxygen therapy
Surgery
Lung transplant
(in cases of severe or progressive disease)
There are also medications that treat specific diseases. If you’ve had a collapsed lung, your provider may recommend pleurodesis. This is a procedure that attaches your lung to your chest cavity to prevent lung collapse from happening again.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you or your child has symptoms like a chronic cough or shortness of breath. These symptoms can have many causes, but it’s always important to get them checked out, especially if they’re getting worse over time.
If you have a cystic lung disease diagnosis, be sure to attend follow-up appointments. Let your provider know how you’re managing any kind of treatment you’re on and if you have new or worsening symptoms.
It might be helpful to ask your provider:
Does this need to be treated?
What are my treatment options?
How will I feel after treatment?
Will this get worse over time?
What symptoms should I look out for?
When should I follow up with you?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is cystic lung disease serious?
Some cystic lung diseases, like LAM, can be serious because of the damage they do to your lungs. Some need to be watched closely because they can cause problems outside of your lungs that appear later in life. Others may not cause serious symptoms or can get better with treatment. Talk to your provider about what to expect in your specific situation.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Cystic lung disease can have many causes and outcomes. Your provider will be able to tell you more about your (or your child’s) specific condition and the treatment options available. Don’t hesitate to bring up questions or concerns you have.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breathing issues can affect your life in many ways. Cleveland Clinic’s respiratory therapy program treats your symptoms so you can feel better day to day.
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment