Broken Finger or Broken Thumb: Symptoms & Recovery Time
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Broken Finger or Thumb
Advertisement
Advertisement
Broken Finger or Thumb
Broken fingers and thumbs are common bone breaks. They occur due to injury or weakened bones. A healthcare provider will use X-rays to diagnose finger and thumb fractures. Treatments usually include splints or surgery for more severe fractures. Broken fingers and thumbs generally heal well after treatment and rehabilitation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
People often break their fingers and thumbs due to injury or weakened bones.
What is a broken finger or thumb?
A broken finger or thumb occurs when one or more of the bones in your finger or thumb break. Another name for a broken bone is a
bone fracture
. People often break their fingers and thumbs due to accidents or weakened bones.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Small bones called phalanges make up your
finger structure
. Each finger contains three phalanges, while your thumb has two. Any of these bones can break. Breaks can also happen in your knuckles, the joints where your finger bones come together.
You can relieve pain from a finger fracture for a short time with ice,
pain relievers
, elevation and immobilization. But you’ll need to see a healthcare provider as soon as possible for an X-ray. Depending on the type and severity of the fracture, your provider may suggest a
splint
to stabilize your finger or surgery to repair the break. They may also recommend moving the fracture into a better position, also known as reduction.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a broken finger?
If you fracture your finger, pain is likely the first symptom you’ll notice. Your finger may also look oddly shaped or out of alignment. Other broken finger symptoms may include:
Bruising
Deformity
Problems bending or moving your finger
Redness
Stiffness
Swelling
Tenderness
You may still be able to move your finger or thumb even though it’s broken. But moving it will usually hurt. Sometimes, the pain will be dull, and other times, it may be severe.
You should still see a provider even if you can tolerate the pain. The chances of successful treatment increase the sooner your treatment starts. Some symptoms, like numbness or trouble moving your fingers, mean you need to see a provider as soon as possible to limit damage. If a bone breaks through your skin (an
open or compound fracture
), you should seek immediate care to prevent complications and start treatment.
Advertisement
What causes a broken finger or thumb?
Most finger fractures and thumb fractures result from injuries. The most common situations that result in broken fingers and thumbs include:
Having a fast-moving object, like a baseball, hit your hand
Putting out your hand to break a fall
Slamming your finger or thumb in a drawer or door
Trauma that impacts your finger or thumb, like a car accident
Using tools like drills, power saws or hammers
What are the risk factors for a fractured finger or fractured thumb?
People with calcium deficiencies or weakened bones are at higher risk of finger and thumb fractures. Fractures are also more likely to occur due to:
Infection
Lack of calcium (calcium deficiency) or vitamin D (
vitamin D deficiency
)
Metabolic bone disease
Malnutrition
Osteomalacia
Osteoporosis
or
osteopenia
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose broken fingers and broken thumbs?
To diagnose a broken finger or thumb, your provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. They may check whether your injured finger:
Angles in the wrong direction
Looks shorter than your other fingers
Overlaps with your other fingers (rotation or scissoring)
Then, your provider will order a finger or
hand X-ray
to confirm a break and rule out any other conditions, like a
finger sprain
or
thumb sprain
.
Management and Treatment
How do healthcare providers treat broken fingers and thumbs?
Finger fracture treatment depends on the location and severity of the fracture, as well as whether or not the fracture is displaced (out of alignment) or nondisplaced (aligned).
If you have a nondisplaced fracture, your provider may splint your injured finger or tape it to the finger next to it (buddy tape). The splint keeps your finger straight and protects it while it heals. You’ll usually keep the splint for several weeks as your fractured finger heals. You’ll also need to avoid strenuous activity for another several weeks afterward, but movement is usually very important at this point to avoid stiffness. Your provider may order
physical therapy
to help you regain motion, too.
If you have a displaced fracture, your provider may immobilize your finger or thumb with a splint after reducing and aligning the fragments of the fracture. Providers are usually able to do this procedure under local
anesthesia
. They typically inject a numbing solution (like at the dentist’s office) into the nerves at the base of your finger or thumb and then move the bones into position.
When does a broken finger or thumb need surgery?
You may need surgery for a fractured finger or fractured thumb if you have:
An injury that involves a
joint
Loose bone fragments
Multiple fractures
Tendon
or
ligament
damage
Unstable fractures that a splint can’t support
During finger or thumb surgery, your surgeon uses screws, small plates, pins or wires to hold your bones together. Sometimes, this hardware is temporary (pins or wires). Other times, it’s permanent and stays in your finger or thumb and is only removed if it causes issues.
Advertisement
When is it too late to fix a broken finger?
If possible, you should see a healthcare provider for treatment within a week of the injury. If you wait longer, it can have an impact on your treatment and recovery. After a period of time, your provider may decide to leave the bones in their current alignment to heal, or they may have to perform surgery to correct any deformity.
How long does a broken finger take to heal?
Recovery time for a finger or thumb fracture ranges from several weeks to a year. Healing time depends on the extent of the injury and your treatment. Your provider will let you know when it’s safe to use your hand again.
You may need to do rehab exercises each day, often under the guidance of a specialized hand therapist. These exercises can help with swelling and stiffness and allow for an optimal outcome.
When should I see my healthcare provider about finger or thumb pain?
You should always seek care right away if you suspect you have a broken finger or broken thumb. You can visit an urgent care center or a hospital’s emergency department.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for people with a broken finger or broken thumb?
The outlook varies depending on your age and overall health, as well as the type and severity of the fracture. Finger fractures and thumb fractures generally heal very well after treatment, but you may require physical therapy to regain motion, which is critical to a successful outcome.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
An injury like a broken finger or thumb might seem small, but that doesn’t mean it’s unimportant. You might be embarrassed or not sure if you should seek medical treatment, but you should. Even a minor injury calls for a trip to a healthcare provider. They can help determine the extent of your injury and what kind of treatment you’ll need. Don’t try to treat a broken finger or thumb yourself.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/26/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment