Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a fast-growing blood cancer that affects your lymphatic system. Healthcare providers typically treat it with a combination of cancer drugs. The combined drugs often eliminate DLBCL signs and symptoms. Medical researchers are studying different treatments for DLBCL that comes back.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is diffuse large B-cell lymphoma?
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, or DLBCL, is a
blood cancer
that involves changes in your B cells, a particular type of white blood cell (
lymphocyte
). It’s the most common form of aggressive
non-Hodgkin lymphoma
and a type of
B-cell lymphoma
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
DLBCL affects your
lymphatic system
. Your lymphatic system is a network of tissues, vessels and organs that help fight infection in your body. Normal
B cells
are a part of that infection-fighting network. But with DLBCL, healthy B cells change into fast-growing cancer cells that overtake healthy ones. They’re no longer able to fight off infection-causing invaders, like viruses and bacteria.
With diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, cancerous B cells may appear in your
lymph nodes
. But they may also appear in virtually any organ, including your gastrointestinal tract, thyroid, skin, breast, bone or brain.
Although it’s aggressive, DLBCL is often treatable and curable — especially with early diagnosis and treatment.
Types of DLBCL
The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified over a dozen different types of DLBCL. Each type’s unique traits tell healthcare providers how the cancer will likely progress and respond to treatment. The classifications depend on things like:
Genetic changes
. The genetic changes in the
lymphoma
cells are the most important identifier.
The part of your body where DLBCL starts
. For example,
primary CNS lymphoma
starts in your
central nervous system
(CNS). Primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma starts in the center of your chest (
mediastinum
).
If there’s an association with a virus
. Some types of DLBCL happen in people with a specific virus. For example, people with EBV-positive DLBCL have an
Epstein-Barr virus
infection.
Advertisement
Understanding how the specific type of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma will impact your care journey is important, but the specifics can be confusing. Ask your provider to explain how your type of DLBCL will impact treatment options and outlook.
How common is diffuse large B-cell lymphoma?
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is the most common type of
lymphoma
. But as cancer diagnoses go, it’s still uncommon overall. According to the National Cancer Institute, in 2020, about 6 people in 100,000 received a DLBCL diagnosis. In comparison, about 500 people in 100,000 received a diagnosis of
cancer
affecting any part of their bodies.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of DLBCL?
The symptoms most people notice with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma are
swollen lymph nodes
in their neck, armpits or groin. They usually appear as a lump that doesn’t go away and seems to be getting larger. The lump isn’t usually painful, but it can be.
About
30%
of people with DLBCL have “B symptoms,” which include:
A
fever
above 103 degrees Fahrenheit (39.5 degrees Celsius) that lasts longer than two days or comes and goes
Unexplained weight loss
that involves losing more than 10% of your body weight over six months
Heavy
night sweats
(so intense that it drenches your sheets)
Having these symptoms doesn’t necessarily mean you have diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. That said, you should contact a healthcare provider anytime you notice changes in your body that last for several weeks.
What causes diffuse large B-cell lymphoma?
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma happens when B cells mutate (change). These are acquired
genetic mutations
, meaning you develop them during your lifetime instead of being born with them.
Risk factors
Medical researchers aren’t sure what triggers the mutations in DLBCL, but they’ve identified several factors that may increase your risk. Risk factors for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma include:
Age.
Most people diagnosed with DLBCL are in their 60s. The average age of diagnosis is 64 years old.
Sex.
DLBCL is slightly more common in
males
.
Race.
DLBCL affects more people who are white than people who are Black.
Family history of DLBCL.
The genetic mutations in DLBCL aren’t hereditary, which means, they don’t run in families. Still, studies show you’re at a slightly higher risk if a first-degree biological relative (parent, sibling or child) also has DLBCL. Medical researchers aren’t sure why.
Infections.
Viral infections
associated with DLBCL include Epstein-Barr virus,
human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) and
hepatitis B
and
C
.
Weakened immune system.
Having a condition that impacts your immune system is the most significant risk factor for DLBCL. Examples include having a
primary immunodeficiency
or
autoimmune disorder
, or taking
immunosuppressants
after an organ transplant.
Increased body mass index (BMI) in young adults.
The risk is especially high for young adults with
obesity
that persists throughout adulthood.
Exposure to toxic substances.
Exposure to pesticides used in farming and certain chemicals used in manufacturing may increase your risk.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is diffuse large B-cell lymphoma diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose DLBCL with a
lymph node biopsy
. This procedure removes all or part of a lymph node to check it for cancer cells. They also do
genetic testing
to learn which cell mutations are involved.
If you do have DLBCL, your provider may order additional tests to learn more about it, including whether it’s spread beyond your primary lymph node. Tests include:
Blood tests
.
These include a
complete blood count
(CBC) to check your general health and tests that detect viruses, like HIV, EBV and hepatitis B and C.
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test
.
This test checks the level of LDH (an
enzyme
) in your body fluid. Over
50%
of people with DLBCL have high levels.
Imaging tests.
You may need a
CT scan
,
MRI
or
PET scan
to show whether the cancer has spread throughout your body.
Bone marrow biopsy
.
This test checks for lymphoma cells in your bone marrow.
Lumbar puncture
.
This test checks for lymphoma cells in the fluid surrounding your spinal cord.
Stages of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Healthcare providers use
cancer staging systems
to determine how advanced the cancer is. This helps them develop treatment plans and estimate
prognosis
, or expected outcome. The stages of DLBCL are:
Stage I:
The cancer is in one lymph node, one lymph organ (thymus, spleen and tonsils) or in just one area of a single organ outside of your lymph system.
Stage II:
This is when there’s lymphoma in two or more lymph node groupings or lymph node organs on the same side of your
diaphragm
.
Stage III:
This stage is when there’s cancer in lymph nodes or lymph tissue on both sides of your diaphragm.
Stage IV:
DLBCL has spread to organs outside of your lymph system, like your bone marrow, liver or lungs.
Advertisement
Your provider may refer to stage I and II DLBCL as “early stage” and stage III and IV DLBCL as “advanced stage.”
Management and Treatment
How is DLBCL treated?
One of the most common treatments for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is
R-CHOP
. It combines the
monoclonal antibody
drug rituximab with three
chemotherapy drugs
and a
corticosteroid
.
This treatment is safe and effective but doesn’t always work or keep DLBCL from coming back (recurring).
Studies
show relapses or
recurrent cancer
affect an estimated 30% to 40% of people with DLBCL who receive R-CHOP. If that happens, your provider may recommend the following treatments:
Second-line therapy and
autologous stem cell transplant
.
Second-line therapy is intensive treatment with combined cancer drugs.
CAR T-cell therapy
.
This treatment is a type of
immunotherapy
that helps your
T cells
(a type of white blood cell) fight cancer more effectively.
Targeted therapy
.
This treatment targets the genetic changes or mutations that cause diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have DLBCL?
While some DLBCL can be life-threatening and difficult to treat, healthcare providers can often
cure
it using a combination of cancer drugs. Often, front-line or initial treatment sends DLBCL into complete
remission
. This means there are no signs and symptoms of cancer. Front-line treatment cures about 60% of people with DLBCL. In general, people who are cancer-free two years after their diagnosis can expect to live as long as most people in their age group.
Advertisement
According to the National Cancer Institute,
64.7%
of all people with DLBCL are alive five years after diagnosis. Like many kinds of cancer,
survival rates
increase for people with early-stage cancer.
Still, while cure rates and survival rates may be helpful, your experience depends on many factors, including the type of DLBCL, cancer stage and your overall health. These are factors that only your healthcare provider knows about. Your provider is your best resource for answering questions about what to expect.
Prevention
Can diffuse large B-cell lymphoma be prevented?
There’s no guaranteed way to prevent DLBCL and nothing you can do about risk factors you can’t control, like having an immunodeficiency. But you can take steps to reduce your risk of developing certain infections linked to DLBCL, like hepatitis and HIV. You can also work to maintain a
BMI
(body mass index) that’s healthy for you.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
It can be stressful and exhausting to live with any form of cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. It’s important that you do what you can to
take care of yourself
throughout DLBCL treatment. Here are some suggestions:
Focus on nutrition.
Know what
foods to eat and avoid
, so you’re nourishing your body.
Rest.
Fatigue
is the most common side effect of DLBCL treatment. Get as much rest as you can.
Develop an exercise routine.
Gentle exercise
may help you cope with stress.
Find support.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is a rare condition. You may feel as if no one understands what you’re going through. Connecting with people who are in your situation may help.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll see your healthcare provider throughout your treatment. They’ll monitor your health and check how the treatment is working.
Afterward, you may see your provider every three to four months for the first two years and then less frequently for the next three years. That’s because diffuse large B-cell lymphoma may come back. Contact your healthcare provider if you notice changes in your body that may mean the cancer has recurred.
When should I go to the emergency room?
Cancer treatments for DLBCL, including
chemotherapy
and
immunotherapy
, may have strong side effects. Your healthcare provider will advise you on how to manage them and prescribe medications to help as needed. Still, you should go to the emergency room if you have:
Side effects that are stronger than you expected
A
fever
higher than 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius)
Chills
that don’t go away
Abdominal pain
Persistent
diarrhea
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider about DLBCL?
Questions you may want to ask include:
What type of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma do I have?
What’s this cancer’s stage?
What treatments will I need?
What treatment side effects should I expect?
Will this treatment cure the cancer?
What treatments are available if the cancer comes back?
Can you refer me to a support group for people who have this kind of cancer?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When most of us hear the word “aggressive” used to describe cancer, we imagine a disease with a poor chance of survival. But things aren’t as straightforward with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. While DLBCL spreads fast and can be life-threatening, current cancer treatments are usually effective at destroying the cancerous B cells. Healthcare providers even use words like “cure” to describe potential outcomes for some people.
Ask your healthcare provider how your diagnosis affects your treatment outlook. They can explain how your current health and the type and stage of cancer will likely impact what happens next. They can also connect you with resources to help support you through this diagnosis.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
There are many types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Whether you have an aggressive type or one that’s slow growing, Cleveland Clinic is here with personalized treatment.
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/06/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials