Sleep Apnea: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Sleep Apnea
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sleep Apnea
Sleep apnea causes you to stop breathing while asleep. Your brain tries to protect you by waking you up enough to breathe, but this prevents restful, healthy sleep. Over time, this condition can cause serious complications. However, it’s manageable. A healthcare provider can help you get better sleep.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is sleep apnea?
Sleep apnea is a condition that makes you stop breathing while you’re
sleeping
. This happens either because of blockage of your airway (obstructive sleep apnea) or because your
brain
doesn’t control your breathing as expected (central sleep apnea).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A lack of oxygen activates a survival reflex that wakes you up just enough to resume breathing. While that reflex keeps you alive, it also interrupts your sleep cycle. This prevents restful sleep. It can also put stress on your heart that may be
life-threatening
if untreated.
A healthcare provider can create a treatment plan to help you manage symptoms and prevent complications.
What are the types of sleep apnea?
There are three types of sleep apnea:
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
. In this condition, the muscles in your throat relax while you’re asleep, causing surrounding tissue to press on your windpipe. This blocks air movement.
Central sleep apnea (CSA)
. With this condition, your brain doesn’t send signals to keep breathing-related muscles working while you sleep.
Mixed/complex sleep apnea
. This type is a combination of both obstructive and central sleep apnea types.
How common is sleep apnea?
One study
estimates that about 1 billion people (between ages 30 to 69) around the world have obstructive sleep apnea. Central sleep apnea is less common than OSA but it’s not a rare condition.
Symptoms and Causes
Sleep apnea causes symptoms that affect you at night and during the day.
What are the symptoms of sleep apnea?
Common symptoms of sleep apnea include:
Waking up repeatedly in the middle of the night
Breathing pauses while asleep (a sleeping partner may notice this)
Unusual breathing patterns (fast breathing that gets deeper, then shallower again until breathing stops before starting again)
Snoring
Waking up feeling
short of breath
or like you’re choking
Daytime
fatigue
, sleepiness or exhaustion when waking up
Advertisement
Other symptoms you might experience may include:
Headaches
, especially when waking up
Night sweats
Mood changes (
depression
and
anxiety
)
Feeling restless at night
Sexual dysfunction
Sleep apnea may look different
in children
.
What causes sleep apnea?
Sleep apnea happens because of:
An airflow blockage in your upper airway during sleep
A problem with how your brain regulates your breathing during sleep
What are the risk factors for sleep apnea?
Anyone can develop this condition. It affects children and adults. Some common risk factors of sleep apnea include having:
A biological family history of sleep apnea
Heart conditions, a
stroke
or elevated blood pressure
Large
tonsils
Obesity
Your risk increases as you get older.
Males
are more likely to receive a diagnosis before age 50.
Also, while you have a higher risk of sleep apnea with obesity, anyone of any body size can develop this condition.
What are the complications of sleep apnea?
Sleep apnea may cause several different complications, many of which are severe or life-threatening. These include:
Excessive daytime sleepiness or “microsleeps” where you fall asleep for very brief periods during the day (dangerous while driving or operating machinery)
Arrhythmias
(
atrial fibrillation
or
left atrial appendage
)
High blood pressure
Heart
damage and
heart failure
Sudden cardiac death
Diagnosis and Tests
How is sleep apnea diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose sleep apnea by asking you questions about your symptoms and medical history. If they suspect the condition, they’ll recommend testing to confirm a diagnosis.
What tests diagnose sleep apnea?
The most common tests for sleep apnea include:
Polysomnogram
. This is an overnight test that involves wearing sensors that monitor your heart rate, breathing, blood oxygen levels, brain waves and more.
Home sleep apnea testing
. This is the at-home version of a sleep study, but it doesn’t involve brain wave monitoring. There are some limitations to this test; for example, it can’t diagnose central sleep apnea.
If you suspect you or a loved one has sleep apnea, you might be able to help a healthcare provider diagnose it. Video and audio recordings of yourself or this person sleeping, especially where the provider can hear breathing, can give a provider key evidence they need to speed up the diagnostic process. You might also show evidence of air movement by holding a piece of tissue in front of a loved one’s face to make this movement visible on a recording.
What are the severity levels of sleep apnea?
Healthcare providers use the
apnea/hypopnea index (AHI)
to determine the severity of a sleep apnea diagnosis. The AHI measures the average hourly number of apnea (when you stop breathing while asleep) and
hypopnea
(decreased airflow) events. The severity levels of sleep apnea are:
Advertisement
Mild sleep apnea (AHI 5-14 events per hour)
Moderate sleep apnea (15-29 events per hour)
Severe sleep apnea (30 or more events per hour)
What organ does sleep apnea affect?
Sleep apnea isn’t limited to only one organ in your body. In fact, it affects many different body systems. The two most affected include your
circulatory system
(heart) and
nervous system
(brain).
Management and Treatment
How is sleep apnea treated?
A healthcare provider will recommend different treatment options based on the type of sleep apnea and the severity. These may include:
Using a breathing device like a
continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) machine
Managing any underlying conditions that cause or increase your risk of sleep apnea
Changing your sleeping position (not on your back) to avoid putting pressure on your airways
Wearing an
oral appliance
(mouthpiece) to keep your airway open
Using a neuromuscular
electrical stimulation
(NMES) device to prevent your tongue and upper airway muscles from blocking your airway during sleep
Taking medications
Undergoing surgery
Sleep apnea surgery
Surgeries on your nose, mouth and throat may help prevent airway blockages during sleep. These surgeries include:
Jaw surgery
. Different procedures can change the position of your jaw so soft tissue can’t press back on your airway.
Nasal surgery
. One common form of nasal surgery is
septoplasty
. This straightens the soft tissue in your nose, making it easier for air to travel through your nose and nasal passages.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is there a cure for sleep apnea?
There isn’t a cure for all types of sleep apnea. For example, weight loss or surgical treatment options may cure obstructive sleep apnea. Your provider can give you more information about what this might look like for your situation.
What can I expect if I have sleep apnea?
Sleep apnea is a condition that can severely disrupt your sleep. You may not perform at your best during the day if you’re not getting restful sleep at night. This may put you at risk of injury or accidents that can interfere with your work, hobbies or social activities.
This condition can also cause complications that may be life-threatening. A healthcare provider can help you find the right treatment option that works for you. You may need to try a couple of different options or combinations to see what works best.
What’s the life expectancy of someone with sleep apnea?
Sleep apnea complications may reduce your life expectancy if untreated. A healthcare provider will work with you to manage the condition and prevent this.
Many factors go into determining your life expectancy, so your provider is the best person to talk to about your situation since it may or may not match statistics.
Prevention
How can sleep apnea be prevented?
You can’t prevent all causes of sleep apnea. But you can take steps to reduce your risk by:
Reaching and maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you
Eating nutritious foods and participating in regular physical activities
Practicing good sleep hygiene (like setting a regular bedtime and turning off electronics)
Managing any existing health conditions, like
high cholesterol
, high blood pressure and Type 2
diabetes
Seeing your healthcare provider at least once a year for a check-up
Avoiding smoking and drinking beverages that contain alcohol
Advertisement
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
There are several key steps you can take to manage this condition:
Make lifestyle changes as best you can
. Changing how you live your life, especially regarding what you eat and physical activity, can be a challenge. Don’t feel ashamed to talk to your healthcare provider about these if they’re difficult. Not only are they common, but your provider can also give you suggestions or recommendations to make things easier.
Stick to your treatment plan closely
. You’ll have a better outcome if you follow your provider’s treatment plan. This reduces your risk of possible complications.
Talk to your provider about what you’re experiencing
. Let your provider know if you have trouble sticking to your treatment plan, for whatever reason. You may have issues with how a PAP device mask fits or you notice side effects from a medication. Your provider can help you, so let them know if you have any questions or concerns.
See your provider as recommended
. Follow-up visits can be crucial, especially early on, to make sure your treatments are working as they should.
When should I go to the ER?
You should go to the emergency room if you notice any symptoms of the following:
Heart attack
. Chest pain (pressure or tightness), cold sweats, heartburn, shortness of breath.
Stroke
. Sudden weakness or numbness on one side of your body, confusion, vision changes, difficulty walking or dizziness.
Difficulty breathing
. Feeling like you can’t get enough air into your lungs, tight chest or noisy breathing.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you recently received a sleep apnea diagnosis, you may want to ask your provider:
What type of treatment do you recommend?
Are there side effects of the treatment?
How do I avoid sleeping on my back?
How do I make a PAP mask more comfortable to wear?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might not know you have sleep apnea unless a sleep partner notices abnormal breathing patterns and tells you about them in the morning. You instead might be wondering why you’re not getting restful sleep each night. Sleep apnea is a common but manageable condition.
A healthcare provider may offer different treatment methods to see which ones work best for you, as treatment can vary from person to person. It may be challenging to change your sleep routine, but start small and perfect one change before moving on to another. Your provider may have other recommendations specific to your situation to help you get restful sleep each night.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Obstructive sleep apnea can keep you from the getting the good night’s rest you need. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can create a treatment plan that helps.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment