Neurogenic Bladder: Causes, Symptoms & Management
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Neurogenic Bladder
Advertisement
Advertisement
Neurogenic Bladder
Neurogenic bladder refers to what happens when an injury or disease interrupts the electrical signals between your nervous system and bladder function. It can’t be cured. But you can manage your symptoms. Treatment options include lifestyle changes, catheters and medications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Neurogenic Bladder?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Neurogenic Bladder?
Neurogenic bladder causes bladder problems, including loss of bladder control, leaks and peeing more than usual.
Neurogenic bladder is the term for what happens when neurological (
nervous system
) conditions affect how your
urinary bladder
works. Your nervous system consists of your:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Brain
Nerves
Spinal cord
Your nerves send electrical signals between your brain and every other part of your body. The electrical signals tell your body to function — to move, to breathe and even to pee.
Neurogenic bladder occurs when a problem with your brain, nerves or spinal cord causes you to lose control of your bladder. Another name for neurogenic bladder is neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction (NLUTD).
What are the types of neurogenic bladder?
There are two major types of bladder control problems that link to neurogenic bladder. They depend on the affected nerves and the nature of the damage. The types include:
Overactive (spastic or hyper-reflexive) bladder
Underactive (flaccid or hypotonic) bladder
Symptoms and Causes
What are neurogenic bladder symptoms?
The most common symptom of neurogenic bladder is being unable to control when you pee. Other neurogenic bladder symptoms depend on the type you have.
Overactive bladder symptoms may include:
Difficulty starting to pee, a slow urine stream or dribbling (
urinary hesitancy
)
Loss of bladder control (
urinary incontinence
)
Peeing eight or more times daily (
frequent urination
)
Sudden urges to pee immediately (
urinary urgency
)
Underactive bladder symptoms may include:
Your bladder not emptying all the way or at all when you pee (
urinary retention
)
Your bladder being too full, so you leak pee (
overflow incontinence
)
Not being able to tell when your bladder is full
Advertisement
What causes neurogenic bladder?
Neurogenic bladder can be congenital (present at birth).
Birth defects
that may cause neurogenic bladder include:
Caudal regression syndrome
Cerebral palsy
Spina bifida
Common neurological conditions that may cause neurologic bladder include:
Central nervous system
tumors
Multiple sclerosis
(MS)
Parkinson’s disease
Stroke
Other conditions that may cause neurogenic bladder include:
Spinal cord injuries
Traumatic injuries
, such as a fall or automobile accident
Complications of neurogenic bladder
If you have neurogenic bladder, you’re at a higher risk for other conditions that affect your
urinary system
. These may include:
Kidney damage (kidney disease)
Kidney stones
and other stones in your urinary system, like
ureteral stones
Pee flowing backward from your bladder to your kidneys (
vesicoureteral reflux
)
Repeated
urinary tract infections
(UTIs)
Neurogenic bladder can also make you nervous to go out in public because you may worry about leaks or odors. This can cause feelings of
anxiety
,
depression
and loneliness. It’s important to recognize these feelings and reach out to a healthcare provider for help.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose neurogenic bladder
A healthcare provider will review your medical history, ask questions about your symptoms and recommend a physical exam. If they suspect neurogenic bladder, they may recommend nervous system and bladder tests. These may include:
Cystoscopy
to look inside your urethra and bladder
Imaging tests, including
CT scans
,
MRIs
,
ultrasounds
and
X-rays
Urodynamic testing
to measure how much pee your bladder can hold, the pressure within your bladder, how well pee flows and how well your bladder empties when it’s full and you pee
During urodynamic testing, a provider may place special sensors near your
urethra
or
rectum
to make sure your
muscles
and nerves in those areas are working properly.
They’ll also likely refer you to a specialist.
What kind of doctor treats it?
A
urologist
who specializes in neurourology can help treat neurogenic bladder. A urologist is a medical doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating conditions that affect your urinary system, as well as the
male reproductive system
and the
female reproductive system
.
Neurourology
is the study of neurological conditions that affect your urinary system.
Management and Treatment
Can you fix a neurogenic bladder?
No, you can’t
cure
neurogenic bladder. But treatments can help you manage your symptoms.
How is it treated?
Healthcare providers will work with you to decide on a treatment plan that’s appropriate for what’s causing neurogenic bladder. Some neurogenic bladder treatments include:
Augmentation cystoplasty
(bladder augmentation)
. This is a type of surgery that increases the size of your bladder so it can hold more pee.
Botulinum toxin
(Botox®)
. A healthcare provider injects Botox into your bladder or urinary sphincters to help the muscles relax. This may increase how much pee you can store and reduce symptoms of urgency, frequency and leakage.
Continuous catheterization
. You wear a thin, flexible tube (urinary catheter) at all times to drain pee. The
catheter
may enter through your urethra and into your bladder or enter through your lower abdominal wall.
Drugs
. Medications that help treat neurogenic bladder include
oxybutynin
,
tolterodine
,
mirabegron
, and solifenacin succinate.
Self-catheterization
(clean intermittent catheterization)
. A healthcare provider teaches you how to insert a urinary catheter through your urethra and into your bladder to drain pee so you can drain your bladder on your own schedule.
Urinary reconstruction and diversion
. A surgeon disconnects part of your
small intestine
or
large intestine
(some approaches use both), attaches it to one end of your ureters and attaches the other end to a surgical opening (stoma). The stoma drains into a plastic bag (ostomy bag) attached to the outside of your body.
Advertisement
What is the first-line treatment for neurogenic bladder?
While not a treatment, healthcare providers often first suggest absorbent underwear to help prevent wetness and odors while protecting your
skin
and clothing. Bed pans and rubber sheets can help protect mattresses and bed linens.
They may also recommend lifestyle changes. These may include avoiding certain foods or drinks that can irritate your bladder, like alcohol, caffeinated drinks like coffee and carbonated drinks like soda pop. If you have
diabetes
, monitoring your
blood sugar (glucose) levels
can help. Treating
constipation
can also help.
How do you train a neurogenic bladder?
Bladder training is a nonsurgical treatment that may help treat neurogenic bladder. You may need to keep a bladder diary in which you record:
Any leaks and what you were doing before you leaked
How much you pee
What you drink
When you pee
This information helps you establish a pattern of when you should try to pee throughout the day.
Kegel exercises
can also help you strengthen your
pelvic floor muscles
so you have more control over when you pee.
Can Flomax® help?
In some cases, long-term use of
tamsulosin
(Flomax®) may help treat neurogenic bladder.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re already in treatment for a type of disorder that affects your nervous system, chances are that healthcare providers will already know how to address the issue of neurogenic bladder. Still, it’s important to be honest with providers about issues you face. Make sure to speak to a provider if you have new or worsening symptoms. This includes symptoms that may indicate an infection, like pain or a
fever
.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for neurogenic bladder?
Many people worry about neurogenic bladder because there isn’t a cure. Sometimes, your symptoms may improve. But other times, they get worse. However, you can manage your symptoms. Many people can manage symptoms with lifestyle changes, medications and catheterization. Most people don’t need surgery to treat it. A healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect according to the type of neurogenic bladder you have and its cause.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A neurological condition can disrupt your life in many ways, including how your bladder functions. Though there isn’t a cure for neurogenic bladder, treatments are available to help manage your symptoms. There are also advances in medical care and ongoing research for more effective treatments to help you adapt to and manage neurogenic bladder. If you have any questions, reach out to a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment