Acute Heart Failure: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Acute Heart Failure
Advertisement
Advertisement
Acute Heart Failure
Acute heart failure is a sudden, life-threatening condition in which your heart is unable to do its job. Your heart is still beating, but it can’t deliver enough oxygen to meet your body’s needs. This condition requires emergency medical care. People with acute heart failure often spend several days in the hospital and receive oxygen and medicines.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Heart Failure Treatments
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is acute heart failure?
Acute heart failure describes a
heart
that can’t deliver enough oxygen-rich
blood
to your body. This happens because of a sudden, rapid decline in heart functioning and the amount of blood your heart can pump to the rest of your body. Acute
heart failure
is a life-threatening condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Heart disease
and certain medical conditions can make your heart work harder than usual.
This extra effort leads to physical changes that can include:
Enlarged heart
.
Decreased blood flow.
Narrow blood vessels
.
Rapid or irregular heartbeat (
arrhythmia
).
Stiff heart muscles.
The changes are small at first. They start long before you experience acute heart failure symptoms. Over time, the changes get worse, making your heart work harder than it should. When your heart is no longer able to keep up, acute heart failure occurs.
Acute heart failure is one of the most common reasons for a hospital stay for people older than 65. While providers see many cases of acute heart failure, each one is different. Your situation (and outcome) likely won’t be the same as that of someone else.
Types of acute heart failure
Acute heart failure can happen even if you don’t have a previous heart issue. Types of acute heart failure include:
Acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF).
You can get this type if you have a heart condition like
coronary artery disease
.
De novo acute heart failure.
You can get this type if you have no history of heart disease. You may have an ongoing health condition like
diabetes
that damages your heart.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of acute decompensated heart failure?
One of the most common acute heart failure symptoms is
shortness of breath (dyspnea)
. You may experience:
Advertisement
Heavy breathing.
A sensation like suffocating.
Struggling to breathe while lying down.
Tight chest.
Other acute heart failure symptoms may include:
Abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia).
Chest pain
.
Cough
.
Fluid retention (
edema
) in your arms or legs.
Loss of consciousness.
If you notice any of these symptoms, seek emergency medical care as quickly as possible. The sooner you receive treatment, the better your chances of recovery.
What causes acute congestive heart failure?
Causes of acute heart failure include health issues that strain your heart, like:
Heart rhythm problems (arrhythmia).
Coronary artery disease.
Heart valve disease
.
Cardiomyopathy
.
Advanced
kidney disease
.
Alcohol use disorder
.
Blood clot in your lung (
pulmonary embolism
).
Diabetes.
High blood pressure (hypertension)
.
Overactive thyroid (
hyperthyroidism
).
Sleep apnea
.
Stroke
.
Viral infections (like
rheumatic heart disease
) that affect your heart.
What are the risk factors for acute decompensated heart failure?
While you may have a condition that can cause acute heart failure, certain behaviors may trigger it. These include:
Not taking prescribed medicines.
Not limiting salt or fluids.
Using alcohol, substances or recreational drugs.
Taking
NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs).
What are the complications of acute decompensated heart failure?
Acute heart failure can lead to organ dysfunction when your organs don’t get enough blood and oxygen.
Cardiogenic shock
is another complication of acute heart failure. Both of these are life-threatening.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is acute congestive heart failure diagnosed?
Healthcare providers perform a rapid assessment that includes:
Your health history
, including your personal or family history of heart disease. They’ll want to know about other health conditions, whether you use tobacco products and any medications you take.
A
physical exam
to learn more about your symptoms and how severe they are. This includes listening to your heart and checking for signs of fluid retention.
What tests will be done to diagnose acute heart failure?
Healthcare providers use a variety of tests to assess your symptoms, like:
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
to record your heart’s electrical activity.
Chest X-ray
to check for fluid buildup in your heart or lungs.
Echocardiogram
to show heart movement and blood flow.
Thoracic (chest)
ultrasound
to show edema.
Angiography
or heart catheterization
to examine your heart’s blood vessels.
BNP (biomarker) blood test
to check for hormones that occur when pressures change inside your heart.
Basic metabolic panel
blood test, which shows signs of
kidney
or
thyroid
issues.
Management and Treatment
How is acute congestive heart failure treated?
Emergency treatment for acute heart failure restores blood flow and oxygen levels. Care often includes:
Oxygen therapy
, which delivers extra oxygen you breathe in through a mask.
Vasodilators
, which are medications that open narrowed blood vessels.
Water pills (
diuretics
)
, which are medicines that help your body get rid of excess fluid.
Advertisement
Your provider will also treat the condition that caused acute heart failure.
Acute heart failure isn’t curable, but it’s treatable. After you leave the hospital, you may need medications, like
beta-blockers
or water pills, to maximize heart health. You may need other treatments to prevent future episodes of acute heart failure.
These treatments may include surgery to:
Place a
stent
or create a
bypass route
for blood flow.
Repair or replace worn-out heart valves (
heart valve surgery
).
Implant a
pacemaker
or
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
to help you maintain a regular heartbeat and help treat dangerous heart rhythms.
Give your heart extra help with a
ventricular assist device
until you can have a transplant.
Replace your heart with a healthy one from a donor (
heart transplant
).
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Heart Failure Treatments
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have acute heart failure?
If you’re in the hospital, you may be there for several days or even beyond one week. Once you’ve had acute heart failure, you’re at a higher risk of having it again. You have a higher risk of acute heart failure becoming fatal if your kidneys aren’t working well. Other signs of advanced heart failure include shortness of breath that won’t go away, weight loss, or two or more hospital stays in one year.
Advertisement
How long can someone live with heart failure?
Generally, the outlook for acute heart failure is poor. About
10% to 30% of people
with acute heart failure return to a hospital within 90 days and don’t survive a year.
But the prognosis for heart failure varies widely and depends on the underlying cause and whether a provider can treat it.
Your outlook depends on a variety of factors, including:
Heart failure cause and severity.
How quickly you receive care.
Your overall health and response to treatment.
Commitment to heart-healthy living.
Prevention
How can I lower my risk of acute heart failure?
Living a heart-healthy lifestyle can lower your risk of acute congestive heart failure.
This includes:
Maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you by eating meals that include plenty of fruits and vegetables.
Quitting tobacco products if you use them and avoiding
secondhand smoke
.
Getting regular physical activity and restful sleep.
Managing
stress
with deep breathing or relaxation techniques.
Following care instructions for chronic conditions like
sleep apnea
or diabetes.
Living With
How do I manage acute heart failure?
Life after acute heart failure often includes changes, like getting more physical activity. You may also need to avoid certain foods and limit salt and fat intake.
It’s important to pay careful attention to your body. This can help you detect the early signs of heart failure that come back after treatment. Your daily routine may include weighing yourself to see if you’re retaining fluid. Ongoing medical care can help you feel your best.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
After leaving the hospital, you’ll likely have a follow-up appointment in a week or two. Contact your healthcare provider if your symptoms get worse again after you go home. Seek emergency care if you’re struggling to breathe or have the other symptoms of acute heart failure.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to consider asking your provider include:
Can you tell me what caused me to have acute heart failure?
Can you treat the cause or tell me how to prevent it in the future?
What’s my prognosis (outlook) based on my situation?
Can you refer me to a dietitian for help choosing heart-healthy foods?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Acute heart failure is a complex condition that can be overwhelming. Your healthcare team can guide you through treatment and explain what they’re doing and why. Ask for the support you need at this time, whether it’s from a support group or from family or friends who’d like to help. You don’t have to go through this alone.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic can diagnose and treat heart failure of any kind, at any stage, with advanced therapies and compassionate care.
Heart Failure Treatments
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/29/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment