What Is an Obstetrician? What They Do & When To See One
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Obstetrician
Advertisement
Advertisement
Obstetrician
An obstetrician is a physician who specializes in delivering babies. They care for you during pregnancy and after you give birth. Obstetricians treat medical conditions unique to pregnancy. They can provide a variety of pregnancy- and childbirth-related procedures.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is an obstetrician?
An obstetrician (OB) is a
doctor
who cares for you from before pregnancy to after childbirth. This includes the following stages:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Preconception
Pregnancy
Labor and delivery
Postpartum
Some obstetricians are also
gynecologists
(Ob/Gyns). Gynecologists specialize in the
female reproductive system
.
Choosing your
pregnancy care provider
is a big decision. An obstetrician is one of your options. They screen for, diagnose and treat conditions related to pregnancy to ensure both you and the fetus are healthy.
What do obstetricians do?
An obstetrician provides routine
prenatal care
to
women
who are pregnant. They also diagnose and treat complications during pregnancy. Obstetricians deliver your baby and monitor you after childbirth.
Your obstetrician is responsible for:
Prenatal screenings, exams and lab tests
Providing information to help you manage pregnancy
Evaluating the fetus’s size,
growth
and
position
during pregnancy
Detecting
congenital differences
or potential complications
Using
ultrasound
, blood tests,
urinalysis
, and other tools to monitor your pregnancy
Treating health conditions that can affect your pregnancy
Managing labor and delivery, including
labor induction
and emergencies
Providing
postpartum care
for up to six weeks after childbirth
When should I see an obstetrician?
You should see your obstetrician:
When you find out you’re pregnant
Throughout your pregnancy for routine appointments
If you develop complications during pregnancy
After you give birth (usually six weeks after)
If you develop complications after giving birth
Advertisement
Reach out to an obstetrician as soon as you know you’re pregnant. In most cases, you’ll see an obstetrician or another pregnancy care provider for the first time around seven or eight weeks after your last
menstrual period
.
The
prenatal appointment schedule
is then usually monthly, biweekly and weekly as you near your due date. You may have more appointments if you have a
high-risk pregnancy
.
If you give birth in a hospital, an obstetrician will deliver your baby — either
vaginally
or via
C-section
. After birth, the obstetrician monitors your bleeding and
bowel
and
bladder function
. They check for signs of
blood clots
or other postpartum conditions. They’ll allow you to go home between one and four days later if your recovery is going well.
Most practices schedule a postpartum visit with your obstetrician about six weeks after you’ve given birth. This is to check for any complications from healing. They’ll also ask about your mental health.
What do they specialize in?
Obstetricians can become board-certified to specialize in certain aspects of obstetrics, like:
Reproductive endocrinology and
infertility
Maternal-fetal medicine (
perinatologists
)
Do you need a referral?
In the U.S., most healthcare insurance plans don’t require a referral to see an obstetrician. Check with your plan to see if this is the case.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What conditions do obstetricians treat?
Obstetricians monitor your general wellness during pregnancy. But they also check for complications or conditions that can affect pregnancy. Some of the conditions they help manage include:
Congenital
genetic disorders
Ectopic pregnancies
or
miscarriages
Gestational diabetes
High blood pressure
or
preeclampsia
Infections
Issues with the
placenta
, like
placental abruption
Morning sickness
Pregnancy discomforts
Some obstetricians have additional experience managing higher-risk pregnancies. A high-risk pregnancy has a greater chance of complications. If the pregnancy is beyond your obstetrician’s comfort level, they may refer you to a maternal-fetal medicine specialist (perinatologist).
What procedures do obstetricians perform?
Obstetricians can do procedures related to pregnancy, labor and delivery. Some examples include:
Amniocentesis
Cervical cerclage
Cervical check to assess dilation and
effacement
Cesarean (C-section) and vaginal delivery
Dilation and curettage
(D&C)
Episiotomy
External cephalic version (ECV)
Membrane sweep
Using
forceps
or a
vacuum
to assist with the birth
How do I choose an obstetrician?
Choosing an obstetrician that you feel comfortable with can make your pregnancy and birthing experience more empowering. If possible, find an obstetrician or Ob/Gyn before getting pregnant. Ask your friends and family who they recommend or go online to read reviews. Your primary care physician or other providers can also recommend obstetricians.
Advertisement
Think about what’s important to you during pregnancy and childbirth. Making a checklist may help. Some questions you may want to ask yourself are:
Do I feel comfortable with this provider? Does my partner?
Does this provider explain things clearly and answer my questions?
What are this provider’s views on my
birth plan
?
What is communication like with this provider outside of appointments?
Who covers my care if my preferred provider isn’t available?
Some obstetricians or Ob/Gyns are in a group practice. Group practices often want you to see as many providers as possible for your prenatal care. This is because the obstetrician who is on-call the day you go into labor will deliver your baby. In the case of a scheduled C-section, you may have a greater chance of selecting your obstetrician.
It’s natural to prefer one provider over another. Remember that all obstetricians are trained and experienced in pregnancy and childbirth.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
With all the vast physical and emotional changes during pregnancy and childbirth, you deserve an obstetrician you can trust. Don’t hesitate to ask them questions about what to expect. They’re there to support you with the best care possible. You and your obstetrician both have the shared goal of a healthy pregnancy, birth and baby.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment