Focal Therapy for Prostate Cancer: Procedure & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Focal Therapy for Prostate Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Focal Therapy for Prostate Cancer
Focal therapy for prostate cancer is a type of treatment that uses various types of energy (like heat or cold) to destroy tumor cells. It aims to keep healthy tissue intact and can have fewer side effects than radiation or surgery. Cancer that hasn’t spread outside your prostate and has a low risk of spreading might be treatable with focal therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Prostate Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
Overview
What is focal therapy for prostate cancer?
Focal therapies are types of treatment for localized
prostate cancer
that target only the area of your
prostate
where the tumor is located. The tumor must be confined to your prostate (usually only on one side) without spreading to other tissue or organs around your prostate. Each type of focal therapy uses an energy source (like heat, cold or electric shock) to destroy tumor cells.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The goal of focal therapy is to destroy cancerous cells while leaving as much healthy tissue as possible, minimizing side effects and complications. It’s an alternative treatment to
surgery
or
radiation
, which treats the entire prostate, and
active surveillance
, where your provider periodically monitors and tests the tumor for signs of spreading. If you have favorable intermediate-risk prostate cancer (PSA between 10 and 20, grade 2 or 3, and less than 50% of biopsies are positive), focal therapy is a potential middle ground between active surveillance and surgery or radiation.
What types of focal therapy are there for prostate cancer?
Types of focal therapy include:
Cryotherapy
:
A provider freezes the tumor with cold gases.
Focal laser ablation (FLA):
Heat from a laser destroys tumor cells.
High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU)
:
Heat from high-frequency sound waves destroys tumor cells.
Irreversible electroporation (IRE):
A provider uses electrodes around the tumor to deliver an electric shock that damages tumor cells.
Transurethral ultrasound ablation of the prostate (TULSA):
Heat from sound waves destroys tumor cells.
Who’s eligible for focal therapy?
Focal therapy treats cancer that has a low risk of spreading and is completely contained (localized) in your prostate. Ideally, the tumor is also not near your urinary sphincter (muscle that controls when pee is released from your
bladder
) or
urethra
(the tube that drains pee out of your body).
Advertisement
People with intermediate-risk prostate cancer are the best candidates for focal therapy. Low-risk cancers are better managed with active surveillance and high-risk cancers are better treated with whole-gland therapies (like surgery or radiation).
Treatment Details
What happens before focal therapy?
Before focal therapy, you may need several tests and imaging studies to determine your treatment options. These include:
MRI (magnetic resonance imagining)
.
MRI-guided prostate biopsy
(either transperineal or transrectal biopsy).
Mapping biopsy.
During a mapping biopsy, your provider will take several samples of tissue from your prostate to map the boundaries (margins) of the tumor.
PSMA PET (positron emission tomography) scan.
This is a type of
PET scan
(an imaging test that looks for cancer that’s spread to other parts of your body) that detects prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) in your body.
How does focal therapy work?
Each focal therapy works a little differently. Your provider will tell you what to expect depending on which type of focal therapy you need. In general, a provider will:
Put you under
anesthesia
so you sleep through the procedure and don’t feel pain.
Insert the device into your prostate either through your rectum or urethra, or with a needle in your skin.
Target the tumor with an energy source that damages and destroys cells.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Prostate Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of focal therapy for prostate cancer?
Advantages of focal therapy include:
Minimizing damage to healthy prostate tissue.
A lower risk of side effects (including
erectile dysfunction
and
urinary incontinence
).
Allowing you to manage prostate cancer while avoiding more invasive treatments.
A more proactive alternative to active surveillance.
What are the downsides of focal therapy for prostate cancer?
The disadvantages of focal therapy may include:
It might not get rid of all cancerous cells (focal therapies have a higher risk of recurrence).
If the cancer returns, you might need additional treatments.
Not everyone is a good candidate.
While the risk is lower, it still might cause sexual and urinary side effects.
Most are relatively new. This means we might not fully understand how beneficial they are compared to surgery, radiation or active surveillance.
Focal therapies often require more thorough monitoring after treatment, such as MRIs and prostate biopsies.
Recovery and Outlook
What can I expect after focal therapy for prostate cancer?
After focal therapy, your provider will monitor you closely for months or years. This includes testing and looking for signs of cancer that:
Didn’t show up on tests or imaging before.
Wasn’t completely destroyed by focal therapy.
Has come back (recurrence).
Is spreading (metastasis).
You might need additional treatment — including surgery or radiation — if tests show that there’s still cancer in your prostate.
Advertisement
How effective is focal therapy for prostate cancer?
The effectiveness of focal therapy can vary widely (from about 30% to 96%). But these numbers aren’t apples-to-apples comparisons, and the quality of the studies vary. First, studies use different measurements to define effectiveness. They might look at the percentage of people who’ve been treated with focal therapy and:
Who have negative biopsies.
Who haven’t progressed (cancer hasn’t grown or spread) in a certain amount of time (usually 10 years).
Whose
PSA numbers
have gone down.
Second, outcomes vary based on:
Type of focal therapy.
Tumor location.
The likelihood that the tumor will spread.
Focal therapies are considered less effective than whole-gland therapies like surgery and radiation. Talk to your provider about the effectiveness, benefits and risks of different types of focal therapy to understand what might be right for you.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Focal therapy treats prostate cancer while sparing healthy tissue. It can provide a less invasive alternative to radiation and surgery and might cause fewer side effects. It can also be a more proactive approach than active surveillance for some prostate cancers.
But it’s not an option for everyone — focal therapies haven’t been studied as much as traditional treatments and some are still considered investigational. Talk to your provider about the benefits and risks of available prostate cancer treatments. They can help you decide what’s right for your specific situation.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A prostate cancer diagnosis can change your life. At Cleveland Clinic, we can help you feel like yourself again with expert treatment and support.
Prostate Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/10/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment