Orbital Cellulitis: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Orbital Cellulitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Orbital Cellulitis
Orbital cellulitis is a bacterial infection of the skin, fat and muscles around your eye. It can cause serious complications for your eye, including vision loss. Visit an eye care specialist if you notice signs of inflammation around your eye that extends beyond the eyelids. Getting treatment right away can help prevent long-term damage.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Orbital Cellulitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Orbital Cellulitis?
If your child has symptoms like a high fever and a bulging eye or swelling in or around their eye, take them to the emergency room right away.
Orbital cellulitis is a
bacterial infection
in the soft tissues that surround your
eye
, inside of your eye socket (your orbit). It causes pain, discoloration and swelling from your eyebrow to your cheekbone. It may make your eye bulge outward. You may also have a fever. This condition most often affects children under 7 and is very serious. Go to the emergency room if your child develops these symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cellulitis
affects the deeper layers of your
skin
and the tissues beneath it, including
fat
and
muscles
. It doesn’t infect your eye, but it can threaten your
vision
by damaging the
nerves
and
blood vessels
around it. It can also potentially spread to your brain or bloodstream through these vessels. This could lead to life-threatening complications. Getting treatment right away can help prevent these outcomes.
Symptoms and Causes
Orbital cellulitis symptoms
Orbital cellulitis symptoms may include:
Swelling of your eyelid
and skin around your eye
Bulging of your eye
Discoloration or redness around your eye
Pain or difficulty moving your eye
Impaired vision
Fever
Causes of orbital cellulitis
Bacteria
that infect the soft tissues in your eye socket cause orbital cellulitis. Usually, infections spread from your
paranasal sinuses
, which run along the sides of your nose. Your ethmoid sinus is the one closest to your eye socket, and only a paper-thin membrane separates them. Most orbital cellulitis infections come from ethmoid
sinus infections
. They’re often
staph infections
or
pneumococcal disease.
Infections can also come from:
The skin of your
eyelids
(
preseptal cellulitis
)
The flesh of your face (
necrotizing fasciitis
)
Ear infections
or
tooth infections
that spread
Eye injuries
or trauma to the area around your eye
Advertisement
Complications of orbital cellulitis
Orbital cellulitis can be vision-threatening and life-threatening.
Vision loss and possible
blindness
can occur if inflammation and swelling damage your
optic nerve
or interrupt the blood flow to parts of your eye. Swelling can also paralyze your
eye muscles
so you can’t move your eye. This can cause
eye misalignment
and
double vision
.
An orbital cellulitis infection can become life-threatening if it spreads to the membrane around your brain (
meningitis
) or to your
cavernous sinus
, where it could cause a
blood clot
in your brain. If the infection
spreads to your bloodstream
, it could lead to
sepsis
, though this is rare.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose orbital cellulitis
An
eye care specialist
can diagnose orbital cellulitis with a physical exam. They’ll ask about your child’s symptoms, then examine the affected eye and the area around it. They’ll check their vision. Tell your provider if your child has had any recent injuries or surgery around their eye, or any recent illnesses.
Your provider might order imaging tests, like a
CT scan
or
MRI
, to see the tissues in more detail and to look for causes or complications. Sometimes, they’ll order a
bacterial culture test
to identify the type of infection. This isn’t always needed, but it can help providers decide which medicine to prescribe.
Management and Treatment
Orbital cellulitis treatment
Healthcare providers treat orbital cellulitis with intravenous (IV)
antibiotics
. This means your child will stay in the hospital and receive medicine through a catheter into their
vein
. This is the quickest way to deliver the medicine throughout their body. When your child’s symptoms start to improve, usually after a few days, they can go home and switch to oral antibiotics (pills). They’ll take these for a few weeks.
Rarely, your child might need a procedure to treat complications of orbital cellulitis, like to:
Drain an
abscess
Remove
dead tissue
Remove a blood clot
Relieve pressure on their eye
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Call or visit an eye care specialist as soon as you notice orbital cellulitis symptoms around your child’s eye. It’s very serious, but getting it treated right away can prevent long-term damage. Call your healthcare provider if your child has an infection that isn’t getting better or might be spreading. Let the provider know if they’re taking antibiotics and their symptoms haven’t improved after a few days.
You might want to ask:
Does my child have orbital cellulitis or another infection?
Where did the infection come from?
Will my child need to stay in the hospital?
How long will my child need to take antibiotics?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has orbital cellulitis?
In most cases, you can expect a full recovery from orbital cellulitis. The sooner your child gets treatment, the less likely it is that they’ll have any lasting complications. They might need to take antibiotics for several weeks before the infection goes away completely. It’s important that they take the full course of antibiotics prescribed, even if they’re feeling better. This ensures the infection won’t come back.
Prevention
Can orbital cellulitis be prevented?
You can prevent orbital cellulitis by treating infections as soon as possible, especially if they’re close to your eyes. Many common infections that are normally less serious than orbital cellulitis can become more serious if they spread. Treating these infections immediately can prevent them from spreading.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Orbital cellulitis usually starts from common and less serious infections. If you’re a parent or caregiver of a young child, you might be shocked by how fast an infection like this can turn into an emergency. This is a scary moment for both of you. But if you act fast, you can expect a full recovery without long-term damage. Call a provider right away if you notice your child has developed swelling all around their eye.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment