Torn Calf Muscle: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Torn Calf Muscle
Advertisement
Advertisement
Torn Calf Muscle
A torn calf muscle is a painful injury in the muscles behind your shin bone. Athletes and people over 40 are especially prone to this type of muscle injury. Calf muscle tears usually heal after a few weeks of conservative treatments, like rest, ice, compression and elevation. In rare cases, you may need surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Torn Calf Muscle?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is a Torn Calf Muscle?
Sudden movements that severely overstretch your calf muscles can tear them.
A torn calf muscle, or calf muscle tear, is a severe
calf strain
, an injury that occurs when you overstretch a muscle in your calf. Your
calf muscles
(the gastrocnemius and soleus) are in your lower leg, behind your shin bone. They extend from behind your knee down to your heel. These muscles can tear if you perform sudden movements that severely overstretch them. Calf tears can be partial or complete (rupture).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your calf muscles are at especially high risk for tears because of their location between two joints — your ankle and your knee. These muscles also have very tight muscle fibers, making them prone to overstretching injuries. If you develop severe or sudden
calf pain
, contact your healthcare provider. They can evaluate your injury and determine appropriate treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
Torn calf muscle symptoms
Calf tear symptoms may include:
No calf strength, including being unable to balance or bear weight on your injured leg
Snapping or popping sensation in your calf
Sudden
muscle pain
in the back of your lower leg, like someone kicked your calf
Swelling
and
bruising
in your calf muscle
Visible indentation beneath the skin where your muscle is torn
Torn calf muscle causes
A ruptured calf muscle can happen if you suddenly overstretch your calf. Quick pivots, jumps or abrupt stops during sports can cause this injury. It’s also possible to develop tears over time if you overwork your muscles. People who return to exercise too quickly after a previous calf injury can also develop tears.
Risk factors
Anyone can get a ruptured calf, but it’s most common in:
Anyone with short or tight calves who starts intense physical activity without the proper conditioning
Athletes who play sports that require sudden jumping or changes in direction, like basketball, soccer or tennis
People over the age of 40 who may have weakened calves due to aging or inflexibility
Advertisement
Complications of gastrocnemius tears
In very rare cases, ruptured calf muscle complications may include:
Compartment syndrome
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Superficial thrombophlebitis
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose calf tears
Your healthcare provider will perform a
physical exam
and review your symptoms. They may palpate (press on) your calf muscles to check for areas of tenderness or swelling.
Sometimes, gastrocnemius tears look like other injuries in your lower leg, like:
Achilles tendon rupture
Burst
Baker’s cyst
Compartment syndrome
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Your provider might require additional tests when the diagnosis isn’t clear.
Tests that are used
Your healthcare provider may perform imaging exams to evaluate your muscles:
Doppler ultrasound
: This type of ultrasound uses sound waves to create pictures of soft tissue inside your body. It also tracks the way blood flows through your body.
MRI
:
An MRI shows detailed images of the soft tissues in your body. It can help your provider see the difference between muscle injuries and problems with your tendons and ligaments.
Management and Treatment
How is a torn calf treated?
After confirming you have a calf muscle tear, your healthcare provider may recommend a home treatment known as RICE:
Rest
:
Stop doing physical activity and rest your leg. Don’t push through the pain, which can make the problem worse. You may have to use
crutches
or wear a boot for several days.
Ice
:
Put an ice pack or cold compress on your calf muscles for 20 minutes every two hours. Don’t apply ice directly to your skin.
Compression
:
Apply a compression wrap or sleeve to your calf. Compression helps reduce blood flow to the painful area and minimize swelling.
Elevation
:
Lift your leg into an elevated position, preferably above the level of your heart. Support the entire length of your leg with pillows, blankets or cushions.
Until your provider says it’s OK, don’t:
Apply heat to the injured area
Massage your calf
Walk, exercise or perform physical activity
Muscle tear treatment may also include the use of a soft
cast
or boot. Some people need crutches or an assistive device to move around as their injury heals.
After several weeks of RICE, your provider may recommend
physical therapy
. Therapy can help you regain strength and flexibility in your calf muscle. It can also help you get back to everyday activities, like walking up stairs or pressing down on the gas pedal in your car with less pain.
You may need surgery for a ruptured calf muscle if you:
Are age 40 or younger and want to return to competitive sports and high-impact activities
Continue to experience calf pain several months after trying nonsurgical treatments
Have a complete muscle tear with serious swelling or internal bleeding
When should I contact my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of a calf muscle tear, including if you:
Can’t rise up on your toes
Can’t walk or bear weight on your leg
Experience severe or prolonged pain in your calf
Have trouble moving your ankle or knee
Notice swelling or serious bruising in your lower leg, foot or ankle
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis (outlook) for people with a torn calf muscle?
Most people recover fully from a calf muscle tear within a few weeks or months, depending on the severity of their injury. Although rare, some people continue to experience prolonged calf pain even after their injury heals.
Advertisement
It’s important to note that even once a ruptured calf muscle heals, there may be
scar tissue
in the muscle. That tissue isn’t as strong as the surrounding muscle. This puts you at a higher risk for future torn calf muscles and other injuries in your lower leg.
Prevention
How can I prevent a torn calf muscle?
You can reduce your risk of a calf muscle tear by:
Allowing your muscles to rest and recover between games, practices or workouts
Keeping your muscles strong and conditioned
Using proper technique when playing sports
Doing a dynamic warm-up of your muscles before physical activity
Wearing supportive footwear that fits properly
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Torn calf muscles are a common injury that affects not only professional athletes but anyone who participates in certain sports and other physical activities. This painful injury can put you on the sideline. So, reach out to your healthcare provider. While mild injuries may heal with rest, ice and other nonsurgical treatments, only your provider can determine if you’ll require something more to get you on your way.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/08/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment