Mitral Valve Replacement: Surgery & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Mitral Valve Replacement
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mitral Valve Replacement
Mitral valve replacement is a heart surgery to replace your mitral valve with a new one. Surgeons do this when they can’t repair your current valve. This surgery can relieve symptoms of mitral valve disease and prevent further damage to your heart. Talk with your provider about the benefits and risks of valve replacement.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mitral & Tricuspid Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Mitral valve replacement is a surgery to take out your damaged valve and put in a new one.
Mitral valve replacement is an open-heart surgery to improve blood flow by replacing an ailing mitral valve with one made from metal or animal tissue. You may receive a mechanical (artificial)
replacement valve
made of carbon and steel. Or you may get a biological (bioprosthetic) valve made of tissues from pigs, cows or (rarely) humans.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
mitral valve
is the passageway between the two
chambers
of your heart that hold oxygen-rich blood. This blood travels from your lungs into your left atrium, through your mitral valve and into your left ventricle. Your left ventricle has the important job of pumping blood out to your body through your aorta.
If you have
mitral valve disease
, your valve can’t open and close properly. This puts a strain on the left side of your heart. Over time, this can lead to heart and lung damage.
Like all
open-heart surgeries
, mitral valve replacement surgery comes with risks. But if your healthcare provider recommends this surgery, it means your valve disease is getting worse and you’re at risk for serious complications. It also means they can’t
repair
your valve.
What does this procedure treat?
A mitral valve replacement operation treats
mitral valve regurgitation
and
mitral valve stenosis
. Surgeons will try to repair your valve, rather than replace it, whenever possible. Your surgeon may recommend a new valve if repair surgery has a low chance of success. Reasons for this may include:
Severe damage from
endocarditis
or
rheumatic heart disease
Extensive calcium deposits or scarring
A lot of damage to your papillary muscles or chordae, which support your valve
Advertisement
Talk with your provider about your options. It’s a good idea to go to a high-volume hospital (where surgeons perform many valve surgeries every day) for evaluation. Surgeons at these hospitals are experienced in evaluating valve anatomy. They’re highly skilled at deciding if repair or replacement would be better for you.
Choosing a replacement mitral valve type
Valve types include:
Mechanical valves:
These last 20 to 30 years, so they’re good for people under 50. But you’ll need to take blood thinners (anticoagulants) for the rest of your life. Taking blood thinners can be risky for some people, like those who are pregnant or have a greater risk of falls or injuries.
Biological valves:
These only last 10 to 20 years, but you’ll only need to take blood thinners for up to three months after surgery. (There’s a lower risk of blood clots, which is good for people over 65.)
If you’re between 50 and 65, your provider may recommend an artificial or biological type of valve, depending on your situation.
How common is this procedure?
Heart valve surgery is the second most common
heart surgery
in the U.S.
In the U.S., about 90,000 people have one of their heart valves replaced each year. Around the world, this number is about 280,000. The most commonly replaced valves are the mitral valve and the
aortic valve
.
Procedure Details
How should I prepare for this procedure?
Your provider will give you specific instructions for how to prepare for your surgery. In general, you’ll need to:
Stop taking certain medications in the weeks before your surgery
Stop smoking and using tobacco products (your provider can give you resources to quit)
Wash your body with an antimicrobial soap the night before your surgery
Stop eating and drinking after a specific time (usually midnight the night before your surgery)
Take certain medications on the day of your surgery
Your provider may also give you medications to treat conditions like
congestive heart failure
and
atrial fibrillation
before your surgery.
As your surgery day approaches, you should also prepare for your return home. For example, it’s important to put everyday items within easy reach and find someone to drive you home from the hospital.
What happens during mitral valve replacement?
During a mitral valve replacement operation, your surgeon will remove your damaged valve and put a new one in its place. Throughout the surgery, your care team will use
transesophageal echocardiography
. This imaging technology guides their work and helps them confirm surgery success.
During a mitral valve replacement procedure, your surgeon will:
Give you anesthesia so you’ll be asleep during the surgery (you won’t remember the surgery when you wake up)
Connect you to monitors and give you antibiotics through an IV
Connect you to a
cardiopulmonary bypass
machine that does the work of your heart and lungs during the surgery (your heart won’t be beating during the surgery)
Make an incision in your chest (most valve replacements require a
sternotomy
to access your heart)
Make an incision in your left atrium to reach your mitral valve
Remove damaged tissue using surgical techniques that preserve as much of your natural tissue as possible, which can help the new valve and your left ventricle work better
Sew your new valve into place — the specific suturing techniques depend on the type of valve you receive
Check to be sure the valve’s leaflets can move freely (it’s important that no tissue gets in the way as your valve closes)
Sew your left atrium closed and slowly ease you off the cardiopulmonary bypass machine
Advertisement
Your surgery will include additional steps if you’re having other procedures done at the same time.
Mitral valve replacement surgery generally takes two to four hours.
What are the potential benefits and risks of this procedure?
The advantages of mitral valve replacement include:
It doesn’t take as long as repair surgery. You’ll spend less time on the cardiopulmonary bypass machine.
It’s less complex to perform than repair surgery (though it’s still very complex).
It lowers your risk of needing another surgery in the future.
Complications of mitral valve replacement surgery include, but aren’t limited to:
Abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmias
)
Bleeding
Blood clots
Heart block
Heart failure
Infection
Stroke
These complications may happen soon after your surgery or later. Talk with your provider about all possible complications and how to lower your risk.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mitral & Tricuspid Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after this procedure?
Most people need to spend about a week in the hospital after a mitral valve replacement. After your surgery, you can expect to:
Spend one or two days in the intensive care unit, where your care team will keep a close eye on you (they’ll check your pulse, breathing and other vitals)
Spend several more days in a hospital room
Receive treatment like medicine or a temporary
pacemaker
for an arrhythmia (abnormal heart rhythm), which is very common after valve replacement
Begin taking anticoagulants to reduce your risk of a blood clot
Learn about cardiac rehab, which can help you get back on your feet again faster
Learn how to care for your incision as you continue recovering at home
Advertisement
What is the recovery time?
Recovery from mitral valve replacement surgery usually takes four to eight weeks. Some people may need more time.
Several factors impact your recovery. These include:
The severity of mitral valve disease before your surgery
: If you had severe regurgitation or reduced heart function, you may need more time to get your strength back.
Your general health before your surgery
: If you had heart failure or kidney failure, you’ll likely face a slower recovery.
The nature of the surgery
: If you had valve replacement along with other procedures, your recovery may be slower.
Don’t push yourself to recover within a certain time frame. Recovering from heart surgery takes time. Everyone is different. Let your body rest, and accept help from others as you heal.
Your provider will tell you when it’s safe for you to drive, lift heavy objects or take walks.
After a mitral valve replacement, it’s important to make caring for your heart part of your lifestyle. This includes:
Eating heart-healthy foods
Avoiding tobacco products
Avoiding beverages that contain alcohol
Staying at a weight that’s healthy for you
Getting regular physical activity
What is the life expectancy?
Almost everyone survives mitral valve replacement surgery, but the risks go up as you get older. About half of people who have this surgery live at least 10 more years. This is true whether they receive a biological valve or a mechanical one.
Advertisement
Your life expectancy after mitral valve replacement depends on many factors. As with any surgery, your age and overall health play a role. Your long-term survival is better if:
You only need a valve replacement
It’s your first time having valve replacement surgery
Your surgery is elective (not an emergency)
You have some healthy valve tissue for surgeons to keep and attach to your new valve
Talk with your provider about your situation and how long you can expect to live after your valve replacement. No provider can predict the exact number of years. But they’ll be able to assess your personal risks and give you a realistic picture of your outlook.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you when you need to return for follow-up appointments. It’s important to keep these appointments so your provider can check how your new valve is working.
As you recover, stay aware of how you’re feeling. Call your provider right away if you have any signs or symptoms of complications. These include:
Chest pain
Chills, fever or other signs of infection, like oozing from your incision
Coughing up blood or mucus that looks yellow or green
Dizziness or fainting
Headache that’s very severe
Irregular pulse (too slow or too fast)
Nausea and vomiting
Pain, redness or swelling in your lower leg
Pain around your incision that won’t go away
Shortness of breath
Slurred speech or other signs of a stroke
If you’re taking blood thinners, you should call your provider if you fall, have excessive bleeding or have many bruises.
Don’t hesitate to call your provider, even if you think everything’s probably fine. Your provider will know if a symptom that seems minor is actually a cause for concern.
When To Call the Doctor
How serious is mitral valve replacement surgery?
Your heart is a major organ that keeps you alive, so any surgery on it is serious. Highly experienced cardiac surgeons have the skills and training to minimize your risks.
Can the mitral valve be replaced without open-heart surgery?
Usually, mitral valve replacement involves open-heart surgery. But some people are candidates for transcatheter mitral valve repair or replacement (
TMVR
). This is a minimally invasive procedure that treats your valve from inside your body. TMVR allows you to avoid open-heart surgery. Your provider will let you know if this is an option for you.
Robotic valve replacement is another option. This involves using robotic assistance to replace your valve without having to cut bone in the chest cavity like a standard sternotomy.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Mitral valve replacement surgery is a major life event. If you just learned you need a new mitral valve, you may feel nervous or worried about what comes next. Seeking care at a hospital that performs valve surgeries daily can give you peace of mind. This is the time to learn as much as you can about your condition and treatment options, including the benefits and risks. Ask your provider questions you have about your choices.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Problems with your heart can be scary. Our experts can diagnose and treat mitral & tricuspid heart valve disease.
Mitral & Tricuspid Valve Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment