Aicardi Syndrome: What It Is, Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Aicardi Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Aicardi Syndrome
Aicardi syndrome is a rare condition that affects your child’s brain and eyes. Seizures are a common symptom. It also causes developmental delays and intellectual disability. Research suggests it’s an X-linked genetic condition, as it mostly affects females. Aicardi syndrome may lead to a shortened life expectancy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Aicardi Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Aicardi Syndrome?
Aicardi syndrome is a rare, present at birth condition that affects your child’s
brain
and
eyes
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The three most common features of Aicardi syndrome are:
Agenesis of the corpus callosum
. The structure connecting the left and right sides of your child’s brain is partially or completely missing.
Coloboma
or chorioretinal lacunae
. Your child has a defect in their
optic nerve
or is missing tissue in the back of their eye (retina).
Seizures
. Abnormal electrical activity in your child’s brain begins during infancy (
infantile spasms
) and continues, causing frequent seizures (
epilepsy
).
This is a life-threatening condition. Severe cases may affect your child’s life expectancy, but not all cases are severe. Your child will still be able to play, laugh and enjoy their childhood, even if it’s shorter than others. Your child’s provider will let you know what to expect for their situation, as it’s as unique as they are.
Your child will also build a close relationship with their providers, as they’ll need lifelong care and support. Resources are also available for parents and caregivers to help navigate your child’s needs as they grow.
Symptoms and Causes
Aicardi syndrome signs and symptoms affecting a child's brain, development and eyes
Symptoms of Aicardi syndrome
Aicardi syndrome can affect many different parts of your child’s body, including their:
Brain
Eyes
Physical development
Brain signs and symptoms
Signs and symptoms of this condition that affect your child’s brain may include:
Advertisement
Agenesis of the corpus callosum
Seizures (epilepsy)
Brain asymmetry
Abnormal (in size and number) brain folds or grooves
Brain cysts
Large ventricles (fluid-filled brain cavities)
Nerve cells collect in abnormal locations (heterotopia)
One early sign of Aicardi syndrome can be seizures that start when your child is a few months old. These may appear as infantile spasms. You may notice your child’s entire body makes sudden movements or jerks all at once. Seizures may occur several times a day and could get worse over time.
In addition, you may notice that your child
misses developmental milestones
for their age. This could include delays in walking and saying their first words.
Intellectual disability
is common and can range from mild to severe.
Eye signs
Aicardi syndrome signs that affect your child’s eyes could include:
A defect in the optic nerve (coloboma)
Missing
retina
tissue (chorioretinal lacunae)
Small or underdeveloped eyes (
microphthalmia
)
Mild cases may cause vision problems that require glasses and regular eye exams. Severe eye abnormalities usually cause
blindness
.
Physical development signs and symptoms
Aicardi syndrome can affect how certain parts of your child’s body develop. This can lead to the following physical characteristics:
Weak, floppy and uncoordinated muscles (
hypotonia
)
Small head size (
microcephaly
)
Spine and rib abnormalities, causing a spine curvature (
scoliosis
)
Large ears
Short space between upper lip and nose (philtrum)
Small, malformed hands
Thin eyebrows
Infants may have trouble sitting up on their own, grasping objects or walking. Your child may have one or multiple characteristics from this list, but likely not all of them.
Gastrointestinal symptoms may also happen with this condition, like:
Difficulty feeding (infants), which can be severe enough to require
tube feeding
Constipation
Diarrhea
Gastroesophageal
reflux
Even with differences in the way certain parts of their body developed, your child may be able to do some things on their own, like:
Feed themselves.
Sit independently.
Speak short sentences or use alternative methods for communicating, like hand gestures.
Walk.
Use the toilet.
It may take your child longer than others to accomplish these skills. Some severe cases may prevent your child from mastering these skills. But each child’s case is different.
Aicardi syndrome causes
A
gene variant
on the X chromosome causes Aicardi syndrome. Research is ongoing to identify which
gene
it is.
The condition doesn’t run in families and happens randomly or sporadically. This means a new gene change causes it. You don’t inherit it from your biological parents.
Advertisement
Risk factors of Aicardi syndrome
Almost all cases of Aicardi syndrome affect
females
. This is because a gene variant targets one X chromosome.
Females have two X chromosomes. Males have an X and a Y chromosome. These chromosomes identify whether you’ll have male or female physical sex characteristics.
The condition is fatal in males, as they only have one X chromosome. Females have two X chromosomes and still have one unaffected X chromosome.
Complications of Aicardi syndrome
Aicardi syndrome can lead to early death. The main causes are:
Prolonged and difficult-to-treat seizures
Feeding issues
Breathing problems
Your child may be more at risk of life-threatening outcomes from respiratory infections like
pneumonia
. This is usually due to muscle weakness in their
lungs
and diaphragm. It can make managing these infections difficult.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Aicardi syndrome
A healthcare provider may detect signs of Aicardi syndrome before birth during a
prenatal ultrasound
. They’ll confirm a diagnosis after your child is born by looking for signs or symptoms that affect your child’s brain and eyes.
Tests can confirm a diagnosis and may include:
MRI
of the brain to check the corpus callosum and other brain structures.
EEG
to assess brainwaves and confirm an epilepsy diagnosis.
Eye exam
from a pediatric
ophthalmologist
to check for coloboma and choroidal lacunae.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is Aicardi syndrome treated?
Treatment for Aicardi syndrome varies based on how symptoms affect your child.
Antiseizure medications
can help regulate seizures. Sometimes, seizures are difficult to treat. There isn’t one medication that works well for everyone. Your child’s provider may offer several different types of antiseizure medications to find one that works best.
Implantable devices, such as a
vagus nerve stimulator
, help regulate brain activity. This may be an option if medications aren’t successful.
Other types of treatment may include:
Physical therapy
Occupational therapy
Speech therapy
Special education programs in school
Vision support (like learning how to use adaptive technologies or read Braille)
Your child will need support throughout their life, especially if they have intellectual disabilities. Support is also available to families and caregivers to help you care for your child and have access to resources if necessary.
When should I see my child’s healthcare provider?
If your child didn’t receive a diagnosis during infancy, and they’re missing developmental milestones for their age, like speaking their first words or sitting upright on their own, contact their healthcare provider.
Contact emergency services if your child has a seizure for the first time.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my child’s healthcare provider?
You may have a lot of questions after learning about your child’s diagnosis. You may want to ask:
How severe are my child’s symptoms?
What symptoms should I look out for?
What do I do if my child has a seizure?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
Are there side effects of treatment?
What’s my child’s life expectancy?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has Aicardi syndrome?
It’s difficult to know how Aicardi syndrome will affect your child, as the condition is rare and symptoms can vary widely from one person to the next. Your child’s healthcare provider will let you know about your child’s outlook specifically.
Your child will need support throughout their life, as they may not be able to do many things on their own safely or live independently. They’ll need ongoing medical care, therapies and supportive services. Your child’s care team will help you along the way so you know what to expect and how to better support your child.
What’s the life expectancy for Aicardi syndrome?
Your child’s future well-being depends on their symptoms and how severe they are. Severe symptoms may cause your child to have a short life expectancy. Many people with mild symptoms survive into adulthood.
This is different for each person, so talk to your child’s healthcare provider for the most accurate information.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It may be one of the most difficult things for a parent or caregiver to hear — that your child has a rare condition like Aicardi syndrome. You likely have a lot of questions about what this means and what to expect. While healthcare providers can’t predict the future, they can offer care and support to make sure your child has everything they need to stay as healthy as possible.
Care for Aicardi syndrome is lifelong. While this may be a very stressful and emotional journey, know that your child’s providers will be there with you every step of the way. Don’t hesitate to reach out if you need help or have any questions.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your child has a neurological condition, you want them to have the best care. At Cleveland Clinic Children’s, we offer compassionate, personalized treatment.
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment