MS (Multiple Sclerosis) in Children: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
MS (Multiple Sclerosis) in Children
Advertisement
Advertisement
MS (Multiple Sclerosis) in Children
Pediatric MS is multiple sclerosis that begins in children or teens. About 98% have relapsing-remitting MS, versus 84% of adults with MS. This autoimmune condition disrupts communication between your child’s brain and body. Symptoms include muscle weakness, cognitive difficulties and vision problems. Treatment may reduce symptom frequency.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Multiple Sclerosis Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is MS in children?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is MS in children?
Multiple sclerosis
(MS) in children, or pediatric MS, is an
autoimmune condition
that affects your child’s central nervous system before the age of 18. Your
central nervous system
is made up of your
brain
and
spinal cord
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If your child has MS, their
immune system
mistakenly attacks
myelin
cells. These are the protective covers that surround the brain and spinal cord
nerves
. Myelin sheath damage disrupts nerve signals from your child’s brain to the rest of their body.
The damage can lead to symptoms like muscle weakness, fatigue, memory problems, issues with balance and coordination, and vision changes.
There’s no
cure
for MS in children. Treatment is available to manage symptoms and decrease the risk of disability or long-term issues from MS.
Types of MS in children
The most common type among children is
relapsing-remitting MS
. Approximately 98% of children diagnosed have this type. MS symptoms flare up or come and go throughout your child’s life.
Primary progressive MS is less common. This means that your child’s symptoms may get worse over time.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs of MS in children?
Some early signs of MS in children include:
Optic neuritis
: Painful vision loss in one or both eyes
Transverse myelitis
: Weakness and or numbness due to an inflammatory spinal cord scar
A healthcare provider will look for these early signs when diagnosing MS.
Symptoms of MS in children
Common symptoms of MS in children include:
Numbness
, tingling or the “pins and needles” feeling (
paresthesia
)
Dizziness
Difficulty walking or keeping balance
Fatigue
Muscle weakness
Tremors
(shaking)
Problems with concentration or memory
Vision issues (blurry vision or
double vision
)
Advertisement
The symptoms of MS vary from person to person and may even be different from one day to the next. Most children have only a few of these common symptoms, not all of them.
Causes of MS in children
Demyelination causes MS in children. Let’s break down what this means.
Myelin is a protective cover (sheath) that surrounds nerve cells (neurons) in your child’s
brain
and
spinal cord
. Myelin helps messages move between your child’s brain and the rest of their body.
Your child’s immune system protects their body from things that can harm it, like a
virus
or
bacteria
. Sometimes, their immune system confuses healthy parts of their body for a threat. In this case, the immune system sees myelin as something harmful. Their immune system attacks and damages this protective cover on your child’s nerve cells.
Damage to myelin is demyelination. This damage can create scars that are visible on imaging tests. You might hear your child’s provider call these scars lesions or plaques. Demyelination affects how your child’s brain sends messages to all parts of their body, which causes symptoms.
Researchers aren’t sure why this happens.
Risk factors of MS in children
You may be more at risk of having a child with MS if any of the following affect you during
pregnancy
:
Toxin exposure, like
secondhand smoke
and pesticides
Low levels of vitamin D
in your blood
Exposure to a virus (
Epstein-Barr virus
or
mononucleosis
)
Obesity
A healthcare provider or pregnancy care provider can help you plan for and stay healthy during pregnancy.
Complications of MS in children
MS in children can lead to complications like:
Difficulty walking without assistance
Depression
and
anxiety
Trouble completing schoolwork
Poor coordination of their hands
Trouble with bladder or bowel regulation (
incontinence
)
Many of these won’t affect your child right away or until they reach adulthood.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose MS in children
A healthcare provider will diagnose MS in your child after a
physical exam
, a
neurological exam
and testing. During the exams, your child’s provider will ask you questions about their medical history and symptoms.
Diagnostic testing helps their provider rule out conditions with similar symptoms. Tests could include:
Blood tests
and urine tests
Imaging tests like an
MRI
or
optical coherence tomography
Lumbar puncture
Evoked potential (EP) tests
Since MS symptoms are similar to many other conditions, it can take some time before you get an official diagnosis. This can be frustrating and may result in several trips to your child’s providers. But an official diagnosis helps your child’s care team better treat their symptoms so they can enjoy every part of their childhood with minimal interruptions.
Advertisement
Can MS be diagnosed in young children?
MS symptoms aren’t present at birth, so it’s unlikely that a child will receive a diagnosis as an infant. Symptoms become more apparent as your child grows and develops. It most commonly starts during puberty. Most diagnoses happen before age 16.
Management and Treatment
How is MS in children treated?
A common treatment for the relapsing-remitting form of MS in children is disease-modifying therapy (DMT). DMTs slow the condition’s progression and can reduce how many symptom flare-ups your child has. One FDA-approved medication is the oral form of
fingolimod
. It’s recommended for children age 10 or older. Researchers are currently studying other DMTs for pediatric use.
A healthcare provider will also treat symptoms of MS that affect your child. This could include:
Occupational therapy
Physical therapy
Speech therapy
Neuropsychology testing and therapy
Your child may need extra support in the classroom if symptoms affect their memory and thinking.
Clinical trials
(studies that test the effectiveness of new treatments) may be available. A provider can give you more information if this is an option for your child.
When should I see my child’s healthcare provider?
If your child tells you about any symptoms they experience, like a tingling feeling in their arms and legs or vision changes, it’s very important to talk to your child’s providers. Finding MS early is key. Providers can evaluate your child or teen and determine the best path to a diagnosis.
Advertisement
After a diagnosis, you and/or your child should contact their care team if any new symptoms come up or if flare-ups happen.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Multiple Sclerosis Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for MS in children?
Children diagnosed with MS usually have a positive outlook. Treatment is available to help them reduce how often flare-ups happen and symptom severity. Managing the condition is lifelong to prevent long-term disability. You can expect that your child will need to meet regularly with their MS care team throughout their life.
Some children diagnosed with the relapsing-remitting form go on to develop secondary progressive MS as adults. Secondary progressive MS symptoms slowly get worse. Research shows that children diagnosed with MS see the disease progress more slowly than adults with the secondary progressive form.
Will MS affect my child in school?
Your child may feel challenged in school since MS may affect their
memory
and cognitive function (thinking and learning). It helps to have at least one formal cognitive test called a neuropsychological test. Then, meet with your child’s teachers regularly. Support is available to help them reach their academic goals at their own pace.
Most children with MS fit right in with their peers. They’re able to play and participate in the same activities as others.
Advertisement
If you have any questions, your child’s provider can advise you on whether or not certain activities are safe for your child to participate in.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
As a parent or caregiver, you may be worried to learn that your child has MS. Most cases that affect children are relapsing-remitting, where symptoms will come and go throughout your child’s life. A healthcare provider can create a treatment plan to reduce the frequency and severity. While MS is a lifelong condition with no cure, managing it well can help your child play and learn with fewer disruptions.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If your child has pediatric multiple sclerosis, you want expert treatment. At Cleveland Clinic Children’s, we can help slow the disease and improve quality of life.
Multiple Sclerosis Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment