Loeys-Dietz Syndrome (LDS): Symptoms & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Loeys-Dietz Syndrome (LDS)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Loeys-Dietz Syndrome (LDS)
Loeys-Dietz syndrome affects the connective tissue that holds your body together. Since the syndrome affects various parts of your body, you’ll need a team of healthcare providers to manage it. Close monitoring and treatments can help keep complications at bay.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Aortic Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Loeys-Dietz Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Loeys-Dietz Syndrome?
Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a
genetic condition
that affects your
connective tissue
. Connective tissue typically provides strength and flexibility to many structures in your body. Loeys-Dietz syndrome mainly affects your:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Heart
and
blood vessels
Bones
and
joints
Eyes
Skin
You’re born with LDS, but you might not notice signs and symptoms until childhood or adulthood. LDS affects each person differently. The health impacts range in severity.
Loeys-Dietz syndrome gets its name from two doctors who first identified the syndrome in 2005. Before this discovery, healthcare providers misdiagnosed it as
Marfan syndrome
. This is another connective tissue disease that affects your body in similar ways.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Loeys-Dietz syndrome
Loeys-Dietz syndrome has four main features:
Aneurysms
. This is the widening of an
artery
. With LDS, it often affects your
aorta
, but you can have aneurysms in other arteries. You may not have symptoms of aneurysms, but imaging tests can detect them.
Arterial tortuosity
. This is when arteries are twisted or spiraled. It most often affects arteries in your neck. Imaging tests can detect them.
Orbital hypertelorism
. Widely spaced eyes are a distinctive craniofacial feature of LDS.
Bifid
or broad uvula
. This means the little piece of flesh that hangs in the back of your mouth (
uvula
) is split or bigger than usual.
Most people with LDS have these four features. But the syndrome can affect several other parts of your body, causing other symptoms.
Advertisement
Physical features
Physical features of Loeys-Dietz syndrome may include:
Cleft lip and palate
Clubfoot
or
flat feet
Craniosynostosis
(early fusion of
skull bones
)
Long fingers and toes
Overly flexible joints (
hypermobility
)
Pectus excavatum
(sunken chest) or
pectus carinatum
(protruding chest)
Scoliosis
Skin that
bruises
and
scars
easily
Skin that’s translucent (almost see-through) and velvety soft
Other features
Other features of LDS may include:
Congenital heart disease
, like
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
,
atrial
or
ventricular septal defect
(ASD/VSD) and
bicuspid aortic valve (BAV)
Digestive system
issues, like
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
Dural ectasia (ballooning or widening of the dural sac, which surrounds your
spinal cord
)
Eye muscle
disorders
Hernias
Food
or
environmental allergies
Loey-Dietz syndrome causes
Changes to certain genes
cause Loeys-Dietz syndrome. These
genes
play roles in how your cells function during growth and development. They also manage the formation of structures in the spaces between cells (the extracellular matrix). This structure is important for tissue strength and repair.
An estimated 3 out of 4 people with Loeys-Dietz syndrome have no biological family history of the syndrome. For unknown reasons, a gene changes for the first time.
In about 1 out of 4 cases, you inherit LDS from a biological parent. LDS has an
autosomal dominant
pattern of inheritance. This means inheriting one copy of the faulty gene is enough to cause the syndrome. A parent with Loeys-Dietz syndrome has a 1 in 2 (50%) chance of passing the syndrome to each of their children.
Types of LDS
Different gene changes cause five distinct types of LDS. Symptoms can overlap between all five types. But each type tends to have distinct features (phenotypes). Types I and II are the most common.
Types of Loeys-Dietz syndromes and the gene changes that cause them include:
LDS-I
(
TGFβR1
). Type I mainly involves craniofacial (head and face) features.
LDS-II
(
TGFβR2
). Type II mainly involves skin (cutaneous) features.
LDS-III
(
SMAD-3
). Type III mainly involves aneurysms and osteoarthritis.
LDS-IV
(
TGFβ2
). Type IV mainly involves Marfan syndrome-like features, like aortic aneurysm issues.
LDS-V
(
TGFβ3
). Type V mainly involves aneurysms in your thoracic and/or abdominal aorta.
Complications of this condition
Cardiovascular
complications are the most common — and serious — complications of Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Some examples include:
Aortic dissection
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Mitral valve prolapse
Subclavian artery
dissection
Stroke
Advertisement
Other LDS complications may include:
Degenerative disk disease
Hollow organ ruptures, like your intestine,
spleen
or
uterus
Osteoarthritis
Osteoporosis
and
bone fractures
Retinal detachment
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
and ask about your medical history. If they think you may have Loeys-Dietz syndrome, they’ll refer you to a
geneticist
. This specialist will do
genetic testing
with a
blood test
to look for gene changes that cause the syndrome.
Your provider may recommend other tests to help diagnose cardiovascular conditions linked to LDS, like:
Echocardiogram
to check for aorta problems and heart defects
Computed tomography angiogram
(CTA) or
magnetic resonance angiogram
(MRA) from your head to your pelvis to check for aneurysms and twisting arteries
Management and Treatment
How is Loeys-Dietz syndrome treated?
There’s no
cure
for LDS. But various treatments and strategies can help manage your symptoms and prevent complications. You’ll need a treatment plan that’s specific to your health issues. This may include medications, frequent monitoring and/or surgery.
Medications and monitoring
Medications that can help slow down the enlargement of your aorta and other arteries include:
Beta-blockers
Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)
You might require open heart surgery to fix an aortic aneurysm or a defective heart valve. If you need
heart valve surgery
for LDS, you might need to be on an
anticoagulant
medication for the rest of your life. It depends on the type of prosthetic valve you receive.
Advertisement
You’ll need routine medical appointments to monitor your:
Heart and blood vessels — in particular, the size of your aorta
Eyes
Skeletal system
This way, your healthcare team can track changes and catch any possible complications as soon as they appear. Your team will tell you how often you need these appointments. Monitoring for LDS usually involves imaging tests.
Physical activity guidance
Intense physical activity can strain your aorta and other connective tissues impacted by LDS. Because of this, you’ll work closely with a
physical therapist
to find exercises and sports that are safe for you.
Providers generally recommend low- to moderate-intensity exercise for most people with LDS. Activities that may be safer for your health include hiking, biking and swimming.
In general, you’ll likely need to avoid:
Contact sports
Exercise to exhaustion
Isometric exercises
, like planks and wall sits
Surgery
Healthcare providers often recommend certain
heart surgeries
for LDS to prevent complications, like aortic dissection. The most common surgery is
aortic root replacement
. Your healthcare team may recommend other cardiovascular surgeries depending on your symptoms.
You may need
orthopedic surgery
to help with scoliosis or foot deformities. Other therapies can help with musculoskeletal conditions, like braces.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Aortic Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
If you have Loeys-Dietz syndrome, you can expect a lot of medical appointments and the need to have a thorough understanding of your body. LDS affects everyone differently, so you’ll have your own journey with the syndrome. You’ll work closely with your team of healthcare providers to manage LDS as it changes.
LDS is still a relatively new disease. Experts are actively studying how it affects your health and life expectancy. So far, research shows that earlier detection and preventive treatments are helping people with LDS live longer.
Cardiovascular impairment is still the most common cause of death in LDS. This is mainly due to sudden death in undiagnosed cases. It’s also more likely to affect people who get a late LDS diagnosis.
LDS and mental health
Several aspects of living with Loeys-Dietz syndrome can impact your mental health and quality of life, like:
The
chronic nature
of LDS and the need for lifelong treatment
The ways LDS affects your appearance
Chronic pain
and
fatigue
Limits on physical activity, which are often social interactions
Family planning stressors
Because of this, you may be at higher risk of:
Anxiety
Depression
Experiencing
bullying
Social isolation
Caregivers
and family members of people with LDS are also at risk of these mental health issues.
Be sure to seek help from a mental health specialist (like a
psychologist
) if you’re experiencing distress related to LDS. Your mental health is just as important as your physical health. Joining a support group may also help.
Additional Common Questions
How does Loeys-Dietz syndrome affect pregnancy?
Pregnant
women
with Loeys-Dietz syndrome are at risk for uterine ruptures. Your uterus may suddenly tear during
pregnancy
or
labor and delivery
. This rupture can be life-threatening to you and your baby.
It’s important to receive care from a
perinatologist
(maternal-fetal medicine doctor). This expert specializes in high-risk pregnancies. Your provider may recommend delivering early or via
Cesarean section
(C-section).
What is the difference between Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome?
Marfan syndrome (MFS) and LDS are both genetic conditions that affect your connective tissue. They typically share the feature of aortic aneurysms. But they have other differing features. For example, LDS often causes twisted or spiraled arteries, but MFS doesn’t.
They also result from different gene changes. For MFS, there’s a change in the gene that gives your cells instructions to make fibrillin. It’s the main component of elastic fibers in your connective tissue.
What is the difference between Ehlers-Danlos and Loeys-Dietz syndrome?
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS)
and LDS are both genetic conditions that affect your connective tissue. But LDS mainly affects your heart and arteries, and EDS mainly affects your skin and joints.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Life with Loeys-Dietz syndrome may feel like spinning through a revolving door of medical appointments, treatments and lifestyle adjustments. But all those check-ins can help prevent complications of LDS so you can live the healthiest life possible. Your healthcare team will be by your side through it all. Lean on them for support and guidance. If you’re becoming overwhelmed, reach out to a mental health specialist for help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you come to Cleveland Clinic for aortic disease treatment, you’ll get industry-leading care and support from our heart and vascular specialists.
Aortic Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment