Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Premenstrual Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Premenstrual Syndrome
Premenstrual syndrome, or PMS, is a combination of symptoms that arrive before your period. Your symptoms may be physical (like bloating or sore breasts), emotional (like irritability or sadness) or a combination of both. Either way, PMS symptoms can disrupt your life. Lifestyle modifications and over-the-counter medications can often relieve PMS symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Premenstrual syndrome (or PMS) begins one to two weeks before you get your period. It can cause symptoms like headaches, breast soreness and mood swings.
What is premenstrual syndrome (PMS)?
Premenstrual syndrome, or PMS, describes physical and emotional symptoms that begin a week or two before your
period
. Most people who menstruate have at least one or more symptoms of PMS. These symptoms usually tip you off that your period is coming soon. Once you get your period, symptoms of PMS usually go away. These symptoms will often reoccur around the same time each menstrual cycle.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Almost 50%
of people who menstruate say they have at least one PMS symptom. About 20% of those people have symptoms that are severe enough to disrupt their life.
Symptoms and Causes
What are symptoms of PMS?
PMS symptoms can be physical, emotional or a mix of both. They can also be mild, severe or somewhere in between. Not everyone experiences PMS. If you do, your symptoms may change throughout your life.
Physical symptoms
The most common physical signs of PMS are:
Bloating
or a gassy feeling
Pelvic pain
Fatigue
Acne
flare-ups
Breast soreness
Headaches
Diarrhea
or
constipation
Emotional symptoms
The most common emotional signs of PMS are:
Irritability
or lashing out toward others
Mood swings
Changes in your
sex drive
Feeling anxious, sad or having crying spells
Brain fog
or trouble concentrating
Food cravings or increased/decreased appetite
Having trouble sleeping (
insomnia
)
What causes PMS?
The exact cause is unknown. But most healthcare providers believe PMS happens due to hormonal changes related to your menstrual cycle.
Symptoms usually show up around
ovulation
, when levels of
estrogen
and
progesterone
increase. Once your period begins, these hormone levels drop for a few days, and then, will start to rise again. These hormonal changes may be to blame for PMS. Some people are more sensitive to hormonal fluctuations, which may explain why PMS affects everyone differently.
Advertisement
How long does PMS last before you get your period?
Most people experience PMS symptoms about one to two weeks before their period. But the timing isn’t always exact. You can have PMS two weeks before your period or two days before your period.
Risk factors for PMS
You may be more likely to have PMS if you have:
A history of
postpartum depression
A personal or family history of
depression
or
anxiety disorders
High
stress
levels
Healthcare providers most often diagnose PMS in people who are in their late 20s and early 30s.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is premenstrual syndrome diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider diagnoses PMS based on your symptoms. They‘ll ask you about what symptoms you have, when you have them and how they impact your life. To receive a PMS diagnosis, your symptoms must:
Occur the week before your period
End within a few days of your period starting
Recur for at least three menstrual cycles in a row
Questions your provider may ask include:
How many days pass between one period and the next?
How many days do you bleed?
How many days are light, medium or heavy?
What symptoms do you have?
When do your PMS symptoms show up/go away?
When are your symptoms milder/more intense?
Can you tell when your symptoms are about to start?
Do your symptoms interfere with your life?
Your provider may also ask about your medical history and medications you’re taking to rule out factors other than PMS that may be causing your symptoms. They may ask you about your biological family’s medical history, too, as many conditions run in families. Your provider will rule out causes like:
Anxiety
Depression
Perimenopause
Chronic fatigue syndrome
Thyroid disorders
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Management and Treatment
How can I manage symptoms of PMS?
There are many treatment options for PMS. Some people may need to try several different treatments until they find one that relieves their symptoms.
Medications for PMS
You can usually manage mild symptoms with over-the-counter (OTC) medications. More severe symptoms may require a prescription from a provider. Options include:
NSAIDs
.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can relieve breast pain and menstrual cramps if you take them around the time when your symptoms start. Options include
ibuprofen
(Advil®, Motrin IB®),
naproxen sodium
(Aleve®),
acetaminophen
(Tylenol®) and
aspirin
. You can purchase them at your local drugstore.
Hormonal birth control
.
Medicines that prevent you from ovulating can relieve unpleasant physical symptoms, like breast tenderness and pain. It may take some experimentation at first to figure out what kind of birth control helps you most. Options include
birth control pills
, the
patch
and the
ring
.
Antidepressants and anti-anxiety medications.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
are the most common types of antidepressants to treat the mood-related issues associated with PMS. Options include
fluoxetine
(Prozac®, Sarafem®),
paroxetine
(Paxil®, Pexeva®) and
sertraline
(Zoloft®).
Diuretics
.
Diuretics can relieve symptoms like bloating and breast tenderness.
Advertisement
Lifestyle changes
You can modify your lifestyle to help relieve pain and combat the mood-related symptoms of PMS. Examples include:
Getting regular exercise.
Moderate exercise (running, walking, swimming) for 30 minutes a day can relieve stress and boost your mood. Plus, exercise is good for your overall wellness.
Eating a diet that’s healthy for you.
Eating more of some foods and less of others can help combat PMS symptoms. Eat fewer salty, fatty and sugary foods, and drink fewer caffeinated drinks and beverages containing alcohol for two weeks before your period to help fend off PMS symptoms. Instead, reach for fruits, vegetables and whole grains.
Getting plenty of sleep.
Getting at least eight hours of sleep can help reduce feelings of irritability. Waking up and going to bed at the same time each day adds the extra benefit of syncing your internal clock so you’re less likely to feel moody throughout the day.
Practicing relaxation exercises.
Yoga
,
meditation
and breathing exercises can help relieve stress and combat the irritability and sadness that often accompany PMS.
Avoiding smoking.
Smoking
tobacco products may worsen PMS symptoms.
Vitamins, minerals and supplements
Vitamins, minerals and herbal supplements aren’t regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the way over-the-counter and prescription drugs are, so it’s a good idea to check with a healthcare provider before taking them. Still, there’s some evidence that they can help with PMS:
Advertisement
Curcumin.
Curcumin is especially effective in easing mood swings and cramps.
Chasteberry.
Chasteberry can help reduce bloating, cramping and food cravings.
St. John’s Wort.
St. John’s Wort is used for mood disorders and to help with anxiety and depression, which can be common during PMS.
Evening primrose oil.
This is an essential fatty acid that may help reduce depression, as well as relieve breast tenderness, swelling and bloating.
Ginkgo biloba.
Ginkgo biloba has been shown to reduce the severity of PMS symptoms.
When will PMS go away?
PMS doesn’t go away for good until you experience
menopause
and no longer have periods. Until then, there’s plenty you can do to help manage your symptoms so they don’t disrupt your life. Keep tabs on when you tend to notice symptoms and take note of the treatments that relieve them. Put them to use each month when your symptoms usually begin.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have premenstrual syndrome?
PMS is common enough that many people accept it as an annoyance during “that time of the month.” Just because PMS is normal, it doesn’t mean you have to let it disrupt your life. Often, you can manage your symptoms with medications and lifestyle changes. If nothing you’re doing is making a big enough difference, see your provider to get treatments that can help.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can you prevent PMS?
You can’t prevent premenstrual syndrome, but you can manage symptoms with lifestyle changes, medications or a combination of both.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you’re unable to get relief from your PMS symptoms. To get the most out of your visit, come to your appointment prepared to discuss your symptoms and your period in detail.
Be prepared to share:
Your symptoms (including how severe they are) and when they occur
When your last two periods began and ended
You can use a pen and paper, a calendar or an app on your phone to track this information. This helps you and your provider recommend the best path forward.
What questions should I ask my provider?
If you have PMS, you may want to ask your provider:
Are my symptoms only related to PMS or could they be a sign of something else?
What lifestyle changes would you recommend to help PMS?
Do I need medication to help my symptoms?
Would you recommend herbal supplements to ease PMS symptoms?
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between PMS and PMDD?
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
(PMDD) is a severe and potentially debilitating form of PMS. It’s much less common than PMS, affecting about
3% of people who menstruate
. With PMDD, you experience PMS symptoms but with much more intensity, especially when it comes to emotional responses and your mood. You’re more likely to experience anger, severe depression and anxiety with PMDD than with PMS.
At what age does PMS get worse?
There isn’t any solid evidence that PMS worsens at a particular age.
Researchers
believe PMS symptoms appear at similar rates across all age groups. Some people believe that their PMS symptoms tend to be more severe as they enter their 40s. But this is usually due to symptoms associated with perimenopause (like
hot flashes
or
vaginal dryness
).
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Just because premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is common, it doesn’t mean that you have to tolerate the unpleasant symptoms it can cause. Pay attention to any aches and pains or mood changes that happen just before your period that may be signs of PMS. If they’re interfering with your well-being, try switching up your habits and taking over-the-counter medications that can ease your symptoms. If that doesn’t work, see a healthcare provider to get the treatment you need.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment