Natural Immunity: What It Is
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Natural Immunity
Advertisement
Advertisement
Natural Immunity
Natural immunity is protection you develop when your body fights off an infection. Your immune system makes antibodies that destroy invading germs and remember them in preparation for the next attack. Natural immunity may last just a few months or much longer, depending on the infectious disease in question.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is natural immunity?
Natural immunity is protection against a specific
infectious disease
that you gain after having that disease. When you get sick, your body’s immune system revs up and mounts an attack to rid your body of the invader — typically, a
virus
or
bacteria
. One way your body does this is by producing proteins called
antibodies
that target and destroy the invader. The antibodies clear out the infection and you feel better. But that’s just the first part of the story.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Once you feel better, you might not think much about what your
immune system
is up to. Yet, behind the scenes, tiny immune cells inside your body (memory cells) hold onto the memory of that infection. That’s because while they mounted their attack, they learned to recognize the
antigen
— or the chemical marker — associated with that specific invader, or
germ
.
These memory cells survive beyond the infection. They stick around with the sole purpose of patrolling for that same invader’s antigen. If the invader returns, your memory cells jump into action and alert other immune cells to swiftly attack and clear it out — often without you even noticing.
This process is a bit like finding an invasive weed in your garden. After you root it out, you remember what it looks like. This memory allows you to spot the weed and get rid of it even quicker if it grows back and threatens nearby plants.
Memory cells are a key part of how natural immunity works. But for your body to develop memory cells, it has to encounter the invader in the first place. So, natural immunity only develops once you’ve gotten the infection and recovered.
To understand the role natural immunity plays within your immune system, it helps to know a bit more about the different types of immunity and how they all work together to protect you.
Advertisement
Types of immunity
There are two main types of immunity, which serve as two lines of defense for your body:
Innate immunity:
Innate immunity is the first line of defense when an invader tries to get in. It includes anatomic barriers, like your
skin
and
mucus membranes
, as well as many different types of cells (like
natural killer cells
) that recognize invaders and immediately launch an attack. But these cells don’t remember the invaders after the battle is done. Instead, the cells launch the same attack every time regardless of the invader. Sometimes, this is enough to clear an infection. But if not, your innate immune cells call for reinforcements — your adaptive immune cells.
Adaptive immunity:
Adaptive immunity is a line of defense that recognizes, targets and remembers specific invaders. Specialized cells — including
T-cells
and
B-cells
— work together to recognize antigens that don’t belong in your body and destroy them. Memory cells in particular are heroes in this scenario because they’ve survived previous infections and can quickly respond to clear out subsequent infections.
When most people talk about natural immunity, they’re referring to a form of adaptive immunity. Your immune system naturally makes proteins and antibodies that target specific invaders and “remember” those invaders. This process prepares your body to recognize and eliminate the invaders in the future.
What is natural active immunity?
Natural active immunity is protection you receive from antibodies your immune system creates in response to an infection. This is slightly different from vaccine-induced active immunity, or protection you receive from antibodies your immune system creates in response to substances (like pieces of viruses or bacteria) in some
vaccines
.
What is natural passive immunity?
Natural passive immunity is protection that transfers from parent to child during pregnancy or nursing. For example, if you’re pregnant, you pass many types of antibodies to the fetus through the
placenta
. After your baby is born, if you
breastfeed
, you pass some types of antibodies to your baby through the milk. This antibody transfer allows your baby to gain protection against harmful germs before their immune system is ready to create all those antibodies on its own.
You can get passive immunity through artificial means. This involves getting an injection of antibodies to serve a specific medical purpose. For example,
monoclonal antibodies
and polyclonal antibodies help treat a wide range of medical conditions. In these situations, scientists make the antibodies in a lab or obtain them from animal sources.
How long does natural immunity last?
How long you’re protected from an infectious disease varies according to the disease. It also depends on your overall health, including whether you have a
weakened immune system
.
Advertisement
Sometimes, having an infection just once is enough to give you lifelong natural immunity. Examples of such “one-and-done” diseases include
measles
and
hepatitis A
.
Other times, your body generates natural immunity that protects you for a limited amount of time. This is why you can get some infections — like a
common cold
, COVID-19 and
the flu
— multiple times throughout your life. Your natural immunity is for a specific strain of the virus. But the viruses keep changing to work around our defenses.
Natural immunity vs. vaccination — what’s the difference?
Natural immunity and vaccine-induced immunity are both forms of active immunization. In both cases, your immune system creates antibodies and T-cells. But they’re making them in response to different triggers, or substances that spur your immune cells into action.
Germs (microbes) from an infection prompt your body to develop natural immunity. Substances in vaccines — like weakened microbes or proteins or mRNA — create vaccine-induced immunity.
When a large number of people gain immunity to a specific infectious disease naturally and/or through vaccination, we can reach what researchers call
herd immunity
. This is when an infection stops spreading because most people are immune to it. Vaccination is the safest way to reach herd immunity.
Advertisement
How can I boost my immune system naturally?
There’s a lot you can do to
strengthen your immune system
and help it work at its best. From getting enough sleep to
eating foods
rich in immune-boosting nutrients, you can help your immune system ward off viruses and other germs that could make you sick.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What is COVID-19 natural immunity?
COVID-19 natural immunity is protection against future infections that your body develops after recovering from a
COVID-19 infection
. The infection trains your immune system to recognize and destroy the virus that causes COVID-19 if it enters your body again.
Infectious disease experts emphasize you shouldn’t rely on natural immunity to protect you and your family. Instead, follow your healthcare provider’s recommendations for
COVID-19 vaccination
. Here’s why:
COVID-19 is an unpredictable infection.
You can’t always know how the virus will affect your body, how sick you’ll get or what long-term effects (like
long COVID
) you’ll end up with. Some research shows a COVID-19 infection causes your body to create autoantibodies. These are antibodies that attack your body’s own healthy cells, potentially leading to
autoimmune disease
. On the other hand, vaccination gives you predictable, safer and reliable protection. Any side effects are temporary and don’t cause lasting harm. Research shows no link between vaccination and the creation of autoantibodies.
COVID-19 natural immunity changes as the virus mutates.
When a virus mutates, it creates a variant, or a new form of the virus. That’s why natural immunity from one COVID variant doesn’t guarantee immunity from all variants. Research has shown earlier variants — up through delta — gave people strong, long-lasting natural immunity for many months after infection. Omicron and its subvariants still give you natural immunity, but it may not be as strong or durable. That’s because these newer variants have “high immune escape.” This means they’re sneaky and can more easily dodge your body’s natural immune defenses. The vaccines are updated yearly to fight the most current strain of COVID.
Advertisement
Instead of relying on natural immunity for protection, talk to your provider about the COVID-19 vaccine. Vaccination provides your body with a powerful form of active immunity without risking severe illness, hospitalization or death from an actual infection. Healthcare providers advise you to still get vaccinated even if you’ve had COVID-19.
How long does natural immunity to COVID-19 last?
It depends. Many people gain protection against another infection (reinfection) for several months. But this natural immunity lessens as time passes. If you have a weakened immune system, your body may not build up effective natural immunity after an infection. So, you may get sick again sooner than others would.
In general, natural immunity from a COVID-19 infection may offer strong protection against severe illness and hospitalization. You might still get COVID-19 during that time, but the infection likely won’t be as severe. We’ll continue to learn more as researchers study the latest variants and reinfection trends.
Keep in mind that having COVID-19 won’t protect you against other viruses going around, like flu or
RSV
, or common bacterial infections like
strep throat
. A different germ (microbe) causes each type of infection. So, even if you have some short-term natural immunity against COVID-19, it’s a good idea to keep taking precautions to protect yourself and your family from all harmful germs. Tips include
washing your hands
often, wearing masks in certain social situations and avoiding others who are sick.
To get advice tailored to your needs, you should talk to a healthcare provider who knows you and your medical history. They can advise you on what you can expect after a COVID-19 infection and how to protect yourself.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When you’re sick, you’re likely not thinking about the tiny cells inside your body that are battling each other. But that’s indeed what’s happening. Once your immune system defeats the invading germ, you’re left with natural protection that may last months, years or even a lifetime.
But natural immunity can only get you so far. In many cases, it doesn’t last forever. Plus, some viruses or bacteria can make you severely sick — so it’s best to develop immunity through vaccination instead. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about how natural immunity might help protect you from certain common infections and what you can do to stay healthy.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/15/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider