Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT): What It Is & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a procedure that uses a small electrical stimulus to cause a brief, controlled seizure. You’ll be asleep and won’t feel any pain or discomfort. This treatment effectively treats severe mental health conditions, including depression, schizophrenia and more. It’s safe and low risk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
Overview
What is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)?
Electroconvulsive therapy, or ECT, is a medical treatment for certain
mental health conditions
that don’t respond well to medications or other treatments. It involves applying a small electrical stimulus to your
brain
to trigger a brief, controlled
seizure
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
ECT happens while you’re under general anesthesia. This means you won’t feel anything during the procedure.
It’s the most effective treatment for severe depression. It may also treat bipolar disorder, catatonia and schizophrenia, among other conditions.
Experts aren’t exactly sure how ECT works. But one leading theory is that it helps brain cells grow and form new connections. This process is called neurogenesis. It may help reverse changes in your brain caused by depression and other mental health disorders.
Doctors began using ECT in 1938, and the procedure improved significantly over the decades.
What conditions are treated with ECT?
ECT may help manage the following conditions:
Bipolar disorder
Catatonia
Major depressive disorder
Mania
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Schizoaffective disorder
Schizophrenia
Who is a good candidate for ECT?
You may be a candidate for ECT if you have a severe mental health condition and:
Are at risk of hurting yourself or others
Are
pregnant
or
breastfeeding
Didn’t respond well to
antidepressants
or other medications
Have symptoms that prevent you from eating or completing your daily routine
Treatment Details
How do I prepare for ECT?
Your provider will give you instructions to follow before your ECT. These may include:
Don’t eat or drink for at least eight hours before treatment.
If you need to take morning medications, take them with small sips of water, only if your doctor says it’s OK.
Bring a case for your dentures or partials.
Don’t wear earrings. Remove facial piercings if you can.
Advertisement
What happens during electroconvulsive therapy?
Here’s what you can expect on the day of your ECT treatment:
Check in at the hospital’s registration desk and go to the treatment area.
Have an IV placed in a vein so you can receive medication.
Meet with the psychiatry and anesthesia teams.
Receive medication (general
anesthesia
) through your IV to fall asleep and relax your
muscles
. You may get other medications as well (your
care team
will explain).
Breathe oxygen through a mask while you’re asleep. Your
vital signs
will be closely monitored.
Undergo ECT. Using electrodes, a small electrical current will trigger a seizure. It usually lasts 30 to 60 seconds.
What happens after ECT?
After treatment, you’ll start to wake up in about five minutes. It’s normal to feel groggy or confused at first, but this usually fades within 20 to 30 minutes. You’ll stay in the treatment area for 30 to 45 minutes until it’s safe to go home.
Follow these steps after each treatment to stay safe and support your recovery:
Don’t drive during a course of ECT (two or three treatments per week). After finishing your acute series, your outpatient provider must clear you before you can drive again. If you’re on maintenance ECT (one treatment per week or fewer), you may drive 24 hours after treatment, but only after getting clearance.
Avoid using heavy machinery or making important decisions on the day of treatment.
Plan ahead for any childcare needs on treatment day.
Have a responsible adult drive you to and from each treatment. You can’t use a taxi or ride-share service to go home.
Make sure someone stays with you for 24 hours after each treatment.
How often do I need ECT?
ECT isn’t a one-time treatment. Instead, it’s a course of treatments. You may need it two to three times a week. The total number of treatments depends on your condition, how ECT is done and how well you respond. Plan to spend at least two hours at each visit, from check-in to discharge.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
ECT side effects
Common side effects of ECT include:
Headache
Muscle aches
Nausea
Temporary rise in
blood pressure
Your care team can give you medications to reduce or prevent the most common side effects.
Rare or serious side effects include:
Memory loss
Heart rhythm problems
Death
(this is extremely rare)
It’s important to note that memory problems after ECT are usually worse right after treatment and get better over time. You may have trouble remembering events from the weeks or months before starting treatment. This usually improves within a few weeks. But in rare cases, it may last longer. Very rarely, there have been reports of permanent memory loss.
Benefits of electroconvulsive therapy
Some of the benefits of ECT may include:
It may provide relief when other treatments like medication or therapy haven’t worked.
It often works faster than other treatments, which helps in emergencies.
It may be an option if you can’t take certain medications.
It can be used safely during pregnancy with close monitoring.
It’s often used alongside medication to enhance its effectiveness.
Advertisement
Recovery and Outlook
Does electroconvulsive therapy work?
Research shows that ECT is an effective procedure to manage depression, catatonia, psychosis and other mental health conditions. The results may appear quickly and can last for a few years. You may need repeat treatments to maintain the effects.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you what symptoms to watch for after ECT. Call your provider or go to the nearest emergency room if you have:
A fast or irregular heartbeat.
Any concerns about your mood or mental health.
A severe headache.
No symptom improvement after two to three days, or if you feel worse.
You should get emergency care if you have thoughts about harming yourself or others. You can contact 911 or your local emergency services number if you’re in immediate danger. If you need someone to talk to, you can call or text
988
. This is the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (U.S.). Someone is available to help you 24/7.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If your only experience with electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) comes from movies or TV, it’s understandable to feel unsure. Media portrayals are often inaccurate and sensational. They rarely show the use of anesthesia or the careful safety steps taken during actual treatment.
In reality, ECT is a well-monitored medical procedure that’s safe and effective at treating certain mental health conditions. Your care team will be with you every step of the way. Their priority is your safety and comfort. If you have any questions or concerns, don’t hesitate to speak up. Your care team is there to help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/26/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment