What Is a Social Worker? What They Do & How To Become One
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Social Worker
Advertisement
Advertisement
Social Worker
Social workers help people with challenging situations. There are many types of social workers, ranging from child and family social workers to advocacy and community organizing social workers. Their roles vary, but the main foundation of social work is to help people who aren’t able — or don’t know how — to help themselves.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is a social worker?
A social worker has special training to help people with challenging situations in their everyday lives. They can help individuals (like a child or adult) or groups of people (like families or communities). Clinical social workers can diagnose and treat
mental health
and behavioral conditions. They’re also called licensed clinical social workers.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You can think of a social worker as an advocate — someone who supports you and works to find the best resources for you. They represent people who can’t effectively represent themselves.
Many social workers specialize in helping a certain population of people or working in a specific setting.
Social workers have roles in nearly every aspect of community life, including:
Schools.
Hospitals.
Mental health and substance use clinics.
Senior centers.
Prisons.
Military settings.
Government.
Corporations and public and private agencies.
They help with a wide range of situations and populations of people. Just a few examples include helping:
A couple adopt a child.
A family cope with and prepare for a loved one’s terminal illness.
Individuals, families and communities find ways to recover from substance use.
Community organizations and policymakers develop social programs. Examples include child fostering programs or housing programs.
Types of social workers
Social workers can specialize in many different areas. Some types of social workers include:
Clinical social workers
: These providers have special training to diagnose and treat mental health and behavioral conditions. They provide individual, group,
family
and couples therapy (
psychotherapy
). Clinical social workers are like therapists or
psychologists
. Many of these providers work in private practices to help people with things like
relationship issues
,
anxiety
and
depression
. They may work in a variety of specialties. For example, a clinical social worker could also be a healthcare social worker.
Healthcare social workers
: These providers help you understand your diagnosis and what it means for your future. They may help you adjust your lifestyle, housing or medical needs to live more comfortably and independently. For example, they may help you find home healthcare aids or support groups. Some further specialize in certain areas, like
cancer
care or
hospice
and
palliative care
.
Child and family social workers
: These providers help vulnerable children and families in need of aid. For example, they may help families find housing or apply for benefits like food stamps. They can help parents of children with developmental disabilities understand their legal rights. They intervene in cases of
child abuse
or neglect. They can also help with child adoption and fostering.
School social workers
: These providers work with parents and teachers. Together, they develop plans to improve students’ academic performance and social development. They help students with issues like
bullying
or frequent absences. They also provide information on special education resources.
Mental health and substance use social workers
: These providers help people with mental health conditions or
substance use disorders
. They refer you to services (like support groups and rehabilitation centers) to help with your condition. They’re often licensed clinical social workers.
Justice and corrections social workers
: These providers work in legal courts, rape crisis centers, police departments and correctional facilities. For example, they may help inmates focus on rehabilitation by providing therapy and other services. They can also be probation or parole officers, as well as victim advocates. Social workers in police departments can help with domestic dispute cases.
Advocacy and community organizing social workers
: These providers work to support the legal rights of people and communities to achieve social justice. They may work for government agencies or nonprofit organizations.
Advertisement
What does a social worker do?
The roles of a social worker can vary based on which communities and fields of work they specialize in. But the general roles of social workers include:
Identifying people and communities in need of help.
Assessing your needs, situations, strengths and weaknesses to determine your goals and how best to achieve them.
Creating a treatment plan or “plan of action” that’ll empower you to overcome, recover from or adjust to your situation.
Helping you adjust to changes and challenges in your life. This can range from a sudden or chronic illness to
divorce
or unemployment.
Researching, providing information on and referring you to community resources. Examples include food stamps, childcare, healthcare access, housing and legal aid.
Responding to crises, like child abuse cases, spousal abuse cases and mental health emergencies.
Monitoring your situation and following up to make sure it’s improved.
Maintaining case files and records.
Providing psychotherapy (talk therapy) services.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
How do you become a social worker?
Social workers usually need a bachelor’s or master’s degree in social work from a program accredited by the Council on Social Work Education. You may also need a special license — the requirements vary by state in the U.S.
A bachelor’s degree in social work (BSW) is the most common requirement for nonclinical social worker positions. All BSW programs involve supervised fieldwork or an internship.
Clinical social workers typically need a master’s degree in social work (MSW). After graduating with an MSW degree, you must complete supervised training and experience. The length of this training varies by state in the U.S., but it may take several years.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Social workers are very important to our society. They help people who have difficulty helping themselves in thousands of different situations. If you’re experiencing challenges related to your physical health, mental health or family or home life, a social worker may be able to help you. While it can be overwhelming to acknowledge and seek help, it’s important that you do.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/13/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider