Ingrown Pubic Hair: Symptoms, Causes, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ingrown Pubic Hair
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ingrown Pubic Hair
Ingrown pubic hairs are a common problem, especially if you shave, wax or pluck your pubic area. Fortunately, there are some things you can do at home to help clear them up. A few changes to your hair removal technique can also help prevent future ingrown pubic hairs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
An ingrown pubic hair doesn’t grow back properly, causing inflammation and discomfort
What is an ingrown pubic hair?
Ingrown pubic hairs are hairs in your pubic area that grow back in the wrong direction after you shave, wax or pluck them. Instead of growing out of the
hair follicle
, through the surface of your skin, ingrown pubic hairs get trapped under your skin surface.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Ingrown hairs
may cause discomfort and itching. They aren’t usually a big deal. But they’re at risk of infection and may need treatment from a healthcare provider.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of an ingrown pubic hair?
The symptoms of an ingrown pubic hair may include:
Itchy skin
Soreness
Irritation when wearing clothing
Skin discoloration
Swelling
What does an ingrown pubic hair look like?
The features of an ingrown pubic hair may include a bump on your skin that’s:
Elevated (higher than the skin around it)
Discolored
(darker than your natural skin tone, brown, purple or red)
You may actually be able to see the hair that’s trapped under your skin in the bump.
What causes an ingrown pubic hair?
Removing hair from your pubic area by shaving, waxing or plucking may cause ingrown hairs. As your hair grows back, it may not grow straight out of the surface of your skin. Instead, it can curve and get trapped under your skin.
The hair in your pubic area tends to be coarser and curlier than other body hair. This texture makes pubic hair more likely than other hair to curve back into your skin instead of growing straight out.
What are the risk factors for an ingrown pubic hair?
You may be more at risk of getting ingrown pubic hairs from the following:
Friction from clothes rubbing on your pubic area
Shaving against the direction of your hair growth
Using a dull razor
What’s an ingrown pubic hair infection?
Ingrown pubic hairs are at risk of
bacterial infections
. Symptoms of an ingrown pubic hair infection may include:
Advertisement
A pus-filled bump (resembles a
pimple
)
Swelling
Pain
Skin discoloration
Healthcare providers can help you treat infections. If you develop these symptoms with a
fever
, see a provider right away.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is an ingrown pubic hair diagnosed?
You can usually identify an ingrown hair at home just by looking at it and knowing what symptoms you have. But if you’re not sure or you think you may have an infection, visit a healthcare provider. They’ll perform a
physical exam
to make a full diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
How is an ingrown pubic hair treated?
Most of the time, you can treat an ingrown pubic hair
at home
, as long as you don’t have an infection. Home remedies for ingrown pubic hairs include:
Warm compresses
. Apply a warm, wet washcloth to the area for 10 to 15 minutes, up to four times a day. This can help soften the skin over the ingrown hair, so it comes out sooner.
Tweezing
. If you can see part of the hair sticking out of your skin, carefully grasp it with clean tweezers and gently pull. Don’t yank hard, or the hair might break off. Don’t try breaking open your skin to remove it.
Scrubbing
. Gently scrub the area with a clean, warm washcloth. This method can get rid of the top layer of skin to get the hair out.
You should stop shaving or waxing the area until the ingrown hair goes away. Continuing to remove hair on top of an ingrown hair can make symptoms worse.
If you have an ingrown pubic hair infection, a healthcare provider will treat it with
antibiotics
. You may need to apply a topical antibiotic on your affected skin as directed or take an oral antibiotic as directed. Make sure you follow all of the directions and continue using the antibiotic as directed, even if you feel better.
What to put on an ingrown pubic hair
It’s important to keep a regular skincare routine to prevent ingrown hairs in your pubic area. You may want to choose specific products that help calm itchy skin or gently scrub (exfoliate) that area of your skin to speed up the natural turnover of your skin cells and encourage the ingrown hair to come out.
Some common skin care ingredients may include:
Benzoyl peroxide
Glycolic acid
Hydrocortisone
Retinoids (substances with vitamin A)
Your provider may have specific recommendations for your skin type.
Can you pop an ingrown pubic hair?
Don’t try to pick at or pop an ingrown pubic hair. This can irritate it and may make the pain worse. Messing with an ingrown pubic hair increases your risk of allowing bacteria to enter your skin, which can cause an infection. It may also lead to scarring or skin discoloration (
hyperpigmentation
) after it heals.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does it take for an ingrown pubic hair to go away?
There isn’t a set amount of time that works for every ingrown hair. It can take several days to a week or more for an ingrown pubic hair to make its way to the surface of your skin on its own. But treating it with at-home remedies can help it go away sooner, usually within a few days.
Advertisement
An infection may take a little longer to clear up. Your provider can give you the best timeframe on what you can expect.
Prevention
How can I prevent ingrown pubic hairs?
You can minimize your risk of getting ingrown pubic hairs with a few changes to your hair removal routine. Try these tips:
Use shave cream or gel
. If you
shave
your pubic area, apply a shaving gel or cream first. These products reduce friction and irritation.
Use a sharp razor
. Use a sharp, clean razor every time you shave. Dull razors are more likely to cause ingrown hairs.
Be gentle
. Don’t pull your skin or press the razor down when you shave. Glide your razor over your skin without force.
Shave in the direction of growth
. When you shave, glide the razor in the same direction as your hair growth.
Wax properly
. If you use
wax
, apply it in the direction of your hair growth. When you pull the wax off, pull it in the opposite direction (against your hair growth).
Pluck with care
. Before tweezing, soften your skin and hair by taking a warm shower, bath or applying a warm washcloth.
Use a moisturizer
. Apply a non-greasy, lightweight moisturizer to the area after removing your pubic hair. A moisturizer can keep your skin soft and prevent irritation.
Consider other hair removal methods
. If you frequently get ingrown pubic hairs, consider permanent hair removal methods like
laser hair removal
or
electrolysis
.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
If you repeatedly get ingrown hairs despite trying home remedies, see a provider. They may prescribe a stronger medication to help clear and prevent them.
See your provider if you notice signs of an infected ingrown pubic hair, which may include:
Fluid or pus draining
Pain or swelling around the hair that’s getting worse
Skin discoloration that spreads beyond the area of the hair
Skin that feels warm to the touch
Additional Common Questions
Can a sexually transmitted infection look like an ingrown pubic hair?
It can be hard to tell the difference between an ingrown pubic hair and
genital herpes
, a type of
sexually transmitted infection
(STI). Genital herpes and ingrown pubic hairs can look similar, but there are some key differences:
Timing
. Genital herpes blisters appear about four days after having exposure to a person with the infection. Ingrown hairs usually show up one to two days after you remove your pubic hair.
Appearance
. Several days after genital herpes blisters appear, they break open. They leave behind painful sores that last several weeks. Ingrown hairs typically don’t break open.
Other symptoms
. Genital herpes can cause
fever
, body aches and
dysuria (painful urination)
. Ingrown hairs don’t cause painful urination and rarely cause a fever unless you have an infection.
Advertisement
Don’t be afraid to talk to your provider about your skin concerns. They can diagnose what’s causing symptoms.
What’s an ingrown pubic hair cyst?
An ingrown pubic hair cyst is a fluid-filled sac under your skin caused by an ingrown hair blocking your
hair follicle
(the tube where hair grows). It can turn an ingrown hair bump into a bigger lump. It may be itchy, inflamed or irritated, especially while wearing clothing.
Ingrown pubic hair cyst treatment
Ingrown pubic hair cysts can go away without treatment. You may be able to relieve discomfort by using a warm compress on it.
A healthcare provider can help you get rid of the cyst faster, especially if it’s irritating or infected. They may recommend:
Using a
steroid
cream
Applying an antibiotic cream for an infection
Undergoing a procedure to drain or remove the cyst
Like ingrown pubic hairs, try to avoid hair removal on the area until the cyst clears up.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you take the time to remove pubic hair, the last thing you want is an ingrown hair. It’s painful and itchy, and you might feel self-conscious about it. The good news is that most of the time, you can get rid of it with home care. If you get ingrown pubic hairs frequently despite proper hair removal techniques, see your provider. Together, you can discuss alternative hair removal methods and other ways to keep ingrown pubic hairs from coming back.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/18/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment