Diffuse Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis (DISH Disease)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Diffuse Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis (DISH)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Diffuse Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis (DISH)
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a type of arthritis that causes your soft tissues — ligaments, tendons and joints — to stiffen and calcify. You may also get bone spurs, which can cause pain and other symptoms. Treatment is exercise and pain relief as needed. Sometimes, people need surgery to remove a bone spur.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
In diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, bone tissue along your spine seems to overgrow into your soft tissues, making your spine stiff.
What is diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)?
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a type of
arthritis
that involves excess bone tissue growing into your soft tissues. It causes hardening and stiffness in your skeletal
ligaments
and
joints
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
"Hyperostosis” is excess bone growth. In DISH disease,
calcium deposits
form in the soft tissues connected to your
skeleton.
Calcification leads to
ossification
, bone tissue within your soft tissues.
“Diffuse” means that this process can occur anywhere along your skeleton. But it typically begins along your spine, particularly in the middle (
thoracic
) part. “Idiopathic” means it occurs for unknown reasons.
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis can cause
musculoskeletal pain
and mobility problems. Ossification can lead to
bone spurs
, outgrowths of bone that can interfere with how your joints move.
Is DISH disease the same thing as Forestier disease?
DISH disease is also called Forestier’s disease, after one of the doctors who first described it in 1950. Later, in 1975, Resnick and his team of researchers coined the more specific term, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis.
How common is diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)?
DISH is common in older populations. It rarely appears before the age of 40, but it affects up to 40% over the age of 50. It’s twice as common in
males
as females.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)?
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis may cause general stiffness and pain, most commonly
back pain
and
neck pain
. You might notice it most in the morning and in cold weather. You’ll also notice a general loss in your range of motion.
Advertisement
DISH disease usually affects your
spine
and
axial skeleton
first, but it can also affect your peripheral skeleton — the parts that extend from your main trunk. You might develop
joint pain
or
tendonitis
in your:
Shoulders
.
Hips
.
Elbows
.
Knees
.
Ankles
.
Heels
.
DISH disease doesn’t always cause noticeable symptoms. When it does, it’s usually because it’s been going on for a while. It means the process has finally progressed enough to harden your soft tissues.
Sometimes symptoms begin when bone overgrowth begins to put pressure on a nearby nerve. This can cause more noticeable pain, especially when you move a certain way or press on a certain spot.
A
pinched nerve
may also cause:
Numbness or tingling
.
Pins and needles
.
Muscle weakness.
If hyperostosis in your neck puts pressure on your esophagus or throat, it might cause:
Hoarseness
.
Swallowing difficulties
.
Obstructive sleep apnea
.
What causes diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis?
Researchers are still working to understand what causes DISH syndrome. They’re looking into a variety of factors that may be involved, though they aren’t sure how yet. Some of these factors include:
Metabolism
. There’s significant crossover between DISH and
metabolic syndrome
, which is a group of related conditions that increase your risk for
cardiovascular disease
. It includes
diabetes
or
high insulin
levels,
high uric acid levels
,
high cholesterol
and
obesity
.
Genetics
. Many people with DISH syndrome have a genetic marker known as
HLA-B8
, which has been associated with many
autoimmune diseases,
including
Type 1 diabetes
. Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis isn’t considered an autoimmune disease itself, but many people with DISH disease also have diabetes.
Inflammation
. DISH syndrome is considered a noninflammatory type of arthritis, which means it isn’t driven by automatic inflammation, as autoimmune diseases are. But there might be some low-grade inflammation involved. Inflammation might trigger the calcification process in some way.
Growth factors
. An excess of growth factors, including
human growth hormone (HGH)
, insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1, may be related to excess bone growth in DISH (hyperostosis). Growth factors are proteins and hormones that tell your body to keep making new tissues.
What are the risk factors for developing DISH disease?
You’re more likely to develop DISH disease if you:
Are older than 50.
Are male.
Have other types of arthritis.
Have metabolic syndrome.
How serious is DISH (diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis)?
DISH syndrome doesn’t always cause problems for people. Some never notice it at all. But in more severe cases, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis can cause some serious complications.
Some of these include:
Neck compression
. Large bone spurs on your
cervical spine
can compress your
esophagus
or
throat
, causing difficulties with swallowing, speaking or breathing, particularly at night.
Sleep apnea
can lead to chronically low blood oxygen levels (
hypoxia
) and put stress on your heart.
Spinal fractures and instability
. DISH disease stiffens your spine, which makes it more vulnerable to breaks. Even minor trauma (a low-energy impact) might be enough to
fracture
or displace one of your vertebrae. This makes your spine unstable and more prone to injury.
Spinal cord compression
. Bone thickening or large bone spurs along your spinal column can compress your
spinal cord
in severe cases. This can lead to nerve pain syndromes like
sciatica
and other nerve symptoms, called
myelopathy
. In the worst-case scenario, it could cause
paralysis
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers use imaging tests to look for evidence of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. It’ll often show up on a routine
X-ray
or
ultrasound
. A
CT scan
(computed tomography scan) can offer more detail if needed.
Advertisement
Radiologists
look for “flowing ossifications,” a series of three or four vertebrae in a row that show bone overgrowth or hardening of the ligaments along the bone. It looks a bit like wax dripping from a candle.
They might look for signs of the disease in other places if you have symptoms elsewhere. Entheses, the attachment sites where joints or ligaments connect to bones, are often calcified in other places.
They’ll also look for signs that help distinguish DISH disease from other similar conditions, like
ankylosing spondylitis
and
osteoarthritis
. Sometimes, people have diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis together with these other conditions.
Management and Treatment
What treatment is available for diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis?
While there’s no cure for DISH disease, physical therapy can help relieve stiffness and improve your range of motion. A
physical therapist
can recommend appropriate, low-impact exercises to practice at home.
You can use over-the-counter (OTC)
pain relievers
, like
NSAIDs
, to relieve aches and pains. Your healthcare provider can also prescribe pain medications if needed.
Cortisone shots
can treat pain in specific areas.
Your provider will monitor your condition, looking out for possible fractures and other complications. Providers sometimes prescribe medications called
bisphosphonates
to prevent or help heal fractures.
Advertisement
If bone overgrowth or bone spurs begin to compress your nerves, causing new pain or other symptoms, you might need surgery to relieve the pressure.
Bone fractures
might also need surgery to repair.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for people with DISH disease?
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis begins late in life and progresses slowly. It may take 10 years for the process to begin causing symptoms. When it does, starting a treatment plan early can help keep your symptoms in check.
When DISH is very advanced, it can become disabling, interfering with day-to-day movement and comfort. Rarely, serious complications can occur. Surgery can treat complications if they arise.
Prevention
Is there any way to prevent DISH?
Researchers don’t know what causes diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, which makes it hard to prevent. But they do know that metabolic factors like
high blood sugar
, high insulin levels and
high triglycerides
can contribute to your risk.
If you have any underlying metabolic conditions, treating them is your best bet for preventing DISH from starting. Treating these conditions may also help to prevent DISH disease from getting worse after it starts.
Living With
How should I take care of myself while living with DISH disease?
DISH, like many types of degenerative arthritis, benefits most from regular, low-impact exercise. Developing a daily practice can help maintain your flexibility and strength for as long as possible.
Advertisement
Regular check-ins with your healthcare provider can help them keep track of your condition and how it progresses. This way, they can intervene to prevent serious complications before they develop.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis is a long name for a still mysterious condition. But for you, what it boils down to is mostly pain and stiffness. It’s often mild, and some even mistake it for normal aging.
But it’s always worth mentioning your symptoms to a healthcare provider. Catching DISH disease earlier can help you and your provider develop a plan for managing your symptoms and preventing complications.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/28/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment