Cockroach Allergy: Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cockroach Allergy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cockroach Allergy
Cockroach allergies cause your immune system to overreact to proteins in cockroaches. Symptoms include skin rash, sneezing, coughing and congestion. A healthcare provider can diagnose cockroach allergies with testing and prescribe or recommend medications to help relieve your symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is a cockroach allergy?
Cockroach allergy occurs when you have allergy symptoms after exposure to cockroaches. Cockroaches are flat, reddish-brown insects with wings and six legs. They often live in warm houses and buildings with easy access to water and food. They’re most active at night.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cockroaches have proteins (allergens) in their:
Saliva (spit).
Feces (poop).
Body parts.
These proteins are usually harmless. But if you have a cockroach allergy, your
immune system
views those proteins as harmful “invaders” (like
bacteria
or
viruses
). Your immune system produces histamine and other chemicals that lead to inflammation.
Is it common to be allergic to cockroaches?
Yes, cockroach allergies are a common allergy. They’re one of the most common indoor allergies in the world. Indoor allergies include allergens that are common inside your home, such as dust mite or
pet dander
.
What percentage of people are allergic to cockroaches?
Studies suggest that between 17% and 41% of people in the United States have cockroach allergies.
What percentage of U.S. homes have cockroaches?
In 2021, U.S. census reports noted about 14 million out of approximately 124 million occupied homes in the U.S. had cockroaches.
Who does a cockroach allergy affect?
Anyone can have a cockroach allergy. But it affects children more than adults.
You’re more likely to develop a cockroach allergy if you have:
Asthma
.
Eczema
.
Hay fever
(allergic rhinitis).
A biological family history of atopy. Atopy is a genetic (inherited) likelihood of developing allergies.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a cockroach allergy?
Cockroach allergy symptoms may include:
Congestion.
Coughing
.
Itchy mouth, nose or throat.
Itchy
skin rash
Postnasal drip (mucus that drips into your throat).
Red, itchy and watery eyes.
Runny nose.
Sneezing.
Advertisement
Can cockroaches cause other health problems?
If you have asthma, cockroach allergies can cause an asthma attack. Asthma attack symptoms include:
Chest tightness, pain or pressure.
Coughing.
Shortness of breath
(dyspnea).
Wheezing
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a cockroach allergy diagnosed?
It’s a good idea to reach out to a healthcare provider if you have cockroach allergy symptoms. They may refer you to an
allergist
(immunologist). An allergist is a healthcare provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating allergies. As part of their examination, they’ll ask questions, including:
What symptoms do you have?
When did symptoms start to appear?
What have you tried to relieve your symptoms?
Have you ever seen cockroaches in your home or workplace?
Does anyone else in your biological family have allergies?
Has a provider ever diagnosed you with other types of allergies?
What tests will be done to diagnose a cockroach allergy?
An allergist may use different allergy tests to diagnose a cockroach allergy according to your symptoms. These tests may include:
Skin prick (scratch) test
. During this test, the allergist uses a thin needle to gently scratch your skin and introduce various types of allergens to the surface of your skin. They’ll then measure any itchy spots similar to a mosquito bite on your skin.
Blood test
. The allergist will take a small blood sample from your arm and send it to a lab. Laboratory tests are done to various indoor and outdoor allergens, including cockroaches.
Management and Treatment
How is a cockroach allergy treated?
The best way to prevent symptoms of a cockroach allergy reaction is to avoid cockroaches. Your allergist will also recommend over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription medications to treat your allergy symptoms.
What medications are used to treat cockroach allergies?
An allergist may recommend or prescribe the following medications to treat your cockroach allergy symptoms:
Oral and nasal antihistamines
. Antihistamines block histamine and are available to take by mouth, in a nose spray or eye drops. They help with itching, sneezing, itchy eyes and runny nose.
Nasal
corticosteroids
. Nasal corticosteroids decrease inflammation and nasal congestion. They can also help treat itchy eyes. You spray nasal corticosteroids into your nose through your nostrils.
Leukotriene modifiers
. Leukotriene modifiers help reduce allergy symptoms. They may take four to six weeks to start working.
Decongestants
. Oral or nasal decongestants temporarily relieve a stuffy nose when you use them over a short period. You shouldn’t use decongestants long-term.
Allergy shots (
immunotherapy
)
. Allergy shots help to “train” your immune system to tolerate cockroach allergens. It may take between six and 12 months of regular allergy shots before your symptoms improve. You should expect at least three to five years of regular allergy shots to get the greatest reduction of symptoms from this treatment.
Advertisement
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a cockroach allergy?
You can’t cure a cockroach allergy. But avoiding cockroach allergens and taking medications can help control cockroach allergy symptoms.
Prevention
Can symptoms of cockroach allergy be prevented?
The most effective way to lower your risk of a cockroach allergy is to reduce your exposure to cockroaches. The following tips can help:
Call an exterminator
. Pest control professionals determine how cockroaches get into your home, locate their nest, identify their food and water sources and set traps to get rid of them.
Clean your home
. Clean up dirty dishes, crumbs and any other food sources on or around your counters, sinks, floors, cupboards, stoves, microwave and floors. This includes pet food. Regularly vacuum and/or mop your floors.
Seal food sources
. Securely close food containers and trash cans.
Fix leaky plumbing
. Leaks provide cockroaches with water and create damp environments that they prefer.
Clean up piles
. Cockroaches will hide in dark, cluttered places, such as laundry, newspaper or dirty dish piles.
Additional Common Questions
Why is katsaridaphobia so common?
Katsaridaphobia (fear of cockroaches) is a type of
entomophobia
(fear of insects). There are many reasons why people fear cockroaches. Some include:
People associate cockroaches with dirty homes or unsanitary environments.
They’re large, fast and move unpredictably.
They have a musty, oily smell.
They look and feel slick or slimy.
They’re challenging to get rid of.
Cockroaches are social bugs. If you find one or two, there are usually others you can’t see.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The quick movements of cockroaches give many people the creeps. And to have cockroach allergies on top of that? It can make cockroaches even more annoying. The best way to avoid cockroach allergy symptoms is to avoid cockroaches. But if you can’t, talk to a healthcare provider. They can order tests to make sure cockroaches are causing your symptoms. They can also recommend or prescribe medications to bring relief.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/01/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment