Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI): What It Is, Symptoms & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (Brittle Bone Disease)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (Brittle Bone Disease)
Osteogenesis imperfecta (brittle bone disease) is a genetic disease that makes your bones thin and brittle. People with osteogenesis imperfecta break bones easily, with little or no force causing the break. It can also cause a curved spine, muscle weakness, difficulty breathing and other issues. The most common type causes mild symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Osteogenesis Imperfecta?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Osteogenesis Imperfecta?
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a
connective tissue disease
. It makes your bones fragile. You might break a bone with little or no force. That’s why OI is also known as brittle bone disease. It makes your bones weaker and thinner than they should be.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Osteogenesis imperfecta also affects your body’s ability to make collagen properly. Collagen is a protein. It helps develop your:
Bones
Skin
Muscles
Tendons
Osteogenesis imperfecta can cause many broken bones throughout your life. It can also affect your:
Teeth
Skin
Spine
Lungs
Other internal organs
The most common form of osteogenesis imperfecta usually causes mild symptoms. But OI can also cause severe disabilities and be fatal.
Types of osteogenesis imperfecta
Healthcare providers classify osteogenesis imperfecta into 19 types. Types I through IV are the most common.
People with type I have lower amounts of normal collagen than they should. People with types II, III and IV have improperly formed collagen. These types cause more severe symptoms.
Type 1
This is the most common form of OI. It causes milder symptoms than other types. You’ll break bones more easily than usual. But most broken bones happen before
puberty
. It doesn’t cause bone deformity.
Type II
Type II is the most serious form. Babies with type II die at or shortly after birth. It causes fatal complications like:
Underdeveloped lungs
Serious bone deformities
Multiple broken bones before birth
Type III
Type III is the second most severe form. It causes dangerous bone deformities. This makes your bones very fragile. You’ll live with physical disabilities. Babies with type III are often born with broken bones.
Advertisement
Type IV
Type IV is more severe than type I. But it’s less severe than type III. Your bones will be more fragile than usual. But they won’t break as often as with type III.
Symptoms and Causes
Osteogenesis imperfecta (brittle bone disease) can lead to multiple bone fractures. Some people have additional symptoms.
Symptoms of osteogenesis imperfecta
Signs and symptoms of this condition can include bone issues like:
Weak bones that break easily
Bone deformities
Bone pain
The
white part of your eye
looking blue or gray
Barrel-shaped rib cage
Curved spine (
kyphosis
or
scoliosis
)
Small stature
Triangular face shape
Weak, brittle or discolored teeth
Teeth that don’t align properly
You might also experience:
Bruising
easily
Difficulty breathing
Hearing loss
Loose
joints
Muscle weakness
Osteogenesis imperfecta causes
A
genetic change
causes this condition. Changes in the
COL1A1
or
COL1A2
genes
cause most cases. Changes in other collagen genes cause rarer types of OI.
The genetic changes that cause OI can be random. You may also inherit them from your biological parents. You’re more likely to have OI if someone else in your biological family has it. Some people have the genetic variation but never develop osteogenesis imperfecta.
You can inherit the gene change from one parent (dominant) or both (recessive), depending on the type of OI.
Complications of brittle bone disease
Complications of osteogenesis imperfecta can include:
Heart disease
, including heart failure
Frequent
pneumonia
Respiratory issues, including
respiratory failure
Nervous system
issues
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose osteogenesis imperfecta
Healthcare providers usually diagnose brittle bone disease in childhood with:
Genetic testing
Bone density tests
A pregnancy care provider might suspect osteogenesis imperfecta before birth. They may see signs of OI on
ultrasound images
. They can confirm the diagnosis during pregnancy with an
amniocentesis
. They can also diagnose it after the baby is born.
Ask your provider about
genetic counseling
. This can help you understand your risk of passing osteogenesis imperfecta to your biological children.
Management and Treatment
How is osteogenesis imperfecta treated?
Treatment for osteogenesis imperfecta can increase your bone strength. It can also help you live more independently. You might need:
Occupational therapy
:
Helps with everyday tasks
Physical therapy
:
Builds strength in bones and muscles
Assistive devices
:
Walkers
, canes or
crutches
can improve mobility
Oral and dental care
:
Regular
dental checkups
and/or
orthodontic care
for tooth and jaw issues
Pulmonary care
: Manages breathing issues
Medications
:
Bisphosphonates
to strengthen bones
Surgery
: Metal rods support curved or fragile bones
Braces,
splints
or
casts
: Stabilize bones after breaks or surgery
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you think you or your child has symptoms of OI. Tell your provider if you break bones easily. Especially without a major injury. Your provider can recommend additional testing if needed.
Advertisement
Go to the emergency room if you or your child breaks a bone. Tell providers in the ER if you know you have osteogenesis imperfecta.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy of a person with osteogenesis imperfecta?
Mild forms of osteogenesis imperfecta usually won’t affect your
lifespan
. But life expectancy varies depending on the type.
Prevention
Can osteogenesis imperfecta be prevented?
Because brittle bone disease is a genetic condition, you can’t prevent it. If you or your partner has OI or if you have a relative with the condition, you can talk to a
genetic counselor
. They can advise you about the risks of passing on the condition.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that your child has a condition that’ll affect them for their whole life can feel overwhelming. The future might look much different from what you expected. But early occupational and physical therapy can help both you and your child adapt to these changes.
It can also help to have honest conversations with your child’s healthcare team and your loved ones every step of the way. They can help you make a plan to manage symptoms and prepare for the future.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment