Melorheostosis: Symptoms, Causes and Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Melorheostosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Melorheostosis
Melorheostosis is a rare condition that affects your bones. It causes new bone tissue to grow on top of healthy bones. This leads to irregularly thick or wide bones. You may have pain, limited range of motion or skin changes. There’s no cure for melorheostosis, but treatment can help you live a higher quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Melorheostosis can make the outer layer of your affected bone look like dripping candle wax
What is melorheostosis?
Melorheostosis (meh-lo-ree-ohs-TOE-sis) is a rare bone disorder. It causes new bone tissue to grow on your existing outer bone layers (cortical bones). This tissue growth leads to an overly thick or wide bone. It usually affects only one of your arms or legs, but it can happen in other bones. Symptoms typically appear during childhood or adolescence.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When this new bone tissue grows, it has a characteristic look on an X-ray: Doctors describe it as looking like dripping or flowing candle wax.
Melorheostosis is a very rare type of
skeletal dysplasia
. Another name for melorheostosis is Leri disease.
Where does the name melorheostosis come from?
Melorheostosis comes from three Greek words:
Melos
means limb.
Rheos
means flow.
Ostosis
means bone formation.
How does melorheostosis affect my body?
If you or your child has melorheostosis, unusually thick or wide bones may limit movement. People with melorheostosis may also have a joint deformity (contracture) or pain. As bone tissue grows, you may also notice skin changes, including skin thickening or shininess.
Melorheostosis doesn’t spread to other bones, but it can worsen over time.
How common is melorheostosis?
Melorheostosis is very rare. Experts estimate that it affects about 1 in 1 million people worldwide.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes melorheostosis?
In about 1 in 2 cases, melorheostosis occurs because of a change (mutation) in the
MAP2K1
gene. The
MAP2K1
gene makes a specific protein that controls how bone cells grow. This gene change happens randomly (sporadically). It isn’t passed down from your parents.
About half of people with melorheostosis don’t have a MAP2K1 gene mutation. In these cases, healthcare providers don’t know what causes the condition.
Advertisement
What are the symptoms of melorheostosis?
About 1 in 2 people with melorheostosis experience symptoms by age 20. Usually, symptoms develop in childhood, possibly even in the first few days of life. They may get more severe over time.
Symptoms usually only affect the arm or leg. Less commonly, you or your child might have symptoms that affect the pelvis, breastbone (sternum) or ribs, such as:
Chronic pain
.
Hardened or shiny skin.
Limb swelling due to fluid buildup (
edema
or
lymphedema
).
Limited range of motion.
Muscle wasting (atrophy).
Uneven arm or leg lengths.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is melorheostosis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers use imaging tests to diagnose melorheostosis, including:
Bone scans
use injections of a small dose of radioactive material and imaging scans.
X-rays
use safe, low doses of radiation to view bones and soft tissues. If you have melorheostosis, your bones look like they are “dripping wax” on an X-ray.
Healthcare providers may also recommend genetic testing. Genetic tests are blood tests to look for the gene mutation that causes melorheostosis.
Management and Treatment
How is melorheostosis treated?
There’s no cure for melorheostosis, but treatment can help you or your child manage symptoms. Providers may prescribe treatments to manage pain and improve function, such as:
Physical therapy
to increase strength and range of motion.
Occupational therapy
to improve fine motor skills and help you or your child complete daily activities such as bathing or getting dressed.
Medications
such as
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
to reduce pain or bisphosphonates to strengthen bones.
Surgery
to remove excess bone growth or reshape bones.
Outlook / Prognosis
What are the long-term effects of melorheostosis?
Melorheostosis isn’t cancerous, and it doesn’t affect your life expectancy. But it can limit your function and movements. You may deal with
joint pain
or swelling. The right treatment plan can help people with melorheostosis live a higher quality of life.
Prevention
How can I prevent melorheostosis?
Because melorheostosis happens randomly, there’s no way to prevent it.
Living With
What else should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you or your child has symptoms or received a diagnosis of melorheostosis, ask your healthcare provider:
What are the early symptoms of melorheostosis?
What tests do I need to diagnose melorheostosis?
What are the treatment options for melorheostosis?
What may happen if I choose not to treat melorheostosis?
How can I increase my quality of life with melorheostosis?
Additional Common Questions
What conditions have similar symptoms to melorheostosis?
Several conditions cause symptoms similar to melorheostosis. Your healthcare provider may rule out these conditions during diagnosis, including:
Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome.
Desmoid tumor
.
Hemangioma.
Osteopathia.
Osteopoikilosis.
Scleroderma
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Melorheostosis is a rare bone disorder. It causes new bone tissue to grow on top of existing bone tissue. It usually affects only one limb. It doesn’t spread from bone to bone, but it can worsen over time. If you have melorheostosis, your treatment plan may include medication, physical therapy, occupational therapy or surgery. These treatments can help you live a higher quality of life with melorheostosis.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/07/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment