Phimosis: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Phimosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Phimosis
If you have phimosis, you can’t pull back the foreskin of your penis. Symptoms may include pain, swelling and discoloration. A provider can usually diagnose it during a physical exam, and they may order additional tests to rule out an infection. Treatment may begin with corticosteroid creams. But you may eventually need surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Penile Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is phimosis?
Phimosis (fie-MOH-sis) is a
penis
condition that occurs in some
uncircumcised
adults and children. If you have phimosis, you can’t pull back (retract) your
foreskin
(prepuce). It may look like your penis has rings around the tip. Under typical circumstances, you should be able to pull back your foreskin easily and see the entire head (glans) of your penis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Having phimosis isn’t necessarily a problem. Babies have phimosis at birth, and their tight foreskin will usually loosen as they get older without treatment. Phimosis becomes a problem when it causes symptoms, like a pinhole-sized opening or you can’t pull back your foreskin enough to clean the area underneath.
What are the types of phimosis?
There are two types of phimosis:
Physiologic phimosis
. Physiologic phimosis occurs more often in children. It usually resolves as they get older.
Pathologic (congenital) phimosis
.
Infection
,
inflammation
or
scarring
cause pathologic phimosis.
Lichen sclerosus
is a common cause.
How common is phimosis?
Nearly all baby
boys
have physiological phimosis. As newborns age, their foreskin changes gradually so it can pull back. Medical professionals estimate only about 1% of males still have physiologic phimosis when they’re 16 or older.
Less than 1% of boys have pathologic phimosis.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of phimosis?
The primary symptom of phimosis is that you can’t pull the foreskin back from the head of your penis. But other phimosis symptoms may include:
Discoloration (red, purple, dark brown or black), which may occur if there’s irritation or you have an infection.
Swelling, which may occur if there’s irritation or you have an infection.
Soreness or pain.
Pain while peeing (
dysuria
).
Weak pee stream.
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
).
Smegma
.
Pain when you get an
erection
or have sexual intercourse.
Advertisement
What does phimosis look like?
If you have phimosis, it may look like your penis has rings or rubber bands around the tip. Most importantly, you can’t pull back your foreskin.
What is the main cause of phimosis?
If you or your child has pathologic phimosis, the most common causes are infection, including
sexually transmitted infections
(STIs), or scarring. If you have a foreskin, it’s important to thoroughly clean the glans with mild soap and warm water. Dry the area with a clean towel afterward.
Other phimosis causes may include:
Skin conditions, including
eczema
,
psoriasis
,
lichen planus
and lichen sclerosus.
Penile (preputial) adhesions
, or scar tissue, that keep the foreskin attached to the tip of your penis.
Injuries.
Who does phimosis affect?
The foreskin is tight in virtually all newborns. It usually starts to loosen by the time your child is 2. Between the ages of 2 and 6, the foreskin begins to separate from the head of their penis.
What are the complications of phimosis?
Phimosis may cause the following complications:
Foreskin inflammation (
posthitis
), glans inflammation (
balanitis
) or foreskin and glans inflammation (
balanoposthitis
).
UTIs (urinary tract infections).
Foreskin tears (adhesions)
The foreskin gets stuck or trapped behind the glans and you can’t pull it down (
paraphimosis
).
Poor hygiene.
Long-standing phimosis may also increase your risk of developing
penile cancer
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is phimosis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can diagnose phimosis by reviewing your symptoms and performing a
physical exam
.
They may also order tests to determine if you have an infection. Tests may include:
Pee test (
urinalysis
).
Urethral discharge culture.
Management and Treatment
How do you fix phimosis?
Physiologic phimosis usually doesn’t need treatment. In most cases, your child will grow out of it.
The first treatment healthcare providers usually try for pathologic phimosis typically includes a topical
corticosteroid
cream or gel. You rub these medications directly onto your penis. Providers may also suggest that you start stretching the foreskin about two weeks after starting to use a corticosteroid cream. Pull the foreskin back gently, only as far as you can without it hurting. Keep applying the cream on the areas of your glans that you expose through these foreskin stretching exercises.
They’ll also prescribe
antibiotics
if you have an infection in your foreskin or glans.
You may need phimosis surgery if a corticosteroid cream doesn’t work. This typically involves a circumcision. During a circumcision, they remove the foreskin to completely expose the glans.
Should I get circumcised if I have phimosis?
Healthcare providers recommend circumcision for adults if:
Advertisement
Lichen sclerosus causes phimosis.
The phimosis is severe.
A corticosteroid cream doesn’t work.
Sexual intercourse, including
masturbation
, is painful.
What are the complications or side effects of phimosis treatment?
Topical corticosteroid creams don’t typically have side effects.
Common circumcision complications may include:
Bleeding.
Infection.
Your foreskin is too short or long.
Pain.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
It takes about a week to 10 days to feel better after circumcision.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Penile Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have phimosis?
With proper phimosis treatment, the outlook is good. Corticosteroid creams with gentle stretching or surgery can treat most cases.
Prevention
Can phimosis be prevented?
There’s no way to prevent physiological phimosis. Nearly all newborns have it. Circumcision will prevent pathologic phimosis.
It’s also important to keep your child’s penis clean. Infections are the most common cause of pathologic phimosis. Healthcare providers will give parents or caregivers directions on the best way to clean a penis. It’s also important to remember that the foreskin isn’t moveable for the first few years of life. When your child is old enough to bathe on their own, teach them how to clean their penis properly.
For adolescents and adults, the easiest way to prevent phimosis is to care for your penis properly. This includes:
Retracting your foreskin entirely each time you pee.
Pulling back your foreskin and cleaning underneath whenever you shower or bathe.
Advertisement
Be sure to pull your foreskin back over the head of your penis when you finish peeing or bathing.
Living With
How do I take care of myself if I have phimosis?
Keeping your penis healthy is important, even if you don’t have phimosis. You can promote penis health by:
Using mild soap and warm water to clean your penis every day. Dry it gently after washing.
Make sure your hands are clean before you touch your penis.
Wear clean underwear.
If you’re sexually active, it’s also a good idea to wear a condom and use lots of lubricant (lube) to help reduce friction. If you have phimosis, friction can cause your foreskin to tear.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you suspect you or your child has phimosis. They can show you how to care for yourself or your child.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the nearest emergency room if:
You have pain.
Your skin looks infected.
You have symptoms of an infection, such as a
fever
,
chills
or
headache
.
You have trouble peeing or pain while peeing.
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your provider include:
Will my phimosis get better?
What treatment do you recommend?
What are the pros and cons of circumcision?
Do I need a partial circumcision or full circumcision?
Additional Common Questions
Can I have sex when I have phimosis?
You can have sexual intercourse if you have phimosis. But it might be uncomfortable. Sexual activity may cause your foreskin to rip. Use a condom and plenty of lube if you have phimosis and decide to have sex.
Advertisement
What is the difference between phimosis and paraphimosis?
Phimosis and
paraphimosis
are both conditions that affect your foreskin. But paraphimosis is an emergency that requires immediate care. Phimosis isn’t an emergency.
Paraphimosis can happen if you’re partially or completely uncircumcised. The foreskin becomes stuck behind the rounded border at the bottom of your glans (corona) and you can’t move it back toward the tip. Without treatment, your penile tissue may die because it doesn’t get enough blood (
gangrene
).
Is it OK to keep the foreskin pulled back?
No, you shouldn’t keep your foreskin pulled back. If your foreskin remains behind your penis, it can cause painful swelling that makes it difficult or impossible to pull your foreskin back down.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Worrying about your child’s health is natural. You love them dearly, and you’re also responsible for their safety and comfort. It’s important to remind yourself that phimosis happens to almost all infants, most children grow out of it and, many times, there’s no reason to treat it. Make sure to regularly clean and dry their penis, and make sure they understand the importance of taking care of their penis when they’re old enough to bathe on their own. If they need treatment, be aware that a common suggestion is circumcision. It’s a big decision. Your child’s healthcare provider understands your feelings, and they can talk you through your options so you can make the best choice for your child.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When something’s wrong with your penis, you’ll want to get care right away. Cleveland Clinic’s experienced urology providers are here for you.
Penile Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/29/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment