Bone Cancer: Symptoms, Treatment & Outlook
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bone Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bone Cancer
Bone cancers include several different cancers that develop in your bones. Cancers that begin in your bone are called primary bone cancers. They most commonly affect children and young adults. Tumors that begin in organs or other parts of your body can also spread to your bones. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Although bone cancer can affect any bone, most tumors start in your leg bones, like your femur (thigh bone), tibia (shin bone) or your upper arm.
What is bone cancer?
“Bone cancer” is the term for several different
cancers
that develop in your
bones
. When cancer cells grow in a bone, they can harm normal bone tissue. Bone cancers can start in any bone, but they more commonly form in your thigh bone, shin bone or upper arm.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cancers that form in the bone itself are called primary bone cancers or bone sarcomas. Many cancerous
tumors
that begin in organs or other parts of your body can
spread to your bones
, as well as other body parts. These growths are called “bony metastases.”
Breast
,
prostate
and
lung
tumors are the cancers most likely to
metastasize
(spread) to your bones.
Bone cancers are serious and require prompt treatment. The good news is that there are things healthcare providers can do to treat bone cancers and, in some cases, even
cure
them.
Types of bone cancer
There are three main types of primary bone cancer. The type of cell and tissue where cancer starts determines the type of bone cancer:
Osteosarcoma
. The most common type of bone cancer, osteosarcoma develops in the cells where new bone tissue forms. It’s most common in teenagers but may also affect young adults and children.
Ewing sarcoma
. These tumors can form in your bones and in surrounding soft tissues. They’re most common in children and teenagers but may also affect some young adults.
Chondrosarcoma
. These tumors begin in the soft connective tissue that allows movement between joints and bones (
cartilage
). They occur more frequently in adults.
Advertisement
Rarer types of bone cancer include:
Chordoma
. These tumors form in your spine or the base of your skull.
Fibrosarcoma
. These tumors start in the fibrous, connective tissue at the end of your bones.
Giant cell tumor
. These benign (noncancerous) tumors may become cancerous in rare cases.
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma
. These aggressive tumors start in soft tissue and bone.
How common is bone cancer?
Bone cancers are rare. They make up less than 1% of cancers in the United States. While they can develop at any age, they’re more common in children, teenagers and young adults than in older adults.
Tumors that form in your bones are much more likely to be benign. Unlike bone cancers,
benign bone tumors
don’t spread throughout your body.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of bone cancer?
Some people with bone cancer have no symptoms other than feeling a painless lump. For others, a variety of symptoms can develop. Providers can easily mistake some symptoms for those of other conditions, like “growing pains,” sports injuries,
arthritis
or
Lyme disease
. Narrowing it down may delay the diagnosis.
The most common signs of bone cancer include:
Bone pain
that gradually becomes more persistent (usually worse at night and may feel throbbing, aching or stabbing)
A lump in the affected area that may be hard or soft to the touch
Unexplained swelling around the affected area of the bone
Difficulty moving around (if swelling is near a
joint
)
Fatigue
Fever
What causes bone cancers?
Experts aren’t certain what causes bone cancers. But as with other cancers, bone tumors form when problems with cell
DNA
cause cells to grow out of control. Eventually, they form a mass that damages the surrounding healthy tissue. Without treatment, bone cancers can spread to other parts of your body.
Risk factors
Researchers have found links between bone cancers and other factors that may increase your risk. Risk factors for bone cancers include:
Previous
cancer treatment
.
Radiation therapy
and some
chemotherapy drugs
to treat other cancers may increase your risk of developing bone cancer in the future.
Genetic factors
. Some rare inherited
genetic disorders
, like
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
, may increase your risk of bone cancer. Inheriting the
genetic mutation
(change) that causes
retinoblastoma
also increases your risk.
Benign bone conditions
. In extremely rare cases, benign bone conditions progress to cancer. For instance, having
Paget disease of the bone
or multiple
enchondromas
may increase your risk.
Still, most people who develop bone cancers don’t have any risk factors. It usually happens without cause.
What are the complications of this condition?
Bone cancers weaken the bones that they form in, and sometimes, people can develop
bone fractures
through the tumor. These are called “pathologic fractures.” Sometimes, healthcare providers find bone cancers while investigating a fracture.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How are bone cancers diagnosed?
To diagnose a bone cancer, your healthcare provider will often first use
X-rays
to view your bones.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and
CT (computed tomography) scans
provide more detailed images of the areas around your bones. You’ll likely need them before treatment.
To confirm the diagnosis, your provider will also do a
biopsy
. They’ll remove a small piece of tissue from your bone, so a disease specialist (
pathologist
) can examine it under a microscope. A biopsy provides specific information about the cancer type. Having this information helps providers know which treatments will work best.
Bone cancer staging
Cancer staging
allows healthcare providers to determine whether the cancer is only in one place (localized) or if it’s already spread throughout your body (metastasized). They also consider how likely it is to spread if it hasn’t already. The tumor’s grade, or how abnormal the cancer cells look, provides clues about how likely it is that cancer will spread. There are two systems providers may use to stage bone cancers.
The Musculoskeletal Tumor Society, or Enneking system, uses the following staging guidelines:
Stage 1
: Tumors are low-grade and haven’t spread.
Stage 2
: Tumors are high-grade and haven’t spread.
Stage 3
: The cancer has spread.
Advertisement
The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) uses the following system:
Stage 1
: The tumor is low-grade and the cancer hasn’t spread.
Stage 2
: The cancer hasn’t spread, but the tumor is high-grade.
Stage 3
: The tumor is high-grade and cancer has spread to other areas within the same bone.
Stage 4
: Cancer has spread from the bone to other areas of your body, like your
lungs
or
liver
.
Management and Treatment
How are bone cancers treated?
The most common treatment for bone cancers is surgery to remove the cancer. Limb-sparing surgery, where your surgeon only removes the tumor and some healthy tissue around it (but leaves your arm or leg intact), is the most common type of surgery. They can repair or rebuild affected bones with real or artificial
bone grafts
.
Sometimes, your surgeon will need to remove an entire limb to treat cancer. In this case, a healthcare provider will fit you with an artificial limb (
prosthesis
) after surgery. These devices are highly sophisticated and allow people to carry on with their routines in much the same way they did before surgery.
Other treatments include:
Radiation therapy
to shrink tumors before surgery or to destroy any remaining cancer cells after surgery. In certain bone cancers, radiation can be used instead of surgery.
Chemotherapy
to treat the primary cancer, any metastases and any cancer cells floating around in your body. Chemotherapy is typically given before surgery to help control the spread of the cancer and possibly shrink the tumors. After surgery, chemo “cleans up” any remaining cancer cells in your body and helps prevent bone cancers from
coming back
.
Advertisement
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
Pain related to bone cancers often improves soon after treatment starts. But the treatments can cause some side effects and require recovery.
It may take up to six months of rehabilitation and
physical therapy
to get used to a prosthesis. With limb-sparing surgery, it may take up to a year to feel completely comfortable with the changes in your bones.
Ultimately, your recovery time depends on the cancer type, stage and the combination of treatments you need. Your healthcare provider will let you know what to expect so you can decide which treatments work best for you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a bone cancer?
Treatment for bone cancers is often successful. In many instances, the cancer never returns. You may need one or more surgeries to accomplish this outcome.
People with more aggressive forms of bone cancer might need to continue treatments like radiation therapy and chemotherapy to keep cancer from spreading. These treatments may go on for a long time to manage the cancer.
Ultimately, every case is different, and there isn’t one outcome that applies to everyone with a bone cancer. Your healthcare provider can explain your
prognosis
(outlook) based on the type of cancer, its stage, location and response to treatment.
What is the survival rate for bone cancer?
Though bone cancers can be fatal, many people make a full recovery. The five-year relative
survival rate
for bone cancer is
68.2%
. This means that 68.2% of people with bone cancer are still alive five years after their diagnosis. Those with lower-stage bone cancers have a better chance of a full recovery. For people with higher-stage bone cancers, where it’s already spread, the chances of the cancer coming back increase.
Keep in mind that survival rates are only estimates based on people who’ve had bone cancers in the past. They can’t predict how long you’ll live or what to expect in your unique situation. To learn more about bone cancer survival rates, talk to your healthcare provider.
Prevention
Can bone cancers be prevented?
As experts don’t really know what causes bone cancers, there’s currently no known way to prevent it. And because radiation therapy (another known cause of bone cancers) is necessary for treating other types of cancer, you can’t avoid it altogether.
Still, you can see a healthcare provider if you’re noticing unusual changes in your bones, like a lump or increasing bone pain. These symptoms don’t usually mean cancer. But only a provider can diagnose what’s causing the issue.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Schedule a visit with a healthcare provider anytime you develop unexplained bone pain or swelling. Contact your child’s provider if they have a lump or swelling that doesn’t go away. If you’re already receiving bone cancer treatment, be sure to inform your provider if any new symptoms arise.
After treatment, make sure to attend all follow-up appointments. Within the first two years, you may need to see your provider as often as every three to six months, with check-ins becoming less frequent after that. The frequency allows your provider to catch cancer recurrence early, when treatment is most effective.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Fully understanding your diagnosis can help empower you to make the best decisions regarding your health. Here are some questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of bone cancer do I have?
Has it spread?
What tests do I need?
What are my treatment options?
What is my prognosis?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning you have bone cancer may make you feel afraid, frustrated and uncertain. It’s true that with a cancer diagnosis, there are a lot of unknowns. Your experience will depend on lots of factors, including the type of bone cancer and when it’s diagnosed. But bone cancer isn’t always fatal or unstoppable. Many people with this diagnosis receive treatments that get rid of the cancer.
Talk to your healthcare provider about your treatment options. You may also want to consider joining a support group. Talking with people who are going through the same thing can benefit your mental, emotional and spiritual health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sarcomas are a rare form of cancer affecting your bones and soft tissues. Our specialists use the latest treatments to care for these types of tumors.
Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/31/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials