Abdominal Epilepsy: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Abdominal Epilepsy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Abdominal Epilepsy
Abdominal epilepsy causes symptoms that affect your abdomen and brain. You may experience abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, in addition to having a seizure. A healthcare provider can help you manage this condition, often with antiseizure medications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy and Seizures Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is abdominal epilepsy?
Abdominal epilepsy is a rare type of
temporal lobe epilepsy
that causes abdominal symptoms like pain, nausea and vomiting. These symptoms happen with
seizures
. Seizures can have a wide variety of symptoms, including unexplained loss of consciousness or uncontrollable muscle movements.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Seizures may occur with varying frequency and can happen as often as multiple times per day. Symptoms can also vary. Your stomach pain may jump from mild to severe unexpectedly from one seizure to the next, for example.
Treatment options are available to help you manage this type of
epilepsy
.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of abdominal epilepsy
Symptoms of abdominal epilepsy may include:
Abdominal pain
(
upper
left and/or
lower
right) that ranges in severity
Nausea and vomiting
Uncontrollable convulsions and a loss of consciousness (generalized
tonic-clonic seizures
)
Diarrhea
Pins and needles feeling in your skin (
paresthesia
)
Vision changes
Confusion
Anxiety
Headache
When the seizure ends, you may feel drowsy, tired or
lethargic
. This is known as the
postictal state
of a seizure.
Abdominal epilepsy causes
Abnormal bursts of electrical activity in your
temporal lobe
(the part of your
brain
behind your ears) cause abdominal epilepsy. Your brain is constantly sending signals or messages to different parts of your body to tell it to do its job as expected. When a burst of abnormal electrical activity happens, these signals don’t get to where they need to go, like your abdomen, in this case. This causes symptoms of abdominal epilepsy.
The exact reason why this happens isn’t well known, as this is a rare condition.
Advertisement
Risk factors of abdominal epilepsy
Most cases of abdominal epilepsy affect children, but adults may experience this condition, too. You may be more at risk if you have:
A
brain tumor
Traumatic brain injury
Brain atrophy
Underdeveloped brain regions
Complications of abdominal epilepsy
Abdominal epilepsy may lead to
malnutrition
, as it can disturb your
digestive system
and cause frequent nausea and vomiting.
As with any type of seizure, you may be at risk of falls and physical injury when you lose consciousness and can’t control your muscle movements.
Epilepsy may have a significant effect on your mental health. It may lead to social isolation, as the symptoms can happen unpredictably. Or it may lead to anxiety or
depression
because of the way the symptoms affect you. A mental health professional can help you manage your emotional well-being. That’s just as important as treating your physical symptoms.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose abdominal epilepsy
A healthcare provider will diagnose abdominal epilepsy after a
physical exam
and testing.
They’ll learn more about your medical history and symptoms. Then, they may perform an
electroencephalogram
(EEG). This is a test to help your provider learn more about how your brain functions. Abdominal epilepsy shows up on an EEG when there’s abnormal electrical activity in your temporal lobes.
Additional testing may be necessary to rule out other conditions with similar symptoms, like
blood
and imaging tests of your brain and abdomen.
Management and Treatment
How is abdominal epilepsy treated?
Your healthcare provider may treat abdominal epilepsy with:
Antiseizure medications
. Your provider may offer one or a combination of medications to reduce the number and/or severity of seizures.
Surgery
. If medications aren’t successful, your provider may recommend a referral to a center that specializes in epilepsy surgery to determine if you are a candidate for this type of treatment.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you experience:
New or worsening symptoms
Side effects of treatment
Mental health challenges
You know your body best. Let your provider know if you notice anything out of the ordinary or if something doesn’t seem right.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy and Seizures Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have abdominal epilepsy?
It may take some time to receive an accurate diagnosis for abdominal epilepsy, as symptoms may look very similar to many other conditions. Your care team will help you manage these symptoms until they’re able to figure out what’s going on. For example, it’s common to start taking antiseizure medications before you receive an official abdominal epilepsy diagnosis.
Many people find success with antiseizure medications to ease the frequency of seizures. But sometimes, medications aren’t the right fit for what your body needs. Your provider may have other recommendations, like surgery, if medications aren’t effective.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between abdominal migraine and abdominal epilepsy?
An
abdominal migraine
and abdominal epilepsy have similar symptoms, and they may be mistaken for each other, but there are differences between both conditions.
The main difference is the duration, or how long your symptoms last. Abdominal migraine symptoms usually last longer than they do for abdominal epilepsy. An abdominal migraine may last from one to 72 hours. You may only have abdominal epilepsy symptoms for a few seconds to minutes, but often less than an hour.
Also, an electroencephalogram (EEG) will show abnormal electrical activity in your brain with epilepsy and not with a migraine.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
While abdominal epilepsy symptoms only last for a few minutes on average, they may happen multiple times per day. This could persist until you and your healthcare provider find a treatment plan that works best for your body’s needs. It might be stressful to not feel in control of your body during this time, but your care team is available to help you. Don’t hesitate to ask them any questions you might have about what you can expect if you have abdominal epilepsy.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy and seizures can impact your life in challenging ways. Cleveland Clinic experts can help you manage them and find relief.
Epilepsy and Seizures Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment