Frozen Shoulder (Adhesive Capsulitis): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Frozen Shoulder (Adhesive Capsulitis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Frozen Shoulder (Adhesive Capsulitis)
Frozen shoulder, also called adhesive capsulitis, is a condition involving pain and stiffness in your shoulder joint. Symptoms usually start slowly and get worse over time. But within one to three years symptoms typically get better. Your risk for developing frozen shoulder increases if you must keep your shoulder still for a long time.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Shoulder Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
Frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis) occurs when the strong connective tissue surrounding your shoulder joint (called the shoulder joint capsule) becomes thick, stiff and inflamed.
What is frozen shoulder?
Frozen shoulder is a painful condition in which your shoulder movement becomes limited. Another name for frozen shoulder is adhesive capsulitis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Frozen shoulder occurs when the strong connective tissue surrounding your
shoulder joint
(called the shoulder joint capsule) becomes thick, stiff and inflamed. The joint capsule contains the ligaments that attach the top of your upper arm bone (humeral head) to your shoulder socket (glenoid), firmly holding the joint in place. This is more commonly known as a ball-and-socket joint.
The condition is called “frozen” shoulder because the more
pain
you feel, the less likely you’ll use your shoulder. Lack of use causes your shoulder capsule to thicken and become tight, making your shoulder even more difficult to move — it’s “frozen” in its position.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis)?
Healthcare providers divide frozen shoulder symptoms into three stages:
The “freezing” stage:
In this stage, your shoulder becomes stiff and is painful to move. The pain slowly increases. It may worsen at night. Inability to move your shoulder increases. This stage lasts from six weeks to nine months.
The “frozen” stage:
In this stage, pain may lessen, but your shoulder remains stiff. This makes it more difficult to complete daily tasks and activities. This stage lasts for two to six months.
The “thawing” (recovery) stage:
In this stage, pain lessens, and your ability to move your shoulder slowly improves. Full or near full recovery occurs as typical strength and motion return. The stage lasts from six months to two years.
Advertisement
What is the main cause of frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis)?
Researchers don’t know exactly why frozen shoulder develops. The condition occurs when
inflammation
causes your shoulder joint capsule to thicken and tighten. Thick bands of scar tissue called adhesions develop over time, and you have less synovial fluid to keep your shoulder joint lubricated. This makes it more difficult for your shoulder to move and rotate properly.
Who’s at risk for developing frozen shoulder?
The following risk factors increase your likelihood of developing frozen shoulder:
Age:
Frozen shoulder most commonly affects adults between the ages of 40 and 60 years old.
Sex:
The condition affects
females
more often than males.
Recent shoulder injury:
Any shoulder injury or surgery that results in the need to keep your shoulder from moving (for example, by using a shoulder brace, sling, shoulder wrap, etc.) increases your risk of frozen shoulder. Examples include a
rotator cuff tear
and
fractures of your shoulder
blade, collarbone or upper arm.
Diabetes:
Between 10% and 20% of people with
diabetes
develop frozen shoulder.
Other health diseases and conditions:
This includes
stroke
,
hypothyroidism
(underactive thyroid gland),
hyperthyroidism
(overactive thyroid gland),
Parkinson’s disease
and heart disease. Stroke is a risk factor for frozen shoulder because movement of your arm and shoulder may be limited. Researchers aren’t sure why other diseases and conditions increase the risk of developing frozen shoulder.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is frozen shoulder diagnosed?
To diagnose frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis), your healthcare provider will discuss your symptoms and review your medical history. They’ll also perform a
physical exam
of your arms and shoulders. They’ll:
Move your shoulder in all directions to check your range of motion and if there’s pain with movement. This type of exam, in which your provider moves your arm, is called determining your “passive range of motion.”
Watch you move your shoulder to see your “active range of motion.”
Compare the two types of motion. People with frozen shoulder have a limited range of both active and passive motion.
Your provider will likely order
shoulder X-rays
to make sure the cause of your symptoms isn’t due to another problem with your shoulder, like
arthritis
. You usually don’t need advanced imaging tests like
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and
ultrasound
to diagnose frozen shoulder. But your provider may request them to look for other problems, like a rotator cuff tear.
Management and Treatment
What treatment is best for frozen shoulder?
Frozen shoulder treatment usually involves pain relief methods until the initial phase passes. You may need therapy or surgery to regain motion if it doesn’t return on its own.
Some simple adhesive capsulitis treatments include:
Advertisement
Hot and cold compresses.
These help reduce pain and swelling.
Medicines that reduce pain and swelling.
These include
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
, like ibuprofen (Advil®, Motrin®) and acetaminophen (Tylenol®). Your healthcare provider may prescribe other painkiller/anti-inflammatory drugs. You can manage more severe pain and swelling with
steroid injections
. Your provider will inject a
corticosteroid
, like cortisone, directly into your shoulder joint.
Physical therapy.
A
physical therapist
can teach you stretching and range-of-motion exercises.
Home exercise program.
Your healthcare provider can show you exercises you can do at home.
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
.
Use of a small, battery-operated device that reduces pain by blocking nerve impulses.
If these noninvasive treatments haven’t relieved your pain and shoulder stiffness after about a year, your provider may recommend other procedures. These include:
Manipulation under
anesthesia
:
During this surgery, you’ll be put to sleep and your provider will force movement of your shoulder. This will cause your joint capsule to stretch or tear to loosen the tightness. This will lead to an increase in your range of motion.
Shoulder arthroscopy
:
Your provider will cut through the tight parts of your joint capsule (capsular release). They’ll insert small, pencil-size instruments through small cuts (incisions) around your shoulder.
Advertisement
Providers often use these two procedures together to get better results.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Shoulder Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis)?
Simple treatments, like the use of pain relievers and shoulder exercises, in combination with a
cortisone injection
, are often enough to restore motion and function within a year or less. Even left completely untreated, range of motion and use of your shoulder continue to get better on their own, but often over a slower course of time. Full or nearly full recovery is seen after about two years.
Prevention
Can frozen shoulder be prevented?
You can reduce your risk of frozen shoulder if you start physical therapy shortly after any shoulder injury in which shoulder movement is painful or difficult. Your
orthopedic surgeon
or physical therapist can develop an exercise program to meet your specific needs.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis) can be a debilitating condition to live with. The pain and stiffness in your shoulder joint can make it difficult or even impossible to perform daily activities that you once did with no problem. If at-home treatments like rest and pain relievers don’t help, reach out to your healthcare provider. They may recommend physical therapy or other noninvasive measures to start. Surgery is an option for frozen shoulder that doesn’t go away after an extended period. Your provider can help you find the best treatment option for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Living with constant shoulder pain? Cleveland Clinic can help you get the relief you need with personalized treatment plans that match your needs.
Shoulder Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/30/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment