What Is an Audiologist?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Audiologist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Audiologist
Audiologists are healthcare providers who specialize in hearing and balance disorders. They perform evaluations to check for hearing loss and can share information on ways to protect your hearing. If you have a balance issue, they can provide therapy to help you maintain your sense of equilibrium.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hearing Loss Treatment
Pediatric Hearing Loss Treatment
Request a Hearing Assessment in Ohio
Request an Appointment in Florida
What is an audiologist?
Audiologists are healthcare providers with expertise in audiology, the study of
hearing
and
balance issues
. Audiologists evaluate, treat and manage problems involving your
ear
, like hearing loss and frequent dizziness. They educate about hearing and balance disorders and share strategies for prevention.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Ultimately, they can help you feel more connected to the world around you by helping you hear better or feel steadier on your feet.
Audiologists work in all types of settings, including:
Doctors’ offices, clinics and hospitals
K-12 educational settings, colleges and universities
Military settings and the Veterans Administration (VA)
Residential care facilities
Rehabilitation centers
They treat people of all ages, from infants to older adults.
What does an audiologist do?
Audiologists are hearing specialists who protect your hearing. They can also help with issues that arise from problems with your body’s balance system, the
vestibular system
.
Conditions audiologists manage include:
Hearing loss
. Audiologists manage all types of hearing loss across various causes, including aging (
presbycusis
), long-term damage (sensorineural hearing loss) and medication side effects (
ototoxicity
).
Tinnitus
. Audiologists can help you manage persistent ringing in your ears.
Auditory processing disorders (APD)
. Audiologists diagnose conditions that involve having normal hearing but trouble understanding certain sounds.
Vestibular disorders
. Audiologists evaluate and treat balance issues, including common ones, like
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV)
.
Advertisement
As part of their work, audiologists:
Perform
hearing tests
Fit you for
hearing aids
,
cochlear implants
or hearing assistive devices
Perform
vestibular testing
to check how the balance system within your inner ear is working
Help conduct
vestibular rehabilitation therapy
to manage symptoms like dizziness and
vertigo
Collaborate on treatment plans with other providers, like
physical therapists
and
speech-language pathologists
Engage in research to improve the current understanding of hearing and balance disorders within the field of audiology
What is the difference between an ENT and an audiologist?
ENTs, also known as
otolaryngologists
, are medical doctors who diagnose and treat many conditions affecting people’s ears,
noses
and
throats
. Audiologists help people manage inner ear conditions related to hearing loss and balance issues.
An ENT can help determine if an underlying medical condition is causing your issues. If so, they can prescribe medications or perform surgeries to help. They may refer you to an audiologist for hearing or vestibular tests.
When would I need to see an audiologist?
You may want to consult with an audiologist if:
It’s hard for you to hear or understand what people are saying
You have to turn up the volume on your television or other devices to hear
You have ongoing ringing or other noise in your head or
ears
You have episodes of frequent
dizziness
or feeling as if the room is spinning
If you’re unsure about whether you should see an audiologist, make an appointment with your primary care provider. They can examine you and refer you to the specialty care you need.
What should I expect from my appointment with my audiologist?
At your first appointment, your audiologist may:
Review your medical history
. This includes previous conditions and treatments. They may ask about your family’s health history, too.
Ask about your symptoms
. This includes how long you’ve had them and if they come and go or are constant.
Examine you
. They’ll check your ears (often, with an instrument called an otoscope). They can check for physical signs of a hearing problem, like
earwax buildup
. You may need hearing tests or vestibular (balance) testing, depending on your symptoms.
Explain test results
. They’ll analyze test results and explain what they mean for your health.
Review next steps
. Depending on test results, your audiologist may recommend additional testing. They work with people with hearing or balance issues and sometimes, their caregivers, to recommend options to help manage the condition.
What questions should I ask my audiologist?
Questions to ask include:
What’s my diagnosis?
What’s causing my hearing loss or balance issues?
How severe is my condition?
What tests will I need?
What treatments would you recommend?
What steps can I take to manage symptoms at home?
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Being able to hear and communicate is essential to staying connected to the world around you. So is being able to maintain balance without feeling dizzy. Audiologists can help in both aspects of your life. See an audiologist if you or your family have concerns about your hearing. Schedule an appointment if you’re having frequent trouble maintaining your sense of equilibrium or steadiness. Your primary care provider may be able to recommend an audiologist for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hearing is an important part of your everyday life. Hearing loss can impact your life in so many ways. Cleveland Clinic experts can help you hear clearly again.
Hearing Loss Treatment
Pediatric Hearing Loss Treatment
Request a Hearing Assessment in Ohio
Request an Appointment in Florida
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/17/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment