Nuchal Cord: Causes, Risks, Prognosis & What To Do
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nuchal Cord
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nuchal Cord
A nuchal cord is a common situation in which the umbilical cord is wrapped around a fetus’s neck. It very rarely causes complications. Pregnancy care providers can usually safely slip the cord over your baby’s head during delivery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
Nuchal cords are fairly common, occurring in 10% to 29% of pregnancies. They rarely result in complications.
What is a nuchal cord?
A nuchal cord happens when the
umbilical cord
is completely wrapped around your baby’s neck during
delivery
. “Nuchal” means “neck.” It can happen during
pregnancy
as well.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The umbilical cord is a flexible, tubelike structure that connects the fetus to the
placenta
. It transfers oxygen,
blood
and nutrients from the mother’s body to the fetus.
It can be scary to hear that your baby’s umbilical cord is wrapped around their neck. But know that nuchal cords almost never cause complications during or after birth. Your pregnancy care provider can explain this finding.
Types of nuchal cords
Healthcare providers use the following terms to describe nuchal cords:
Single nuchal cord:
There’s one loop of the umbilical cord around your baby’s neck
Multiple nuchal cords:
There’s more than one loop of the umbilical cord around your baby’s neck
Providers may also describe the nuchal cord as “loose” or “tight”:
A loose nuchal cord may come undone by fetal movement during pregnancy.
Loose nuchal cords are more common than tight nuchal cords.
Tight nuchal cords are more likely to cause complications than loose nuchal cords.
What percentage of babies are born with a nuchal cord?
Up to 25% of babies (1 in 4) are born with a single nuchal cord, so it’s fairly common. About 2.4% to 8.3% of babies (2 to 8 out of 100 babies) are born with two or more loops (multiple nuchal cords).
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs of a nuchal cord?
During pregnancy and labor, one possible sign of a nuchal cord is variable decelerations in
fetal heart rate monitoring
. This means the fetus’s
heart rate
temporarily drops below a healthy rate.
Advertisement
Variable decelerations usually mean there’s a blockage of blood flow through the umbilical cord. Or it could mean there’s a compression (squeezing) of the vessels within the cord. A nuchal cord could cause this. But other situations can as well, like a knot in the cord or
umbilical cord prolapse
.
If there are fetal heart rate decelerations, your care team will act quickly to keep you and the fetus safe.
What causes a nuchal cord?
Nuchal cords happen randomly. The biggest risk factors include:
Excessive
fetal movement
A long umbilical cord (over 27 inches long)
Large amounts of
amniotic fluid
(
polyhydramnios
)
There’s nothing you can do to manage these risk factors. It’s not your fault if your baby has a nuchal cord when they’re born.
What are the complications of a nuchal cord?
Loose nuchal cords very rarely cause issues. Your pregnancy care provider can usually slip the loop over your baby’s head when it comes through the birth canal.
Infants with a tight nuchal cord may — but not always — develop any of the following complications after birth:
Broken
blood vessel
in their eye (
subconjunctival hemorrhage
)
Low blood pressure
(hypotension)
Low blood volume (
hypovolemia
)
Mild breathing issues (respiratory distress)
Pinpoint-sized spots of bleeding under the skin on their face (facial
petechiae
)
Skin
abrasions
around their neck
Temporary face discoloration
These complications typically aren’t severe and usually don’t cause lasting health issues.
In very rare cases, a tight nuchal cord can cause:
Significant blood loss
Acidosis (acidic blood)
Anemia
Your baby’s healthcare team will know how to manage these complications if they happen.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a nuchal cord diagnosed?
During pregnancy, your healthcare provider may see a nuchal cord during an
ultrasound
. But they may not report the finding. This is because nuchal cords are common and typically considered normal. As long as blood is flowing properly through the umbilical cord, there usually isn’t a concern. Your provider can check blood flow with
Doppler ultrasound
.
Before delivery, your pregnancy care provider may check for a nuchal cord with a physical test. It involves applying pressure to the fetal neck area through your abdomen (belly). If the pressure results in a drop in fetal heart rate, it means there’s a risk of umbilical cord compression. Your provider will closely keep track of the fetal heart rate monitoring so they can act quickly if it points to complications.
Management and Treatment
How is a nuchal cord managed during labor and delivery?
There’s no way to undo or fix a nuchal cord during labor. Healthcare providers look for signs of umbilical cord issues with fetal heart rate monitoring during labor and delivery. If there are drops in fetal heart rate, your care team will manage it. This usually involves:
Advertisement
Changing how you’re positioned (like turning from one side to the other)
IV fluids
Oxygen therapy
During delivery, your pregnancy care provider will feel for the umbilical cord around your baby’s neck once their head is through the birth canal. If there’s a loose nuchal cord, they can usually slip it over your baby’s head.
If the nuchal cord is too tight, your provider may be able to use the somersault maneuver to deliver your baby. They position your baby in a way that keeps their head close to your pelvis. This allows the cord to not pull as much on your baby’s neck as the rest of their body passes through the birth canal.
Can a baby with a nuchal cord be delivered normally?
In most cases, nuchal cords don’t complicate delivery. This means you can deliver your baby as planned.
In rare cases, a tight nuchal cord may block blood supply through the umbilical cord, causing
fetal distress
. If this happens, you may need an emergency
C-section
.
If the fetus is in
breech position
and has a nuchal cord, your healthcare provider will likely not recommend doing
external cephalic version (ECV)
or vaginal delivery. You’ll likely need a C-section.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Should I be worried about a nuchal cord?
In the vast majority of cases, nuchal cords aren’t a concern. They’re not linked to
stillbirth
or serious health issues. Your pregnancy care provider will know how to manage a nuchal cord. They’ll tell you if it may be causing complications like fetal distress.
Advertisement
Prevention
How can I prevent an umbilical cord around the neck?
There’s nothing you can do to prevent a nuchal cord. You can’t control how the fetus and umbilical cord move in your uterus. And you can’t do anything to unwind the cord. Your healthcare team will know what to do if they discover a nuchal cord during the delivery of your baby.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having the umbilical cord wrapped around your baby’s neck may seem dangerous. But you can breathe easy knowing that complications from nuchal cords are extremely rare. It almost never causes health issues in babies. In the unlikely event that a nuchal cord causes fetal distress, your healthcare team will be ready to act to deliver your baby as safely as possible.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment