Protein Losing Enteropathy: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Protein-Losing Enteropathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Protein-Losing Enteropathy
Protein-losing enteropathy is when a chronic disease causes you to lose proteins through your intestinal tract. Proteins leak from your bloodstream into your intestines and come out in your poop. This leads to malnutrition and related complications. To address it, you‘ll need nutrition therapy and treatment for the underlying cause.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Protein-Losing Enteropathy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Protein-Losing Enteropathy?
Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) is a condition where you lose too much protein through your intestines — essentially, by pooping it out. It can happen if you have a chronic (long-lasting) disease that damages your intestinal lining. When your intestinal lining is damaged, proteins in your blood can leak through the weakened walls and enter your GI tract. Once inside, they travel through and all the way out.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your body is made up of thousands of proteins that each have important jobs. They help build your cells and tissues and allow them to grow and repair. They support your immune system, gene function and more. But with protein-losing enteropathy, you lose proteins that your body systems need to function. The result is
low protein in your blood
and overall protein deficiency, which affects you in many ways.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of protein-losing enteropathy
Symptoms of protein-losing enteropathy can include:
Abdominal pain
Bloated stomach
Chronic diarrhea
Fever
Frequent illness
Swelling in your face, arms and legs
Unexplained weight loss
or
growth faltering
You may also have other symptoms related to the underlying cause.
Protein-losing enteropathy causes
In PLE, a weakness in your intestinal walls allows proteins in your blood to leak into your intestines. Once inside, these proteins follow the path of your food through the long, winding tube until it comes out at the end. Healthcare providers have identified three categories of disorders that can cause protein-losing enteropathy. Most of these are gastrointestinal (GI) diseases. But some affect your intestines indirectly.
Causes include:
Primary erosive gastrointestinal disorders
These conditions damage your intestinal lining, creating weaknesses or openings for protein to leak in. They include:
Advertisement
Cancer in your digestive system
Carcinoid syndrome
Graft vs. host disease
Inflammatory bowel diseases
(like ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease)
Peptic ulcer disease
Pseudomembranous colitis
Non-erosive gastrointestinal disorders
These conditions disrupt or rearrange the cells in your intestinal walls, which can lead to protein loss. They include:
Amyloidosis
Celiac disease
Eosinophilic gastritis
HIV/AIDS
Intestinal parasites
Lupus
Mixed connective tissue disease
Whipple’s disease
Disorders affecting your lymph system
These conditions can cause protein-rich
lymph
to leak into your intestines through lymph channels connected to them.
They include:
Congenital heart disease
Constrictive pericarditis
Fontan procedure
Liver disease
Lymphoma
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Right-sided heart failure
Sarcoidosis
Complications of protein-losing enteropathy
The most abundant protein in your blood is albumin. When
albumin is low
, fluids leak into your bloodstream, causing swelling. In severe cases, fluid can collect around your lungs and around your heart. Albumin also helps transport vitamins, minerals and hormones through your body. Without it, you can develop severe
malnutrition
. In children, this can cause growth and developmental delays.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
To diagnose your condition, your healthcare provider will:
Ask about your symptoms and medical history
Conduct a physical exam
Order blood work to test for abnormal protein levels and other signs
Look for possible causes of low protein in your blood
Additional tests might include:
Stool test
: Your provider might ask for a sample of your poop to test for proteins. High levels of a protein called alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) can confirm a diagnosis of protein-losing enteropathy.
Endoscopy
: Your provider might need to look inside your intestines with an endoscope to find the source of the leak or diagnose the cause. Sometimes, they can treat it at the same time.
Lymphangiography
: Your provider might need to examine your lymphatic system to locate the cause of protein-losing enteropathy. They can sometimes fix the issue during the exam.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for protein-losing enteropathy?
Treatment of protein-losing enteropathy involves:
Treating the underlying condition that’s causing it
Restoring your protein levels and overall nutrition
Treating the underlying condition might involve medications and/or procedures. If your provider finds the cause during an endoscopy or lymphangiography exam, they can sometimes treat it then. For example, they might be able to remove a blockage or seal a wound. Some causes are curable, and others might need long-term treatment. Your provider will discuss your treatment plan with your diagnosis.
To restore your nutrition, a registered dietitian will design a personalized
medical nutrition therapy
plan for you. Some people might need treatment in the hospital to receive nutrition
through a tube
or
through a vein
. When you‘re ready to go home, you‘ll have guidance on what foods to eat and supplements to take. You‘ll need to eat lots of
high-protein foods
to meet your protein requirements.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for protein-losing enteropathy?
Most people start to feel better after beginning treatment for protein-losing enteropathy and the condition causing it. If your condition is curable, your symptoms may go away altogether. If you have a long-term condition, you may need lifelong treatment. But with treatment, most conditions are manageable. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about what to expect from your condition.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Symptoms of protein-losing enteropathy can be vague and resemble many other conditions. It‘s easy to mistake them for something less serious, or something that will go away by itself. But if you continue to have symptoms that you can’t explain, it’s a good idea to check in with your healthcare provider. PLE and the conditions that cause it can affect you in many ways. The good news is that they‘re treatable.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have issues with your digestive system, you need a team of experts you can trust. Our gastroenterology specialists at Cleveland Clinic can help.
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us