Arthroscopy: What It Is, How It’s Performed & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Arthroscopy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Arthroscopy
Arthroscopy is a minimally invasive surgery on a joint, like your knee, shoulder, ankle or elbow. Surgeons use small incisions to examine your joint with a small scope. They operate through other small incisions with long, narrow tools. Small incisions make recovery faster and easier.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Arthroscopy?
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
What Is Arthroscopy?
Arthroscopy is a surgical procedure to diagnose and treat structural problems in your
joints
, which may cause pain, instability or other dysfunction. It uses a tool called an arthroscope, which is a long, thin tube that transmits light and video. The arthroscope allows a surgeon to look inside your joint through a very small opening. Surgeons perform minimally invasive surgery guided by the arthroscope.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Arthroscopy is a type of
endoscopy
— a procedure that uses a special type of scope to look inside a particular part of your body. All endoscopes are thin tubes that go through small holes. Some go into existing openings in your body, while others, like arthroscopes, go through a small incision. Surgeons make other small incisions — about the size of a dime — to operate through, using long, narrow tools.
Types of arthroscopy
Orthopaedic surgeons use arthroscopy to diagnose and treat a variety of common joint injuries and conditions. It’s quickly become the standard of care for most routine procedures on major joints.
Types of arthroscopy you might have include:
Ankle arthroscopy
Elbow arthroscopy
Hip arthroscopy
Knee arthroscopy
Shoulder arthroscopy
Wrist arthroscopy
Common conditions arthroscopy treats include:
Cartilage tears (like
labral
or
meniscus
tears)
Joint impingement (like ankle,
shoulder
or
hip
impingement)
Joint instability (like
ankle
or
knee instability
)
Ligament tears (
ankle sprains
,
wrist sprains
and knee ligament tears)
Nerve compression syndromes
(like
carpal tunnel syndrome
)
Synovitis
(often an early stage of
rheumatoid arthritis
)
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for arthroscopic surgery?
Most arthroscopic surgeries are outpatient procedures, meaning you can expect to go home the same day. But as you’ll likely be under anesthesia for the operation, you’ll need to arrange for a ride home.
Advertisement
You may also need to:
Take some standard health screening tests.
Discuss what type of anesthesia you want to have.
Stop taking certain medications before your procedure.
Avoid eating solid foods the day before your procedure.
What happens during arthroscopic surgery?
You’ll have anesthesia for the procedure. You may have a local type of anesthesia that numbs your joint area while you stay awake. Or you may have general anesthesia and sleep through the procedure.
During arthroscopy surgery, your surgeon will:
Position you for surgery.
They might use a holding device to keep your joint in position.
Make a tiny incision (a half inch or less).
They’ll use this to insert the arthroscope.
Expand the joint space.
Filling the space with saline creates more room to operate in.
Examine your joint.
The arthroscope will project magnified images of your joint to a screen.
Operate.
They’ll make one or more small incisions to place ports for their surgical tools.
Complete the surgery.
When they’re done, they’ll close your incisions with stitches or tape.
What your surgeon does when they operate will depend on your condition. They might need to:
Release a compressed or pinched nerve.
Remove damaged tissues or loose fragments.
Repair or reinforce torn tissues or broken bones.
Reshape or adjust misaligned bones in your joint.
Most arthroscopy operations take one to two hours. Afterward, you’ll spend another one to two hours in a recovery room as you come out of the anesthesia. Healthcare providers will monitor your recovery.
What are the risks and benefits of this surgery?
The benefit of arthroscopy over open joint surgery is that it’s minimally invasive. This means:
Faster return to activities
Less postoperative pain
Minimal blood loss and scarring
Less risk of complications
Even minimally invasive surgery carries a small risk of surgical complications, like:
Blood clots
Excessive bleeding
Damage to nearby tissues
Infection
Nerve injury (usually temporary)
Stiffness after surgery
Surgical complications are rare. If they do occur, your healthcare team will know what to do.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after arthroscopy?
You’ll go home to recover from surgery. Depending on the procedure you had, you might need to wear a brace or splint to keep your joint in position while it heals. If you had surgery on a leg, you might need to use crutches to keep weight off the joint. You can use the
RICE method
and over-the-counter pain relievers to reduce pain and swelling after surgery. Your incisions should heal within a week or two.
As soon as you’re able, your healthcare team will encourage you to start moving your joint in specific ways. They might give you exercises to practice at home, or they might refer you to a physical therapist, who’ll practice exercises with you. Physical therapy is an important part of your recovery from surgery. It helps rebuild weakened tissues and prevent them from stiffening and scarring.
Advertisement
How long is the recovery from arthroscopy?
Recovery from arthroscopy is generally easier and faster than recovery from open surgery. The small incisions cause less pain and heal sooner than a large incision. Being able to start moving your joint sooner after surgery also helps speed up your recovery. But the physical therapy part of your recovery can still last several weeks to months. It depends on your condition and the type of repairs you have.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’re ready to consider surgery for your joint pain, arthroscopy might make the prospect easier. This advanced method allows surgeons to find and fix issues in your joint while causing minimal trauma. It takes special training and equipment to perform arthroscopic surgery, and the methods and technology continue to improve. Surgeons also continue to update their techniques to make surgery less stressful.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment