Mandibular Tori: Causes, Symptoms & Removal
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Torus Mandibularis (Mandibular Tori)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Torus Mandibularis (Mandibular Tori)
Mandibular tori are bony growths on the floor of your mouth, under your tongue. These growths aren’t dangerous, but they can be uncomfortable and inconvenient. You can be born with mandibular tori or develop them later in life. You don’t need to remove them unless they cause complications or interfere with eating or speaking.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is torus mandibularis (mandibular tori)?
Torus mandibularis refers to a bony growth on the floor of your mouth, under your
tongue
. These growths, also called dental tori, are harmless and typically don’t cause pain. You can have mandibular tori on one side or both sides of your
mouth
. Torus mandibularis generally doesn’t require treatment unless it interferes with chewing, speaking or other functions. You can be born with the condition or develop it later in life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Dental tori vary in number and size. You can have one growth or several. You can get torus (singular) or tori (plural) on the roof of your mouth, too. Healthcare providers call these bony growths
palatal tori
(torus palatinus) because they form on your palate (roof of your mouth).
Is it normal to have mandibular tori?
Mandibular tori are somewhat uncommon, affecting about 27 out of every 1,000 adults in the United States. Mandibular tori are much less common than palatal tori. In addition, about 80% of people with mandibular tori have these growths on both sides of their mouth.
While dental tori aren’t common, there’s nothing wrong with having them. They’re not harmful or
cancerous
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of torus mandibularis (mandibular tori)?
You can develop mandibular tori on one or both sides of your lower jaw. You might be born with these growths, or you may develop them gradually over time.
Mandibular tori symptoms may include:
One or more bony growths on your lower jaw, under your tongue. (This can happen on one side or both.)
Difficulty chewing or swallowing.
Difficulty getting dental appliances to fit correctly, such as
dentures
and
mouth guards
.
Food particles getting stuck around the bony growths.
Speech difficulties.
Trouble closing your mouth all the way (rare).
What causes torus mandibularis (mandibular tori)?
Healthcare providers don’t really know what causes mandibular tori or why some people are more likely to develop them. There are, however, certain identifiable risk factors.
Advertisement
Torus mandibularis risk factors
Risk factors for mandibular tori include:
Teeth grinding (bruxism)
. If you clench or grind your teeth, you might be more likely to have mandibular tori.
Mouth anatomy
. The way your
teeth
fit together, as well as your jaw shape, can have an impact on the presence of dental tori.
Bone density
. People who have higher bone density — or experience a significant change in bone density — may be more likely to have mandibular tori.
Vitamin deficiencies
. Some research indicates that a lack of certain vitamins can contribute to dental tori.
Genetics
. You’re more likely to have dental tori if there’s a family history of the condition.
Age
. People over the age of 30 are more likely to develop mandibular tori.
What are the complications of torus mandibularis (mandibular tori)?
Though mandibular tori aren’t harmful or cancerous, they can cause complications in some people — particularly if the growths interfere with other oral structures or functions. These complications may include:
Poor
oral hygiene
. Tori that are near your teeth may make it difficult to brush and floss properly. This can result in a buildup of
dental plaque
and harmful oral bacteria.
Difficulty chewing or swallowing
. Large mandibular tori may interfere with chewing, eating or swallowing your food.
Speech issues
. Sometimes mandibular tori can hinder your tongue’s movement, resulting in speech difficulties.
Pain or discomfort
. If mandibular tori grow very large, they may prevent you from closing your mouth completely. The tissue covering the bony growths may also become irritated or inflamed, especially if you wear dentures, mouth guards or other oral appliances.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are mandibular tori diagnosed?
Dentists
usually diagnose dental tori during routine examinations. They may take photos of the growths to document their size and location.
What tests can help diagnose mandibular tori?
You might not need testing to diagnose mandibular tori. However, your dentist may take a
CT (computed tomography) scan
to rule out other dental issues.
Management and Treatment
How are mandibular tori treated?
You probably won’t need treatment for mandibular tori unless they cause pain or interfere with function or quality of life. Surgeons can remove mandibular tori, when necessary, with an
oral surgery
procedure.
Surgical mandibular tori removal
Oral surgeons perform mandibular tori removal. During this procedure, a surgeon will:
Give you local
anesthesia
to numb your gums. (In addition, most oral surgeons offer
sedation dentistry
options to keep you calm and comfortable during your procedure.)
Make an incision (cut) in your gums to access the tori.
Remove the tori and any excess bone.
Close the incision with stitches.
Complications of mandibular tori removal
Complications following mandibular tori removal are rare, but they can occur. These complications may include:
Excessive bleeding.
Infection.
Swelling that lasts for more than a few days.
Allergic reaction to anesthesia (rare).
How long does it take to recover from mandibular torus treatment?
It can take up to four weeks to fully heal after mandibular tori removal — sometimes longer, depending on the size of the growths. But your overall comfort level should start to improve within a week or two.
Advertisement
During recovery, you should:
Take all medications as directed.
Avoid hard and crunchy foods.
Eat soft foods, such as mashed potatoes, yogurt, pudding, applesauce and pasta.
Use an antibacterial mouthwash daily to help keep the surgical site clean.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have mandibular tori?
Most people with mandibular tori don’t need to do anything. Surgical removal isn’t necessary unless the growths interfere with function or your quality of life.
If you have dental tori, you should let your healthcare provider know so they can confirm the diagnosis and monitor any growth that occurs over time.
Can mandibular tori shrink?
No, mandibular tori don’t shrink over time. If you have dental tori that cause pain or hinder speech or chewing function, you’ll need oral surgery to remove them.
Can mandibular tori grow back after you remove them?
Unfortunately, mandibular tori can grow back in some cases. Treating any underlying issues, such as grinding or clenching your teeth, can help reduce this likelihood.
Prevention
Can I prevent mandibular tori?
There’s no way to prevent mandibular tori because experts don’t know what causes it in the first place. Let your dentist know if you have bony growths on the floor of your mouth. With early detection, they can keep an eye on the growths and make sure they don’t cause any issues.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should tell your dentist or healthcare provider any time you notice a lump or bump in your mouth. They can confirm your diagnosis and rule out other conditions.
Advertisement
If you already have mandibular tori, you should call your healthcare provider if:
The growths multiply or grow larger.
The tissue covering the tori becomes red and irritated.
You develop pain or discomfort.
The tori start to interfere with chewing or swallowing.
You have difficulty speaking.
Additional Common Questions
Are mandibular tori cancer?
No, mandibular tori aren’t cancerous or precancerous. People who have these growths aren’t more likely to develop cancer in the future.
Should I worry about mandibular tori?
No, mandibular tori aren’t a cause for concern. They aren’t harmful, infectious or cancerous.
If you develop complications related to mandibular tori, talk to your dentist about treatment options. They can refer you to an oral surgeon for further evaluation.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A torus mandibularis is a noncancerous, bony growth that forms on your lower jaw and sits under your tongue. You may have one growth (torus) or several (tori). They can develop on one side or both sides of your mouth. Mandibular tori aren’t dangerous, but they can be uncomfortable and even painful in some instances. If these bony growths interfere with your oral function or quality of life, talk to your dentist. They can recommend appropriate treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have conditions affecting your ears, nose and throat, you want experts you can trust. Cleveland Clinic’s otolaryngology specialists can help.
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for an Adult
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get ENT (Otolaryngology) Care for a Child
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/19/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment