Arginine Vasopressin Disorders (Diabetes Insipidus)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Arginine Vasopressin Disorders (Diabetes Insipidus)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Arginine Vasopressin Disorders (Diabetes Insipidus)
Arginine vasopressin disorders — formerly known as diabetes insipidus — are two rare and treatable conditions in which your body lets go of too much pee. They mainly happen due to an issue with how your body makes or uses arginine vasopressin, a hormone.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Diabetes Insipidus Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Arginine Vasopressin Disorder (Diabetes Insipidus)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Arginine Vasopressin Disorder (Diabetes Insipidus)?
Arginine vasopressin disorder, formerly known as diabetes insipidus, represents two conditions that happen when your body lets go of too much
urine
(pee). It can’t keep (retain) water properly. These conditions are rare but treatable.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
An issue with arginine vasopressin (AVP) — a
hormone
— mainly causes these conditions:
AVP deficiency (AVP-D)
happens when your body doesn’t make enough AVP.
AVP resistance (AVP-R)
happens because your
kidneys
don’t use AVP properly.
Healthcare providers may also call AVP antidiuretic hormone (ADH). AVP plays a large role in helping your kidneys balance the amount of fluid in your body.
Symptoms and Causes
If you have arginine vasopressin deficiency or resistance and you stop drinking fluids or don’t get treatment, you can quickly develop dehydration.
Symptoms of AVP deficiency and AVP resistance (diabetes insipidus)
The main symptoms of arginine vasopressin deficiency and resistance include:
Needing to pee often
, including through the night (
nocturia
)
Passing large amounts of light-colored or clear pee
Extreme thirst (
polydipsia
)
Most people make 1 to 3 quarts of pee a day. People with AVP-D or AVP-R can make up to 20 quarts of pee a day.
If you stop drinking fluids or don’t get treatment, you can quickly develop
dehydration
.
These symptoms are a significant sign that something in your body isn’t working as it should. It’s essential to get medical help as soon as possible.
Symptoms in children
Symptoms of arginine vasopressin deficiency or arginine vasopressin resistance in children may include:
Severe dehydration
Constipation
Vomiting
Fevers
Irritability
Growth faltering
(failure to thrive)
Causes of arginine vasopressin disorders (diabetes insipidus)
The causes vary based on the type:
Arginine vasopressin deficiency (AVP-D)
. Formerly known as
central diabetes insipidus
, AVP-D happens when your body doesn’t have enough arginine vasopressin (a deficiency). It’s the most common type.
Arginine vasopressin resistance (AVP-R)
. This type was formerly known as
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
. AVP-R happens when your
pituitary gland
releases enough AVP, but your kidneys don’t respond to it properly (resistance).
Advertisement
One other type is a rare pregnancy-related form known as gestational arginine vasopressin disorder (gAVP-d). During
pregnancy
, the
placenta
may make too much of an
enzyme
that breaks down AVP. You’re more likely to get gAVP-D if you:
Are
pregnant with multiples
Have a condition that affects your
liver function
, like
preeclampsia
or
HELLP syndrome
gAVP-d usually goes away two to three weeks after the pregnancy is over.
Causes of arginine vasopressin deficiency (AVP-D)
AVP-D happens when there’s an issue with your
hypothalamus
or pituitary gland. Specific causes include:
An inherited
gene variation
Damage from surgery or a
head injury
Inflammation (
granulomas
) from conditions like
sarcoidosis
or
tuberculosis
Tumors
Up to half of the cases of AVP-D have an unknown cause (idiopathic).
Causes of arginine vasopressin resistance (AVP-R)
Specific causes of AVP-R include:
A blocked urinary tract
An inherited gene variation
Certain medications
Hypercalcemia
Hypokalemia
Lithium toxicity
Complications of AVP-D and AVP-R
The main complication of arginine vasopressin disorders is dehydration. This happens when your body loses too much fluid and
electrolytes
to function as it’s meant to.
You can usually make up for all the fluids you pass in your pee by drinking more liquids. But if you don’t, you could quickly become dehydrated.
Dehydration can be life-threatening. If you have symptoms of dehydration, like
dizziness
,
nausea
and
fatigue
, get to the nearest hospital as soon as possible.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose AVP-D or AVP-R
Other, more common conditions cause frequent thirst and peeing. So, part of the process of diagnosing AVP-D or AVP-R involves ruling out other conditions. Your healthcare provider may order several tests if you have these symptoms.
A diagnosis of AVP-D or AVP-R involves finding the type and cause.
Tests that diagnose AVP-D or AVP-R
A water deprivation test is the most reliable way to diagnose either AVP-D or AVP-R. If you get this test, you’ll be under constant supervision during the process. This is because it can cause dehydration.
A water deprivation test involves not drinking any liquid for several hours to see how your body responds. If you have AVP-D or AVP-R, you’ll continue to pee large amounts of watery, light-colored urine. Without the condition, you’ll only pee a small amount of concentrated, dark yellow urine.
Your provider may also recommend the following tests:
Copeptin blood test (copeptin is a byproduct of AVP)
Blood glucose test
to rule out
diabetes mellitus
Urinalysis
to check osmolality (the concentration of your urine) and/or to check for
ketones
Imaging tests, like an
MRI
, to check for damage to your pituitary gland or hypothalamus
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How are AVP-D and AVP-R (diabetes insipidus) treated?
Treatment depends on whether you have AVP-D or AVP-R. Even with medical treatment, it’s important to drink water regularly to make sure you don’t get dehydrated.
AVP-D treatment
Desmopressin
is the first-line treatment for arginine vasopressin deficiency (AVP-D). It’s a medication that works like AVP. It comes in different forms.
Healthcare providers may also use desmopressin to treat the rare gestational form known as gAVP-d. Drinking more water alone may be enough for the gestational form.
AVP-R treatment
Treatment for arginine vasopressin resistance (AVP-R) is more complicated. It sometimes involves a combination of approaches, like taking the following medications:
Thiazide
diuretics
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
If a medication you take causes AVP-R, your provider can sometimes treat AVP-R by switching the medication to a different one.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have AVP-D or AVP-R, it’s important to see your healthcare provider regularly. They’ll want to run tests to monitor the condition and make sure your treatment is working.
It may be helpful to ask your provider the following questions:
Do I have AVP-D or AVP-R?
What caused it?
Is it chronic or temporary?
What are my treatment options?
How much water should I be drinking in a day?
Is there anything else I can do to manage this condition?
Are my family members at risk for developing arginine vasopressin disorder?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Diabetes Insipidus Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have AVP-D or AVP-R?
The outlook (prognosis) for AVP-D and AVP-R is generally good. It usually doesn’t cause serious problems as long as you get treatment and drink enough water.
The risk of complications is higher for:
Infants
People over 65
People with certain mental health conditions or developmental disabilities
These groups of people may have difficulty recognizing their thirst or they may not be able to act on it.
Additional Common Questions
Why is it no longer called diabetes insipidus?
In 2022, several medical organizations decided to change the name of diabetes insipidus to arginine vasopressin deficiency and arginine vasopressin resistance. The main reason for this change is that the shared term of “diabetes” was causing confusion and leading to harmful health effects.
What most people just call “diabetes” is diabetes mellitus. It happens when you have
high blood sugar
, which causes frequent thirst and urination. It’s much more common than AVP-D and AVP-R (diabetes insipidus). The treatment for diabetes mellitus is very different from the treatment for AVP-D and AVP-R.
The word “diabetes” comes from the Greek word “diabainein,” which means “go through.” This is much like the liquids that quickly go through your body in diabetes mellitus and the arginine vasopressin disorders
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have AVP-D (arginine vasopressin deficiency) or AVP-R (arginine vasopressin resistance), you may feel like you live in the bathroom and can never quench your thirst. The good news is that these conditions are manageable. Your healthcare provider will help you develop a treatment plan and let you know how much water you should drink in a day to keep dehydration at bay. Lean on them for support and guidance.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic offers diabetes insipidus treatment from experienced healthcare providers. Learn how we diagnose and manage this rare endocrine condition.
Diabetes Insipidus Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes