Invasive Lobular Carcinoma: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Invasive Lobular Carcinoma (ILC)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Invasive Lobular Carcinoma (ILC)
Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) starts in the milk-producing glands in your breasts. It causes symptoms like breast pain, changes in your breast skin or discharge from your nipples. ILC can spread to many different areas of your body. Treatment may include surgery, along with chemotherapy and other anti-cancer drugs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lobular Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Invasive Lobular Carcinoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Invasive Lobular Carcinoma?
Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is an uncommon type of breast cancer. It starts in the milk producing areas of the breast and can spread.
Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is a type of
breast cancer
that starts in the milk-producing and transportation system of your breast. Healthcare providers may use the term “lobules” or “terminal duct lobular units” when they describe where this cancer starts.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
About 10% to 15% of breast cancers are invasive lobular breast cancer. This type of breast cancer usually grows in response to estrogen, the main female hormone. It grows slowly. You may have ILC for years before it’s seen on a mammogram or causes symptoms. Like all other breast cancers, ILC can spread through breast tissue or to other areas of your body.
ILC affects an estimated 31,000 to 46,000
women
in the U.S. each year. Early diagnosis and treatment may cure it. But ILC can spread to other areas of your body many years after your diagnosis and treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
Invasive lobular carcinoma symptoms
Most of the time, breast cancer happens when cancer cells multiply to create a
tumor
. The tumor may make a
lump
in your breast that you can feel. ILC is different. Early on, ILC cells spread out in a single file to form strands or strings of cancer cells.
As ILC grows slowly and may not form a lump, it may not cause noticeable changes in your breasts. When it does, symptoms can include:
Breast pain or warmth
Breast skin that looks or feels thicker than usual or has dimples, tiny dents or puckers
Changes in breast size and shape, like an area of swelling or fullness
Inverted nipple
that points into your breast instead of pointing out
Lump near your armpit
Nipple discharge
Skin discoloration
that appears reddish or darker than usual
Advertisement
Invasive lobular cancer causes
ILC happens when
genetic mutations
(changes) turn healthy cells into cancer cells. Experts aren’t sure what causes the mutations. Researchers believe the following factors increase your risk of having invasive lobular carcinoma:
Being age 55 and older
Giving birth after age 30 or not giving birth
Having had breast cancer previously
Having a family history of breast cancer or
ovarian cancer
Having lobular carcinoma in situ (
LCIS
)
Inheriting certain genetic mutations
Starting
menopause
later than usual (after age 55)
Starting your
period
earlier than usual (before age 12)
Receiving certain types of
hormone therapy
for menopause symptoms
Complications of invasive lobular carcinoma
ILC may cause two unusual complications:
It can spread to a larger-than-usual range of organs and tissues.
You can develop metastatic invasive lobular carcinoma, which means it spreads to areas of your body far from your breast, 10 to 15 years after your diagnosis and treatment.
Breast cancer that spreads (
metastatic breast cancer
) typically affects your
brain
,
bones
,
liver
and
lungs
. ILC may spread to those areas. But it may also spread to less common areas, including your:
Digestive system
, including your
colon
,
small intestine
and
stomach
Female reproductive
organs, including your
ovaries
and
uterus
Leptomeninges (the lining of your brain and spinal cord)
Peritoneum
(lining of your abdomen)
Tissues around your eye (orbital tissues)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose lobular breast cancer
A healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms. They’ll examine your breasts and the area near your armpits. They may do the following tests:
Mammogram
to look for abnormal masses or changes in your breasts
Breast MRI
to get very detailed images of your breast tissue
Breast ultrasound
to focus on specific areas of your breasts
They may recommend a
breast biopsy
to get a small sample of your breast tissue. A medical
pathologist
will examine the tissue under a microscope. They’ll look for abnormal breast cells and other cancer
signs
.
Your cancer care team will use test results to
stage the cancer
and plan your treatment. There are four stages of invasive lobular carcinoma:
Stage I is a tumor that measures up to 2 centimeters (cm) (about 3/4-inch) across and may be in nearby lymph nodes.
Stage II means the tumor is 2 cm and is spreading to nearby lymph nodes. This stage also includes tumors that measure 5 cm or more (2 inches) across but haven’t spread into lymph nodes.
Stage III means there’s cancer in your breast and lymph nodes. There are more lymph nodes with cancer than there are if you have stage II cancer.
Stage IV is cancer that has spread to distant areas of your body, such as your lungs, liver or bones.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
Invasive lobular carcinoma treatment
Your treatment may be a combination of:
Breast cancer surgery
Chemotherapy
before or after surgery
Hormone therapy
if tests show you have estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer
Radiation therapy
to kill any cancer cells that may remain after surgery
Targeted therapy
focuses on genetic mutations that turn healthy cells into cancer cells
Recovery time
Your recovery will depend on your treatment. For example, it can take two to four weeks to recover from breast cancer surgery. Recovering from treatments like chemotherapy may take six months to a year. It’s important to understand how cancer treatment may affect your daily routine. Don’t hesitate to ask your oncologists what to expect in terms of recovery.
When should I see my cancer care team?
Contact your cancer care team if you have:
Surgical wound infection symptoms like a
fever
(greater than 101 degrees Fahrenheit or 38.4 degrees Celsius) or thick, cloudy discharge from the incision (cut)
Cancer treatment side effects that are stronger than you expected, like
vomiting
that you can’t control
Pain
that prescription pain medication doesn’t ease
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lobular Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the survival rate for invasive lobular carcinoma?
Cancer survival rates
are estimates of the percentage of people with a specific cancer diagnosis who are alive after a certain time — usually one to five years — after they receive a diagnosis.
Advertisement
Research
shows that overall, 94% of women with ILC were alive and cancer-free five years after their diagnosis. That estimate includes women who have stage I to stage III when they’re diagnosed. In general, the earlier the stage at diagnosis, the better the prognosis. About 86% of women with ILC are alive and cancer-free 10 years after their diagnosis.
The five-year survival rates for ILC are similar to other types of breast cancer. But they’re 4% to 10% lower at that 10-year mark.
Healthcare providers are working to understand why this is and come up with treatment options to improve your chances of being cancer-free in the long run.
The rates don’t predict how long you’ll live with cancer. Survival rate information can be confusing and cause concern. If you have questions, your oncologist will explain what a survival rate means in your situation.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You know your breasts better than anyone. And you’re probably familiar with common breast cancer symptoms. Even so, you may wonder about a change in your breasts that you don’t associate with breast cancer. Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) doesn’t cause a lump in your breast like most other types of breast cancer. ILC symptoms may be breast pain or dimples in your breast skin.
Advertisement
Don’t hesitate to talk to a healthcare provider if your breasts look or feel different. They’ll listen to your concerns. And if invasive lobular carcinoma is the cause, your provider will be there to answer questions and support you through treatment and beyond.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A lobular breast cancer diagnosis can be scary. At Cleveland Clinic, we offer expert diagnosis and personalized treatment for lobular breast cancer.
Lobular Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials