Heat Rash Prickly Heat (Sweat Rash) Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Heat Rash
Advertisement
Advertisement
Heat Rash
A heat rash (prickly heat) can form on your skin when sweat gets trapped under the surface. You’ll notice bumps on your skin that feel itchy or prickly. Cooling, drying and airing out affected skin can help get rid of the rash. Anyone can develop a heat rash, but it’s common among infants and children, as well as people who live in humid climates.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Heat Rash?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is a Heat Rash?
A heat rash (also called a prickly heat rash or miliaria) is an area of your
skin
that gets irritated from sweat. The
rash
can be itchy and bothersome, but it’s usually harmless. You can typically care for a heat rash at home, and it’ll clear up within a few days.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers consider heat rash a mild form of
heat-related illness
. It’s not as serious as conditions like
heat exhaustion
or
heat stroke
. But if you’re exerting yourself in hot weather, a heat rash could be an early warning sign to cool down your body.
Symptoms and Causes
Heat rash looks red on lighter skin but may look white or gray on darker skin.
Symptoms of heat rash
A heat rash can make your skin feel like it’s:
Burning
Itchy
Prickly
These sensations are uncomfortable and may make you want to scratch your skin. But resist that urge! Scratching your skin could cause it to break open, possibly leading to an infection.
What does heat rash look like?
A heat rash is a group of tiny bumps, similar to pimples or blisters. Typically, each bump is about 1 to 3 millimeters wide. The bumps often look red on light-colored skin. On darker skin, the bumps may look grey or white. The medical term for heat rash that causes these discolored bumps is “miliaria rubra.” This is the most common form of heat rash.
Heat rash can also appear as tiny, clear bumps. These look a bit like water droplets. Providers call this type of heat rash “miliaria crystalline.” It typically affects newborns but can also occur in adults. This is a milder form that may not cause itchiness or other discomfort.
Where do heat rashes form?
Heat rash often develops on areas of your body that don’t get enough airflow (for example, areas covered with clothing). It also tends to form in folds and creases where there’s skin-to-skin contact.
Advertisement
In babies, heat rash commonly forms in these areas:
Armpits
Elbow creases
Neck
Groin (diaper area)
Upper chest and back
In adults, heat rash commonly forms in these areas:
Arms
Back
Chest (especially under your
breasts
)
Legs (especially on your inner thighs)
Heat rash causes
Sweat
that’s trapped within your skin causes a heat rash. Normally, sweat glands in your skin make sweat and send it through tiny tubes (sweat ducts) until it reaches the surface of your skin. This sweat exits through openings on your skin (pores) and then evaporates to help cool your body down.
But clogs can sometimes form in your sweat ducts. A clog prevents sweat from finishing its journey to your skin’s surface. Instead, the sweat flows backward in the ducts. This causes
inflammation
within your skin’s outermost layer (
epidermis
) and/or middle layer (
dermis
). The inflammation results in a rash.
A clog can happen if:
Too much sweat builds up between your skin and your clothing
and/or:
Dead skin cells (corneocytes) build up in your
pores
or sweat ducts
If you’re
sweating a lot
, it’s easy for sweat to build up. The sweat softens dead skin cells on the surface of your skin and makes them more likely to build up in your pores or sweat ducts.
Risk factors
You may be more likely to develop a heat rash if you:
Do intense physical activity, especially in the heat
Have a
fever
Have a condition that makes you sweat more than expected (
hyperhidrosis
)
Live in a hot or humid climate
Need bedrest for a while (in this case, the rash may form on your back)
Take medications that make your sweat glands more active, like
beta-blockers
,
clonidine
or
opioids
Wear tight clothing when working out or in warm environments
Babies, infants and toddlers have a higher risk because their sweat glands and ducts are still growing, and their bodies may not control their temperatures as well as adults do. They’re also often well-bundled or wearing multiple layers of clothing. And diapers aren’t very breathable!
Complications of prickly heat
It’s possible for heat rash to lead to a
bacterial
skin infection. This can happen if there’s a break in your skin (for example, from scratching), and bacteria enter. An infection can make the skin around the rash swell up or feel warm to the touch. You may also develop a fever, nausea and/or
chills
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose heat rash
You may not need to seek medical care for a heat rash. But if you do, a provider will:
Ask you when the rash started, where it’s located and what symptoms you’ve had
Review your medical history and any medications you’re taking
Take a close look at your skin and (with your permission) touch the affected area
Talk with you about things that might’ve caused the rash — like weather, physical activity or illness
Advertisement
All this information will help your provider diagnose heat rash or identify other issues that might be causing your symptoms. Conditions your provider may want to rule out (
differential diagnoses
) include:
Bug bites
Chicken pox
Drug allergy
rash
Eczema
or
dermatitis
Folliculitis
You don’t need any tests for a heat rash diagnosis. But you may need tests if your provider suspects another cause for your rash. In this case, your provider will tell you what to expect.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for heat rash?
It’s usually possible to get rid of a heat rash with at-home care. Here’s what to do as soon as you notice a rash forming:
Move to a cooler or air-conditioned area, if possible.
Remove clothing from the affected skin.
Gently wash your skin in cool or lukewarm water and pat it dry (don’t scrub).
Keep the area uncovered or put on clean, loose clothing that doesn’t rub against your skin.
Apply a cool washcloth to your skin as needed to calm the prickly feeling.
These same basic tips apply no matter your age. If your
child develops a heat rash
, at-home care is usually enough. But call your pediatrician if your child keeps getting heat rashes or they last longer than a few days. They may want to rule out other common
childhood skin conditions
. In some severe cases, they may consider a medicated ointment to reduce itching or inflammation.
Advertisement
Tips while prickly heat rash heals
As the rash heals, it’s important to:
Avoid using creams or other products that could block your pores
. Sweat needs to come out. Lotions, creams, ointments and powders that might seem soothing can actually block your pores and keep sweat from coming out. This will make the rash worse.
Limit activities that cause sweating
. If possible, wait to work out or do other activities that cause excessive sweating until the rash is gone.
Resist the urge to scratch
. It’s so tempting. But scratching that itch can delay healing or even open up your skin to infection.
Take cool showers
. Taking frequent cool showers can help remove sweat from your skin.
Use light bedding and wear light clothing
. Avoid being bundled or wrapped up in blankets. Choose loose, airy clothes over tight, stretchy fabrics. For a baby, avoid over-bundling in too many layers or blankets, while still avoiding loose cloth or material that could get near your baby’s face. Let your skin or your baby’s skin breathe. When in doubt, air it out!
In general, you want to keep your pores open — and that means skipping creams and ointments. But applying an anti-itch cream (like
calamine
) may be necessary if the itching is intense. Talk to your provider or a
pharmacist
before using any topical products. They’ll help you choose the one that’s best for you.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if:
The rash doesn’t improve after a few days
The rash is painful or causes intense itching
You notice signs of a possible infection, like fever, chills, or skin that’s swollen or warm to the touch
You’re concerned something else (besides heat) is causing the rash
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a prickly heat rash?
Once you cool and dry your skin, you can expect the rash to go away within a few days. You may want to talk to your healthcare provider about ways to avoid heat rashes in the future — especially if your job, hobbies or the climate where you live causes you to sweat a lot.
Prevention
How can I prevent heat rashes?
Keeping your skin cool and dry is the key to preventing heat rashes. That can be hard to do if you work outdoors or do sports or other activities in the heat. But whenever possible:
Avoid spending time outside when it’s really hot or humid
If you’re out in the heat, take frequent breaks to cool down
Use air conditioning and/or fans to cool your indoor spaces
Wear clothes that fit loosely and let your skin breathe (cotton fabrics are better than synthetic fabrics)
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Itchy, prickly skin is no fun. But thankfully, heat rash is usually a passing annoyance that you can manage at home. It’s important to know when to seek medical care, though.
If the rash doesn’t clear up within a few days or you have other symptoms like a fever, call a provider. The same holds true with babies and children. If your child has a rash along with other symptoms, it’s a good idea to get things checked out. Providers can identify heat rash with a simple exam or diagnose other conditions that need treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/31/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us