Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy (OPMD)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is a rare genetic disease. It causes muscle weakness that mainly affects your eyelids and throat. Most people with OPMD don’t develop symptoms until they’re in their 40s or later. Treatments vary depending on your symptoms and how severe they are.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Muscular Dystrophy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy (OPMD)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy (OPMD)?
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is a rare
genetic condition
that causes muscle weakness. Even though you’re born with it, symptoms usually don’t appear until you’re around 40 or 50. The symptoms get worse over time, but they tend to progress slowly.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
OPMD is a type of
muscular dystrophy
— a group of inherited conditions that cause muscle weakness. This specific type affects your:
Eyelids
(ocular)
Throat
(pharyngeal)
Fewer than 50,000 people
in the U.S. are estimated to have OPMD.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy
OPMD mostly affects your
eyes
and throat. Common symptoms, in order of how often they appear, include:
Drooping eyelids
Difficulty swallowing
Weakness or shrinking of your
tongue
Limited eye movement, especially upward
Difficulty speaking
Facial weakness
You may also develop weakness in the muscles near the center of your body (proximal muscles), usually after eye and throat symptoms. This can affect your:
Hips
Shoulders
Upper legs
If the weakness gets worse, you might need a cane or walker. About 1 in 10 people with OPMD eventually use a wheelchair.
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy causes
OPMD is a genetic condition caused by a change (
mutation
) in the
PABPN1
gene. You’re born with this gene change and usually inherit it from one parent who also has OPMD.
You have two copies of most genes, including
PABPN1
. You only need a change in one copy to develop the condition. If both copies are affected, symptoms may start earlier and be more severe.
Complications of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy
The most serious complication is trouble swallowing. Weak tongue and throat muscles can lead to:
Advertisement
Aspiration pneumonia
Choking
Malnutrition
Talk to your provider if you’re having trouble swallowing. You may need to change how you eat to avoid these complications.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy
Your provider may suspect OPMD based on your symptoms. They usually confirm the diagnosis with a blood test that looks for a mutation in your
PABPN1
gene.
Other tests may include:
Electromyogram
: Shows how your muscles respond to nerve signals.
Muscle
biopsy
: Removes a small sample of muscle to look for signs of the gene change if blood tests aren’t clear.
Swallowing tests
: Check how well your throat muscles work and help explain any swallowing problems.
Management and Treatment
How is oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy treated?
There’s no cure or targeted treatment for OPMD, but symptoms can be managed. Treatment depends on which symptoms you have and how severe they are. Options range from least to most invasive:
Occupational or
physical therapy
: A therapist can help you stay active and build strength. They may also suggest canes, leg braces or walkers if muscle weakness affects how you move.
Speech therapy
: A
speech-language pathologist (SLP)
can help with swallowing and speech. You may learn to take smaller bites, adjust your head position or change the foods you eat.
Botulinum toxin
injections
: These can be injected into a throat muscle to help you swallow more easily. The effects are temporary, so you may need repeat injections.
Blepharoptosis repair
: A surgery (called
blepharoplasty
) can lift drooping eyelids and improve your vision.
Cricopharyngeal myotomy
: A surgeon cuts a muscle near your esophagus to help food pass more easily. Sometimes, this is done using a balloon to widen the area instead of surgery.
Tube feeding (enteral nutrition)
: If swallowing is severely affected, a feeding tube may be placed through your nose or belly to send nutrients directly to your stomach.
Are there clinical trial treatments for this condition?
Yes. Ask your provider if you qualify for clinical trials. Some involve new types of injections to relieve symptoms. Researchers are still studying how well these treatments work long-term.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your provider if you think you have OPMD or if your symptoms get worse.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Here are some questions you might want to ask your healthcare provider:
What are the early signs of OPMD?
How could it affect my daily life?
What treatment do you recommend?
How often should I come in for follow-ups?
How will I know if it’s getting worse?
Can I pass OPMD to my children?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Muscular Dystrophy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy?
OPMD can affect your quality of life, but it usually doesn’t shorten it. There’s no cure, but treatment can help manage symptoms and lower your risk of complications.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might not notice symptoms until you’re over 40 — that’s when most people start to see signs. If you think you might have oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD), talk to a healthcare provider. They can run tests to confirm it and help you feel better.
Symptoms may slowly get worse over time. But the good news is, OPMD doesn’t usually affect how long you live. And with the right care, you can still do many things that you enjoy.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A muscular dystrophy diagnosis can leave you with a lot of questions. Cleveland Clinic’s caring neurology providers are here to help you take the next step.
Muscular Dystrophy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment