Neurosarcoidosis: What It Is, Diagnosis, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Neurosarcoidosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Neurosarcoidosis
Neurosarcoidosis causes inflammation in your nervous system (brain, spinal cord and nerves). It’s a form of sarcoidosis. The most common symptom is facial weakness where one side of your face is droopy. Treatment with steroids or other medications can manage your symptoms, which vary from person to person.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Neurosarcoidosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Neurosarcoidosis?
Neurosarcoidosis is a condition that causes inflammation and abnormal cell clusters (
granulomas
) to form in your
nervous system
. Common symptoms include weakness or drooping of one side of your face, problems with vision, chronic headaches and difficulty walking. Symptoms vary from person to person and range in severity.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Neurosarcoidosis is a type of sarcoidosis. This chronic (long-term)
inflammatory
condition can affect many organs, but it most often affects your lungs.
Sarcoidosis affects an estimated
60 people per 100,000
in the United States. Neurosarcoidosis affects 5% to 15% of people diagnosed with sarcoidosis.
Where do neurosarcoidosis granulomas form?
Neurosarcoidosis most commonly affects the
cranial nerves
,
meninges
or lining of your brain and spine. It can also invade your brain or spinal tissue.
Symptoms and Causes
Neurosarcoidosis symptoms
Neurosarcoidosis symptoms vary based on where inflammation happens in your nervous system. It also depends on where granulomas form. Brain and cranial nerve symptoms may include:
Bowel and bladder symptoms
Confusion
Headaches
Motor symptoms (weakness in your arms and legs or problems with walking)
Sensory symptoms (numbness and tingling in your arms and legs)
If neurosarcoidosis affects your pituitary gland (a hormone-producing component in your brain), you may have the following symptoms:
Fatigue
Excessive thirst
Changes to your weight
Frequent urination
Irregular periods
Neurosarcoidosis causes
Researchers believe an overactive immune system causes neurosarcoidosis. The reason why your immune system overreacts isn’t well understood. Your immune system fights off threats to your body to keep you healthy, like bacteria or viruses. When it detects a threat, it causes
inflammation
. In the case of neurosarcoidosis, that inflammation targets your nervous system.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Neurosarcoidosis can affect anyone. You may be more at risk of developing neurosarcoidosis if you:
Have sarcoidosis
Are
female
Have African or Northern European ancestry
Are in your mid-40s
Have someone in your biological family diagnosed with sarcoidosis
Have a gene change (mutation) that affects immune system response
Have certain environmental exposures
It’s about three times
more common
in Black adults than in white adults. The condition rarely affects children.
Complications of neurosarcoidosis
This condition can cause worsening or even permanent loss of neurological function (the way your brain, spinal cord and nerves work). The most bothersome symptoms are:
Bowel and bladder dysfunction
Depression
Fatigue
Loss of vision
Loss of hearing
Pain
Problems with arm function (loss of coordination and weakness)
Problems with leg function (difficulty walking)
Thinking (cognition) challenges
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose neurosarcoidosis
A healthcare provider will perform a complete medical history and neurological exam. Testing helps confirm the diagnosis and rule out other possible causes of your symptoms.
Your provider will also check for symptoms of sarcoidosis in other parts of your body, like
swollen lymph nodes
, a rash or joint pain. This can help identify a good biopsy site, which is one of the best ways to confirm the diagnosis.
Sometimes, the nervous system is the first part of your body affected by sarcoidosis. So, you may not notice other symptoms yet.
What tests diagnose neurosarcoidosis?
Your healthcare provider may offer tests to rule out conditions with similar symptoms. While there isn’t a single test to diagnose this condition, the following may be helpful:
An
MRI
of your brain and spinal cord
A
lumbar puncture
to rule out other causes of your symptoms, like infection
An
EMG
/
NCS
if there’s concern for nerve or muscle involvement
A
CT scan
of your chest
A lung or nerve
biopsy
Your provider may recommend other tests as needed.
Management and Treatment
Neurosarcoidosis treatment
There’s no cure for neurosarcoidosis. But treatment may help control inflammation, prevent new or worsening damage, and give your body a chance to heal. Other treatments are available to help manage long-term symptoms that may continue even after inflammation improves.
Treatment may include:
Taking medications to control inflammation and manage sarcoidosis symptoms
Using assistive devices, like glasses, hearing aids, a walker or a wheelchair
Participating in physical therapy
Neurosarcoidosis medications
The following are common medications to treat symptoms of neurosarcoidosis:
Corticosteroids
as a first-line treatment to reduce inflammation
Immunosuppressants
to reduce inflammation in the long term
Hormone replacements if symptoms affect your pituitary gland
Varying medications to manage symptoms like fatigue, nerve pain, spasticity, bowel and bladder issues and sexual dysfunction
Advertisement
Talk to your provider about the side effects of each medication before you start taking it. This helps you know what to look out for. Let them know if you experience any side effects during treatment or if your symptoms change.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
If you notice symptoms of neurosarcoidosis, contact a healthcare provider. Common symptoms include:
Changes in sensation
Loss of vision
Movement problems
Ongoing headaches
Weakness or drooping on one side of your face
These symptoms can happen with other conditions, too, not just sarcoidosis. So, it’s best to get them checked by a provider.
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for neurosarcoidosis?
The prognosis varies from person to person. Your healthcare provider can give you an idea of what your outlook is based on your situation.
Many people improve with treatment. Others continue to have long-term symptoms, depending on which parts of the nervous system it affects and how quickly they receive a diagnosis and begin treatment.
Some side effects can happen when you take certain medications for a long time. For example, corticosteroids may cause many long-term side effects, and immunosuppressants can increase your risk of infections.
Your provider will monitor how the condition affects you over time. Even if your symptoms improve, regular check-ups can help catch and manage symptoms if they return.
Advertisement
What’s the life expectancy of a person with neurosarcoidosis?
Most people diagnosed with this condition have a normal life expectancy. This can vary from person to person. It depends on the severity and where the disease is located. Your provider will give you the most accurate information about what to expect.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can feel overwhelming to learn you have a condition that affects your brain and nerves. Everyday activities, like walking safely or remembering things, may become harder. Your healthcare provider will work with you to find treatments that ease symptoms and fit your needs. Ongoing care is important to watch for changes and prevent complications. If you have questions or concerns, reach out to your provider. They’re there to help guide you through your care.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment