Cortical Visual Impairment (CVI): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cortical Visual Impairment (CVI)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cortical Visual Impairment (CVI)
Cortical visual impairment (CVI) happens when vision problems come from brain damage, not your eyes. It can affect how kids learn and interact with the world. Your child may have trouble recognizing faces, reaching for objects or seeing objects on patterns. An early diagnosis and support can make a big difference.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is Cortical Visual Impairment (CVI)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What is Cortical Visual Impairment (CVI)?
Cortical visual impairment (CVI) happens when your child has vision issues due to damage to parts of their brain that process vision, not eye problems.
Cortical visual impairment (CVI) happens when your child has
vision
issues due to damage to parts of their
brain
that process vision. So, it’s about their brain, not their
eyes
. Healthcare providers also call it cerebral visual impairment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cortical visual impairment is the leading cause of vision loss in children. CVI most often affects babies and young children, but it can continue into adulthood. Any damage to your brain’s visual processing areas can cause CVI.
Vision is different for everyone because what you see feels “normal” to you. The same goes for children. They might not be able to tell you they’re having vision problems. But you may notice unusual behaviors tied to how they see and learn. This might include trouble recognizing or reaching for objects. Talk to their healthcare provider if you notice this. The sooner they get help, the less CVI may affect their development, learning and social skills.
How does CVI affect vision?
This condition can cause issues with:
Figuring out where something is
Seeing what’s directly in front of you
Seeing what’s on the outside of your central vision
Noticing movement
Visually guiding your own movement
Gaze control
Visual attention
Visual analysis and recognition
Visual memory
Symptoms and Causes
Signs and symptoms of cortical visual impairment
As your child might not be able to tell you what they’re experiencing, you may notice the following signs:
Difficulty recognizing
faces, places or objects
Having more trouble seeing an object on a pattern rather than a solid background
Looking away from an object while reaching for it
Not responding as you’d expect to what they see
Not understanding what they’re looking at
Reacting slowly to hand gestures, facial expressions or other cues
Looking at moving objects more than still ones
Using
side vision
instead of looking straight at an object
Needing to look at things close up to see them
Staring at bright lights or being
sensitive to light
Trouble focusing or following things with their eyes
Advertisement
Cortical visual impairment causes
Damage to parts of your child’s brain that process vision causes CVI. This includes your child’s:
Occipital lobe
. This is in the back of your brain. It processes what you see.
Parietal lobe
. This is near the top and sides of your brain. It helps you understand where things are and how they move.
Temporal lobe
. This is near your temples (before your ears). It helps you recognize what you see (like faces and objects).
Most of the time, this damage happens before, during or shortly after birth. A lack of oxygen to your child’s brain at birth (called
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
) is the most common cause.
Other causes include:
Seizures
that damage their brain (like
infantile spasms
)
Brain differences or malformations (like
holoprosencephaly
,
schizencephaly
or
lissencephaly
)
Fluid buildup
in their brain
Infections (like
meningitis
and
encephalitis
)
Infections during pregnancy (like
Zika virus
and
TORCH infections
)
Head injuries
Bleeding
in or around their brain
Metabolic conditions (like frequent
low blood sugar
)
Brain diseases that get worse
over time (like
Fabry disease
and
Leigh syndrome
)
Babies who are born
preterm
are more likely to develop this condition.
Co-occurring conditions
Kids with this condition often have other brain-related diagnoses, like:
Autism spectrum disorder
Cerebral palsy
Developmental delays
and
learning disabilities
Epilepsy
Sleep disorders
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose cortical visual impairment
If you think your child has trouble seeing, the first step is to get an
eye exam
. This will check for any problems with their eyes. If the exam doesn’t find any vision problems, the issue may be in their brain.
Your child should then see an eye doctor (
ophthalmologist
). They may also need to see other doctors, like a pediatric brain doctor (
neurologist
) or a neuro-ophthalmologist. Their doctor will check your child, ask about their health history and any concerns you have about their vision. They may order brain scans, like an
MRI
.
Getting a CVI diagnosis can take time. But it’s important to stick with it so your child gets the right diagnosis and the help they need.
Management and Treatment
How is cortical visual impairment treated?
There’s no cure for CVI. Your child’s healthcare provider might recommend different ways to help them manage their symptoms. This could include making changes at home and school to help them see and learn.
Examples include:
Avoiding too much visual clutter (like not using patterned rugs or dishes)
Avoiding vision tasks (like reading and looking at pictures) when your child is hungry, tired or upset
Having teachers or family wear the same bright item (like a scarf) each time to help your child recognize them
Lowering room lights and using screens that light up from behind
Using big, colorful, high-contrast or moving objects for learning
Using text with more space between lines and blocking extra text to help with reading
Using touch or sound to get your child’s attention
Advertisement
Every child learns in their own way. Once you know what works best for them, you can adjust and make changes to support them as they grow.
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
Your child will likely need regular visits with a neurologist or eye specialist to monitor their symptoms. As they get older, their environment and learning needs will change. Their providers may adjust treatments to better support them over time.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has CVI?
It’s important to remember that no two children with CVI experience it the same way. Your child’s healthcare providers and specialists can help you understand what to expect.
Most children with CVI see
some improvement
in their vision as they grow. But for some, vision challenges stay the same or get worse.
If your child has CVI, advocating for their care is key to making sure they get the support they need. Speaking up for their healthcare and school accommodations can help them achieve the best possible quality of life. Early intervention can reduce the impact on their development, education, social skills and mental health.
Consider joining a support group for families living with CVI. You can connect with others and learn practical tips from others who share a similar experience.
Additional Common Questions
Can adults get CVI?
Brain damage from a
stroke
or
traumatic brain injury
can cause vision problems. Healthcare providers may call this acquired CVI. But it’s different from the type of CVI that affects babies and children. It often comes with different symptoms.
Advertisement
If you notice any vision changes in adulthood, especially after a head injury or brain condition, see a provider right away.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
We all experience the world differently. Even if someone could see through your eyes, they wouldn’t truly know how your brain processes what you see.
Most of the time, we’re not even aware our brains are interpreting visual information — it just happens. But for children with cortical visual impairment (CVI), this process can make everyday life harder.
The more you learn about CVI, the better you’ll understand how your child experiences their world. Life with CVI will be unique to your child and family. Over time, you’ll discover what your child can see, their strengths and how they can adapt to challenges.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your child has a neurological condition, you want them to have the best care. At Cleveland Clinic Children’s, we offer compassionate, personalized treatment.
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/06/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment