How To Prevent Heart Disease
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Heart Disease Prevention
Advertisement
Advertisement
Heart Disease Prevention
You can prevent or delay heart disease by doing things like eating heart-healthy foods, exercising and avoiding tobacco. You may also need medicine to manage risk factors like high blood pressure. Making small changes to your daily life can add up, giving you a healthier heart. Talk with a healthcare provider about a plan that works for you.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Is heart disease preventable?
Yes, in many cases, you can prevent
heart disease
or delay its progression. Heart disease refers to conditions that impact your heart’s function or structure. The most common form of heart disease is
coronary artery disease (CAD)
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you have CAD, that means you have
plaque
buildup in your
coronary arteries
. These arteries supply oxygen-rich blood to your
heart
to keep it pumping. Plaque can limit or block blood flow to your heart. This may lead to symptoms like
stable angina
or, ultimately, a
heart attack
.
It’s not always possible to prevent plaque buildup in arteries. Plaque usually starts to form when you’re a child or teen. But you may be able to slow its progression and delay complications.
How can we prevent heart disease?
There are many things you can do to prevent heart disease or delay its onset — from avoiding tobacco to choosing
heart-healthy foods
. Use the list below to get started. But don’t feel pressured to tackle everything all at once. Pick one goal to start and keep building from there.
Avoid smoking, vaping or using other tobacco products
When you think about the health risks of
smoking
, lung cancer might come to mind first. But tobacco use is also a major risk factor for heart disease. Here’s what to know:
If you smoke, you’re more than twice as likely to have a heart attack compared with someone who doesn’t.
Even one to two cigarettes a day greatly increases your risk of a heart attack or
stroke
.
Smoking is the biggest risk factor for
sudden cardiac death
.
Even if you never pick up a cigarette,
secondhand smoke
increases your risk of heart disease.
Advertisement
Tobacco use is the most preventable risk factor for heart disease and stroke.
Quitting
is hard. But it’s one of the best things you can do for your heart.
Limit alcohol
Drinking too much
alcohol
can lead to issues like:
Atrial fibrillation
Heart failure
High blood pressure
Stroke
When it comes to your
heart
, drinking no alcohol is your safest route. But if you do choose to drink, do so in moderation.
Females
should have no more than one
drink
per day. And males should have no more than two.
Eat heart-healthy foods
“
Heart-healthy diet
” is a term you might hear often. But what does it mean? Simply put, it means giving your heart the nutrients it needs to work well. It also means limiting or getting rid of ingredients that can raise your
blood pressure
or clog your arteries.
A
dietitian
can help you find changes to make right away. They may suggest a specific plan, like the
Mediterranean diet
. They’ll also tailor advice to your medical history and needs. Here are some general tips for heart-healthy eating:
Choose foods rich in
omega-3 fatty acids
(healthy fats), like tuna, salmon, flaxseed, almonds and walnuts.
Load up on fresh fruits and vegetables, which provide many nutrients and are often high in
fiber
.
Use
extra virgin olive oil
in place of animal fats.
Avoid
processed foods
, like chicken nuggets and packaged soups, which are often high in saturated fat, trans fat and sodium.
Replace
red meat
with lean chicken or fish.
Avoid adding salt when you cook and look for low-sodium versions of products.
Satisfy your sweet tooth with
heart-healthy desserts
.
Avoid palm, coconut and hydrogenated oils.
Aim for healthy lipid levels
A
lipid panel
measures the fats in your blood like
cholesterol
and
triglycerides
. Your healthcare provider will go over the numbers with you and help you understand what they mean. In general, you want to aim for:
Low total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol and triglycerides
High (but not
too high
)
HDL cholesterol
LDL cholesterol is “bad” because it contributes to
plaque buildup in your arteries
. Plus, scientists have linked high total cholesterol and
high triglycerides
with a higher risk for heart disease.
On the other hand, HDLs help your body get rid of the extra LDL cholesterol in your blood. Healthy HDL levels may protect you against heart disease. Low levels may put you at risk.
Manage high blood pressure
Blood pressure
is a measurement of the force inside your
arteries
each time your heart beats. High blood pressure makes your heart and
kidneys
work harder. Over time, this raises your risk of:
Heart attack
Heart failure
Kidney disease
Stroke
Aim for blood pressure at or below 120/80 millimeters of mercury (mmHg). Your provider might change your goal based on your age and health history.
To manage your blood pressure:
Eat a
low-sodium diet
.
Keep a weight that’s healthy for you.
Limit alcohol consumption.
Take medication if your provider prescribes it.
Advertisement
Manage diabetes
Having
diabetes
puts you at a higher risk of heart disease. That’s because diabetes makes you more likely to have high blood pressure and unhealthy lipid levels.
Talk with your provider about what your ideal
blood sugar and hemoglobin A1C
numbers should be. Together, make a plan to meet your goal.
Keep a weight that’s healthy for you
Carrying extra weight — especially around your waist — can tax your heart and blood vessels. It may raise your blood pressure, cholesterol and triglycerides. And it may raise your risk for diabetes.
Your provider can help you understand what weight is healthy for you. Everyone’s different. For example, the target
body mass index (BMI)
varies by ethnicity. In general, aim for:
A body mass index (BMI) between 18.5 and 24.9
A waist circumference of fewer than 40 inches for males
A waist circumference of fewer than 35 inches for females
Move around more
Physical activity
is important in preventing heart disease because it:
Improves how well your heart
pumps blood
through your body
Helps you prevent or manage many heart disease risk factors, like high blood pressure, high cholesterol and
overweight/obesity
You have many heart-healthy options for physical activity:
Get in 30 minutes of
moderately intense activity
, like brisk walking or swimming, five days a week.
Do 25 minutes of vigorous activity, like running, three days a week.
Do several shorter chunks of 10 to 15 minutes each until you reach your weekly goal.
Build two-minute bursts of activity (
exercise snacks
) into your daily routine.
Advertisement
Talk with your provider before starting any new physical activity or changing your activity level. In general, it’s safer for you to gradually increase your activity level.
Take your medications as prescribed
Sometimes, you need medicine to help manage conditions like high blood pressure or high cholesterol that put your heart at risk. Talk with your provider about the ones you need and why.
Follow your provider’s guidance on when and how to take your medicines. You need to take them at the same time each day and follow other
guidelines
to get the most benefits.
Keep stress at bay
Your blood pressure can go up when you’re feeling stressed.
Keep your stress level low
with workouts, music,
yoga
or
meditation
. Even just
breathing
deeply, stretching or cuddling a pet can help when you’re feeling overwhelmed.
Get quality sleep
A lack of
sleep
puts you at risk for conditions that lead to heart disease, like diabetes, overweight/obesity and high blood pressure.
Adults need seven to nine hours of
sleep
each night. This can be tough when life gets busy. But your efforts to get more — and better quality — sleep will help protect your heart.
There’s a lot you can do to
improve your sleep
, from going to bed and waking up at the same times every day to limiting screen use before bedtime.
Advertisement
Don’t try to do it alone
A can-do attitude isn’t always enough to prevent heart disease. This is why partnering with a healthcare provider is so important. They can catch signs of heart disease early — even before you may notice anything is amiss. And early diagnosis makes it more likely that treatment can help.
Make an appointment with a
primary care provider
each year. They’ll check your
vital signs
and overall health. They’ll tell you how often to get
blood tests
for cholesterol, blood sugar and other key levels.
Your provider may refer you to a
preventive cardiologist
to keep an even closer eye on your heart health. This specialist can calculate your
cardiac risk score
and work with you over the years to manage those risks. Some, you can’t control, like your age or biological family history. But others you can influence in small or big ways.
Barriers to heart disease prevention
There’s a lot you can do to lower your heart disease risk. But just because you
want
to make heart-healthy choices doesn’t mean you
can
.
Limited access
to resources like healthy food, childcare or a gym can get in the way.
If this sounds familiar, talk with your provider. They may be able to connect you with resources. For example, they might:
Refer you to a dietitian or give you tips for
meal planning
.
Help you learn
exercises
you can do at home.
Point you to places in your community, like food banks and affordable childcare.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
Can heart disease be reversed or cured?
You can’t reverse coronary artery disease once you have it. And there’s
no cure
. But tweaking some habits and taking medications can slow or stop the progression. Scientists continue to study new medications and therapies every day. For now, there are still reasons to be optimistic:
You can do a lot to prevent or delay heart disease.
Treatments can help you live longer and enjoy a vibrant quality of life.
It’s important to learn how to prevent heart disease and take whatever steps you can in that direction. But know there’s a safety net of treatments available to you if you need them.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
We all have our reasons for trying to prevent heart disease. Maybe you just learned you have high cholesterol, and now, you’re thinking more about your heart. Maybe heart issues run in your family. Or perhaps you just read a news story about heart disease risk and you’re wondering if you should be concerned. No matter where you are, a healthcare provider can help.
Talk to your provider about your risk for heart disease. Ask what you can start doing today to protect your heart. You might not be able to control many of your risk factors. But every small change you make can add up to make a big difference down the road.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment