Parkes Weber Syndrome: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Parkes Weber Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Parkes Weber Syndrome
Parkes Weber syndrome is a rare vascular disorder that’s present at birth. A tangled cluster of irregular blood vessels is the main issue, but people also have port wine stains and one limb that’s larger than the other. Treatments of various kinds help with symptoms and slowing down the disease. A few complications can be life-threatening.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Parkes Weber Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Is Parkes Weber Syndrome?
Parkes Weber syndrome is a rare vascular disorder that’s present at birth and often shows up in one leg.
Parkes Weber syndrome is a rare congenital (present at birth)
vascular disorder
. It involves a tangled network of irregular
blood vessels
. In diagnostic images, the cluster of tangled blood vessels looks like a tumbleweed. This blood vessel cluster has a hard time circulating blood to areas that rely on it for their blood (and oxygen) supply.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This syndrome typically affects only one limb (usually one leg). This limb may develop
skin ulcers
(open sores) from a lack of oxygen. This type of wound is hard to heal due to a lack of blood supply.
Complications of Parkes Weber syndrome can be life-threatening. But regular monitoring helps catch issues that develop over time. Providers have many treatments they can use to help ease symptoms and slow the disease down.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms?
Parkes Weber syndrome symptoms and signs may show up at birth or during childhood. Symptoms include pain, swelling and fatigue in the affected area, usually in one leg.
Signs of Parkes Weber syndrome include:
Capillary malformations
: These appear as salmon-colored
port wine stains
with pale halos around them on your skin.
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)
: These blood vessel tangles can happen anywhere in your body, but are often in one leg (or sometimes one arm).
Hemihyperplasia
: This is a noticeable difference in the size of one limb because of more bone and soft tissue growth than in the other limb.
This condition is like
Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome
, which has venous malformations and purple port wine stains.
What causes Parkes Weber syndrome?
A variation in your
RASA1
gene
can cause Parkes Weber syndrome. This gene plays a role in how your vascular system develops. You may inherit this variation from one biological parent. But it can also happen at random (without a biological family history).
Advertisement
Complications of Parkes Weber syndrome
High-output heart failure
is a serious complication of this condition. This can lead to an
enlarged heart
and pulmonary edema (fluid buildup in your lungs). Skin infections from skin ulceration are common and require treatment.
Other complications may include:
Skin ulcers (wounds)
Rhabdomyolysis
(muscle breakdown that can be life-threatening)
Heart disease
Hypertrophy (heart muscle thickening)
Tachycardia
(an abnormally high heart rate while at rest)
High blood pressure
Limb ischemia (low blood flow to your limb)
Aneurysms (weakness in an artery wall)
Blood clots (mass of blood cells)
Varicose veins
Diagnosis and Tests
How is it diagnosed?
It may be difficult to get a Parkes Weber syndrome diagnosis because the condition is rare. But a provider may suspect your child has it based on what they see in a physical exam. A provider may talk about different syndrome stages, from I to IV. Stage I usually doesn’t have symptoms. Stages II through IV include symptoms, with IV being the worst.
Tests to diagnose Parkes Weber syndrome may include:
Doppler ultrasound
CT (computed tomography) scan
CT angiogram
MRA (magnetic resonance angiogram)
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Providers don’t have a cure for Parkes Weber syndrome. But treatments can ease symptoms and keep the syndrome from getting worse. Parkes Weber syndrome treatment varies from person to person. Treatments range from simple, noninvasive measures to procedures that destroy blood vessels.
Treatments may include:
Compression stockings to reduce swelling and prevent
deep vein thrombosis
Orthopedic shoe insert for one foot to make up for the difference in leg length
Wound care for skin ulcers
Angiogenesis
inhibitors to keep new blood vessels from forming
Diuretics
to reduce fluid buildup
Stent
to hold a blood vessel open
Embolization of AVMs (creating a blockage inside a blood vessel)
Endovascular ablation of AVMs (destroying them with a minimally invasive procedure)
Sclerotherapy of AVMs (an injection to close off a blood vessel)
Surgery
Amputation (limb removal)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has Parkes Weber syndrome?
Parkes Weber syndrome is a chronic (long-term) condition.
Vascular malformations
tend to become more noticeable over time. And your child may develop more port wine stains as they age.
Some people need a hospital stay to treat bleeding or infected ulcers.
Embolization
and other treatments can improve circulation. But your child will most likely need treatment more than once for an AVM. This is a condition that requires lifelong follow-ups.
What is the outlook for Parkes Weber syndrome?
Because the disease is rare, information about a Parkes Weber syndrome prognosis is limited.
One study
included a few people who had their first treatment in their 40s and even late 60s. Most of the others in that study had their first treatments before age 17. This suggests that most people need treatment during childhood.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can Parkes Weber syndrome be prevented?
Because this syndrome is present at birth, you can’t prevent it. You can talk with a genetic counselor if Parkes Weber syndrome runs in your family and you’re planning a pregnancy. But the syndrome can happen even if you don’t have a biological family history of it.
Living With
How do I take care of my child?
Having a child with Parkes Weber syndrome means being extra observant. In addition to watching for typical childhood illnesses, it’s important to keep an eye out for signs that the syndrome is getting worse. Your child’s healthcare providers can help you monitor any changes in their condition.
Helping your child stay at a weight that’s healthy for them may help with their symptoms, as well.
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
The short answer is: regularly. A team that specializes in vascular issues may be the best bet for your child. You’ll likely need to take your child to regular checkups with several providers, like a:
Dermatologist
Interventional radiologist
Hematologist or oncologist
General surgeon
Your child may have regular tests like
echocardiograms
or MRIs to check for complications. They should see their provider whenever they have painful swelling in the affected area.
When should I take my child to the ER?
Seek immediate treatment for your child if they’re having:
Skin breakdown or ulcers
Chest pain
Heart palpitations
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
Dizziness
Muscle weakness, pain or stiffness
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to consider asking your child’s provider may include:
How often do they need checkups?
What stage of the syndrome does my child have?
What’s the best treatment for them?
Which treatments have worked well for others with this syndrome?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It may be a relief to get a diagnosis, especially if you’ve seen multiple providers. But learning that your child has Parkes Weber syndrome can be overwhelming. The good news is that many treatments are available. A team of vascular experts and related providers may be your best option. They’ve likely seen a number of cases of this rare syndrome.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular disease may affect your life in big and small ways. Cleveland Clinic’s specialists treat the many types of vascular disease so you can focus on living.
Vascular Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment