Umbilical Hernia: Symptoms, What It Is, Treatment & Surgery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Umbilical Hernia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Umbilical Hernia
An umbilical hernia is a tissue bulge on or near your belly button. In children they usually disappear by age 5. In adults, untreated umbilical hernias can lead to complications. If your provider has concerns about an umbilical hernia, they may recommend surgery to put the tissue back into place.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hernia Repair
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
The most common sign of an umbilical hernia is a bulge on or near your belly button, where your small intestine pokes through your abdominal wall.
What is an umbilical hernia?
An umbilical
hernia
is an unusual bulge you can often see or feel over your belly button (umbilicus). It develops when part of your
small intestine
, together with fat or fluid, forms a sac. The sac pushes through an opening or weakness in your abdominal wall muscle.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
While they may look or feel alarming, umbilical hernias are usually not serious. But it’s important to contact a healthcare provider so they can take a look. Umbilical hernias are most common in newborns, babies and young children. But adults can get them, too.
Umbilical hernias are three times more common in
females
than in males.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of an umbilical hernia?
Umbilical hernia symptoms are similar in adults and children. The most common sign is a visible bulge on or near your belly button that’s soft to the touch. For some people, the bulge is always visible. In other cases, you can only see the bulge when there’s pressure on your abdomen. For example, you may not notice the bulge until you lift something heavy. In newborns and babies, sometimes the bulge doesn’t appear until they’re crying.
They’re usually painless in children. Adults with umbilical hernias are more likely to experience discomfort, dull pain or pressure.
Symptoms that should alert you of a problem with your hernia requiring emergency care include:
Sharp, sudden or worsening pain in your abdomen
Bulge that’s red, darkened, purple and firm
Blood in your poop
Nausea
and
vomiting
What causes an umbilical hernia?
Causes are different in children and adults.
Umbilical hernia causes in children
Umbilical hernias in children happen when the holes in their abdominal walls that allow the
umbilical cord
to pass through (the umbilical ring) don’t fully close.
Advertisement
During
pregnancy
, the umbilical ring allows the umbilical cord to pass from the mother to the fetus. After birth, the ring in the abdominal wall starts to close. It’s usually completely closed by age 5. In the meantime, hernias can form through that opening.
Umbilical hernia causes in adults
In adults, umbilical hernias happen when pressure in your abdomen causes weaknesses in your abdominal wall muscles. Parts of your small intestine and related tissue can bulge through the weakened muscle.
Several factors can increase your risk, including:
Sex
. Females are more likely to have umbilical hernias.
Obesity
. Umbilical hernias are more common in adults with
obesity
.
Multiple births
. Women who’ve
given birth
multiple times have a higher risk of umbilical hernias.
Fluid buildup in your abdomen (
ascites
)
. People with
cirrhosis of the liver
are at a greater risk of developing umbilical hernias due to developing ascites.
Previous abdominal surgeries
. Procedures on your abdomen that weaken the muscle wall can increase your risk for a hernia.
What are the complications of an umbilical hernia?
Possible complications are that the hernia becomes:
Incarcerated
: This is when your small intestine gets stuck in the hernia, causing problems like a
small bowel obstruction
(a blockage in your intestine).
Strangulated
: This is when the blood supply to your intestines is cut off, causing the tissue to die. It’s a medical emergency that requires quick action.
Umbilical hernias are usually not dangerous in babies. In adults, there’s a higher risk of complications. It’s important for you and your provider to monitor your hernia and time treatment to prevent the hernia from progressing.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is an umbilical hernia diagnosed?
A
physical exam
is usually enough to diagnose an umbilical hernia. Your healthcare provider may ask you to squeeze or contract your abdominal muscles so it’s easier for them to see and feel the bulge.
To check for complications (like incarceration or a bowel obstruction), they may use imaging to see inside your abdomen. Common imaging procedures include an
abdominal ultrasound
and a
CT scan
.
Management and Treatment
Does an umbilical hernia need treatment?
It depends on how severe it is. Children may not need treatment because the hernia eventually goes away. More than
90% of children
with umbilical hernias heal by the time they’re 5 years old. In the meantime, your provider may be able to use their hands to push the hernia back into place. A reducible umbilical hernia is one that your provider can treat by pressing the herniated tissue back into place.
You should never attempt to put your child’s hernia back into place. Although you may be trying to help your child, you may injure them instead.
Surgical treatment for umbilical hernias
If your child does need treatment,
surgery
can help. Your child is more likely to need surgery if their hernia is:
Advertisement
Incarcerated or strangulated
Larger than 2 centimeters (around ¾ of an inch)
Still present by the time they’re 5 years old
Painful
Most adults eventually need surgery. Umbilical hernias in adults are more likely to worsen and cause complications.
During the procedure to treat umbilical hernia, a surgeon makes incisions (cuts) that allow them to access the hernia and push the tissue back into place. Then, they strengthen the abdominal wall muscle to hold the tissue in place. Sometimes, they use a material called surgical mesh to strengthen the tissue barrier.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hernia Repair
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have an umbilical hernia?
Umbilical hernias usually have a positive outcome. Most childhood hernias heal naturally over time. Surgery to treat umbilical hernias is also very effective, and the risk of the hernia coming back is low.
Will an umbilical hernia come back?
It’s possible for an umbilical hernia to return after surgery, but it’s uncommon. Ask your healthcare provider what you can do to reduce your risk of a hernia coming back.
Prevention
How can I lower my risk of an umbilical cord hernia?
There’s nothing you can do to prevent your child from having an umbilical cord hernia. Prevention isn’t always possible in adults, either.
As an adult, you can reduce your risk of a hernia by avoiding activities that create pressure inside your abdomen (like repeated heavy lifting). Also, trying to maintain a weight that’s healthy for you can reduce your risk of developing a hernia.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I seek care?
See a healthcare provider if you notice a bulge at your belly button. Once your healthcare provider diagnoses your hernia, they can advise you on when it may need surgery and when you can monitor it. If you or your child has a hernia, they can help you identify symptoms that should prompt you to seek care, including:
Pain (signs of pain in an infant may include irritability, crying or refusing to eat)
A bulge that’s getting bigger
Nausea & vomiting
Constipation
Bloody stool
A bulge that feels firm, is darkening or changing color
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask include:
How serious is my hernia?
Does my hernia need treatment?
How often will I need appointments to monitor my hernia?
Should I adjust my activity levels or lifestyle to prevent complications?
What lifestyle changes should I make to reduce the risk of my hernia worsening or returning?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
An umbilical hernia’s seriousness has everything to do with who has it. In children, umbilical hernias are common and usually don’t cause problems. In adults, they’re considered more high risk. Even if a hernia isn’t causing problems now, it can potentially cause issues in the future. If your provider’s concerned about complications, hernia repair surgery can help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hernias can be painful – Cleveland Clinic’s experts can help. We are leaders in minimally invasive hernia repair, and abdominal wall reconstruction.
Hernia Repair
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/18/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us