First Aid: What Is First Aid?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
First Aid
Advertisement
Advertisement
First Aid
First aid can mean a lot of things. Sometimes, it’s tending to cuts and scrapes. Other times, it’s lifesaving care like CPR. First aid training can prepare you to step up when people need it most. While most people never need to provide lifesaving care, it’s better to have the training and never use it than to need it and not have it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is first aid?
First aid is the initial helping action or medical care you may receive if you have an acute injury or illness. It can be minor assistance, like cleaning and bandaging minor cuts and scrapes. But it can also be acting fast to help someone with a life-threatening medical emergency.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
First aid is meant to do the following:
Save lives
Limit suffering
Avoid or reduce the severity of further illness
Improve or speed up recovery
First responders like paramedics, EMTs or firefighters are often the ones who start first aid. But almost anyone can learn and perform it.
What can first aid treat?
First aid can treat a huge range of conditions, and many aren’t emergencies. Examples of nonemergency conditions and symptoms that first aid can treat include:
Bee
, hornet, wasp and
yellow jacket stings
Exposure to irritating, poisonous plants like
poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac
Knocked-out (avulsed) teeth
Minor burns (all superficial burns and
partial-thickness burns
small enough to cover with your hand)
Minor epistaxis (nosebleed)
Sprains
and
strains
Superficial skin wounds like cuts (lacerations), bruises (
contusions
) or scrapes (
abrasions
)
Tick bites
First aid can save lives or prevent permanent disabilities when used for emergency conditions and symptoms like:
Anaphylaxis
Asthma attacks
Bites from
snakes
or
spiders
Chemical injuries
to your eyes and skin
Chest pain
Head injuries
(like
concussions
and
traumatic brain injuries
)
Electrical injuries
and electrocution
Exertion-related
dehydration
Eye injuries
Fainting (
syncope
) and near-fainting (
presyncope
)
Frostbite
Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)
Most
broken bones (fractures)
Opioid overdose
Seizures
and
status epilepticus
Severe burns
Shock
Spine
or
spinal cord injuries
Severe nosebleeds
Stings from
jellyfish
and
scorpions
Stroke
and
transient ischemic attacks (TIAs)
Temperature extremes like
hyperthermia
or
heat stroke
, or low body temperature (
hypothermia
)
Advertisement
Skills that fall under first aid
First aid includes the following skills:
Bandaging wounds
Cooling and rehydration
for heat-related illnesses
or warming for hypothermia
CPR and rescue breathing
Helping someone who’s choking (either with
backslaps for children
or the
Heimlich maneuver
)
Placing someone in the recovery position (on their side with their ground-side arm extended and beneath their head for support)
Removing ticks
Shock first aid
Splinting
Stopping bleeding
with direct pressure and
stopping nosebleeds
Treating bee, hornet, wasp and yellow jacket stings
Using autoinjectors for conditions like severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis)
Using rescue devices like automated external
defibrillators
Using tourniquets when pressure on a bleeding limb doesn’t stop bleeding
What are some key principles of first aid to know?
Some of the most important principles of first aid include:
Stay calm
. Take a deep breath, focus on what you need to do and do your best.
Get help
. If you’re concerned someone’s in danger, don’t delay. Seconds and minutes might make all the difference. Either call for help directly or send someone to do so.
Don’t endanger yourself
. You can’t help anyone if you need saving.
Prioritize
. Manage the most dangerous issues first. Remember the ABCs: airway, breathing and circulation. Check to see that their mouth and airway are clear. Once you know it’s clear, check for breathing. If they aren’t breathing, start CPR.
Limit movement
. Try not to move people with unknown injuries. You might make the injury worse. The only exception is when not moving them would risk further harm.
Don’t rely on luck or hope
. If you’re hesitant to provide first aid to someone and there’s a chance their condition will get worse, it’s better to be safe than sorry. Hoping for the best or that you get a lucky break can be dangerous.
Additional Common Questions
Who can perform first aid?
Anyone can perform first aid, and everyone should learn it. And in a situation where someone needs help, anyone who has the training and ability should perform first aid.
One of the key things you learn as part of first aid training is your limitations. That means you understand what you don’t know how to do or don’t feel you can do safely.
How do I learn first aid?
First aid is something you can learn from a variety of sources. They can include:
School programs
. Students can often sign up for first aid classes. Some classes may count toward curriculum requirements.
Workplace classes
. Many employers or organizations will pay for staff members to complete first aid classes.
Local nonprofit organizations
. Depending on where you live, there may be organizations that teach first aid classes. The cost of the classes can vary.
What do I need for a first aid kit?
First aid kits often come preassembled. But you can also prepare one on your own. The
main first aid guidelines in the U.S.
include specific guidance for what to include in your first aid kit. Some examples of key supplies include:
Adhesive bandages
Alcohol-based hand sanitizer
Glucose tablets
Medical exam gloves
Notepad and pencil
Shears/utility scissors
Sterile bandages/gauze
Tape (both medical adhesive tape and duct tape)
Tourniquet
Tweezers
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe you have a cut on your hand or you’re having a serious issue like chest pain. First aid can help both. This type of care is just the initial assistance that someone gets when they’re having an acute (new or newly recurring) injury or illness.
First aid is something that professional first responders often give. But anyone with the training and ability can provide it. And when given properly and quickly, it can make a big difference. That’s why experts recommend that everyone learn first aid and be ready to use the training and skills when needed.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider