Postinfectious Cough Treatment (Postviral Cough)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Postinfectious Cough
Advertisement
Advertisement
Postinfectious Cough
After other symptoms of an upper respiratory infection fade, postinfectious cough can hang around. It’s a good idea to get this cough checked out. While it’s probably just an annoyance, it’s best to be certain. And you’ll feel better if you’re sure it’s not something more serious, too.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Postinfectious Cough?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Postinfectious Cough?
Postinfectious cough is a
cough
that lingers for weeks or even months after an
upper respiratory infection
. This happens because of germs like viruses and bacteria. It’s also sometimes known as postviral cough or postviral cough syndrome.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Postinfectious cough is common and can happen at any age. It’s more likely to be a cause of chronic cough in adults than it is in children. Up to 1 in 4 adults who get an upper respiratory infection can develop it. And while it isn’t a dangerous condition, it can definitely be unpleasant.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of postinfectious cough
A persistent or chronic cough is the key symptom of postinfectious cough. A persistent cough lasts three to eight weeks. A chronic cough lasts eight weeks or more.
This cough is usually:
Not severe
: You’re not coughing hard or having coughing fits.
Nonproductive
: It’s dry, meaning it doesn’t bring up mucus.
Gradually weaker
: It usually fades slowly over time.
Postinfectious cough causes
There are two main causes of postinfectious cough: bacteria and viruses.
Bacterial causes include:
Chlamydia pneumoniae
(which can cause
pneumonia
)
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Whooping cough
(postinfectious cough is much more common with this)
Viral causes include:
Adenoviruses
Coronaviruses, including the ones that cause the
common cold
and
COVID-19
Parainfluenza
RSV
Postinfectious cough isn’t contagious. But it’s important to see a healthcare provider so they can rule out a lingering infection when they diagnose your cough. That way, you can be sure you won’t pass an infection to anyone who’s vulnerable.
Advertisement
Why it happens
Experts don’t fully understand why postinfectious cough develops. But they suspect a few reasons:
Inflammation
: Your immune response may leave behind inflammation that takes time to heal.
Mucus
buildup
: Infections increase mucus and make it harder to clear, which can irritate airways even after you’re better.
Nerve sensitivity
: Some infections may hypersensitize cough reflex nerves, making you cough more easily.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose postinfectious cough
To diagnose postinfectious cough, your provider will:
Do a physical exam and listen to your breathing
Ask about your symptoms and any recent upper respiratory infections
Recommend and run tests if needed
Rule out more serious causes of chronic cough
If you have a history of multiple rounds of pneumonia or
smoking
, be sure to tell your provider about those, too. Your provider will need to know about that to diagnose you properly.
Tests that are used
Your provider might use the following tests to diagnose postinfectious cough:
Blood tests
Chest X-ray or CT scan
Pulmonary function tests
Throat culture test
Management and Treatment
How is postinfectious cough treated?
Postinfectious cough doesn’t need treatment. Prescription medicines, like antibiotics, won’t help it. This condition gets better on its own. But make sure you get a diagnosis before waiting it out.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see your provider if you have a cough that lasts more than a couple weeks after other infection symptoms clear up. And you should ask for a follow-up appointment if you still have your cough eight weeks after seeing your provider.
You should also see your provider as soon as possible if you have a persistent cough with any red-flag symptoms. Most of them are signs of something severe that needs care quickly.
Red flag symptoms include:
Coughing blood
Hoarseness
Other symptoms throughout your body, like fever,
unexplained weight loss
, or
foot/leg swelling
with weight gain
Severe
breathing difficulty
, especially when resting or at night
Trouble swallowing
Vomiting
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a postinfectious cough?
Postinfectious cough can be unpleasant and annoying. But it isn’t dangerous. The outlook for it is excellent.
This condition should go away within several weeks. But don’t wait too long to get that diagnosis in the first place. And see your provider again if you still have the cough eight weeks after your diagnosis.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Home cough remedies
may help you cope with postinfectious cough. Cough drops could also help, but don’t overuse them. That could make your cough worse.
You might feel tempted to reach for cough syrup or other over-the-counter (OTC) cough medicines if you have postinfectious cough. But those products won’t make this condition go away any faster. And they could cause other unwanted effects.
Your healthcare provider can offer guidance on what else you can do to ease your symptoms.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Can postviral cough turn into pneumonia?
No. Postinfectious cough can’t turn into pneumonia. This condition only happens after the infection is gone.
But similar conditions that cause chronic cough can lead to pneumonia. That’s why you should see a provider if you have a lingering cough for more than a couple weeks.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
While it’s a relief to feel mostly better after an upper respiratory infection, you’ve still got a cough you just can’t shake. This cough may feel mild, but it’s still something a provider should check. The good news is that postinfectious cough isn’t serious and it goes away on its own. That means you can go back to life as usual while you wait for it to move on.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider