Allergies: Types, Symptoms, Treatment & Management
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Allergies
Advertisement
Advertisement
Allergies
Allergies happen when your immune system overreacts to something that’s usually not harmful — like pollen, pet dander and certain foods. Symptoms can include everything from sneezing and a runny nose to vomiting and difficulty breathing. If you can’t avoid allergens, there are some medications that might help reduce your symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Allergies?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Are Allergies?
Allergies can cause minor itching, sniffling and sneezing. But they can also cause life-threatening swelling.
Allergies are your
immune system’s
overreaction to foreign substances. When you touch, inhale or eat something you’re allergic to, your body thinks it’s harmful and reacts to try to get rid of it. This can cause minor reactions like itching, sniffling and sneezing. But in some cases,
allergic reactions
can lead to life-threatening
airway
swelling and low blood pressure (
anaphylaxis
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You can be allergic to almost anything — like pollen, animals, medications and food. Some people have allergies that are merely annoying. Others have to completely alter their lives to avoid reactions.
Types of allergies
Some common allergies include:
Bee stings
and other insect stings and bites
Dust mites
Foods
Medications
Molds
Pets
and other animals
Poison ivy
rashes and other
contact dermatitis
reactions
Pollen
(seasonal allergies)
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of allergies
Allergies can cause a range of symptoms, including:
Skin rash
or
hives
Itchy skin
Sneezing
Stuffy or
runny nose
Cough
Wheezing
Itchy,
watery eyes
Swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat
Difficulty breathing
or swallowing
Vomiting
or
diarrhea
Low blood pressure
Symptoms often depend on how you’re exposed to an allergen. For instance, if you touch something you’re allergic to, you might get an itchy rash. If you’re allergic to pollen or pet dander, you usually get a runny nose or sneeze when you breathe them in. Food and drug allergies and bee stings are more likely to cause severe reactions, like airway swelling and vomiting.
How long can allergies last?
Your allergies will continue as long as you’re exposed to the allergen. Some start within minutes of exposure, while others don’t start until hours or days later. Once you’re no longer around allergens, your symptoms should go away after a few hours. Some allergies, like poison ivy rashes, can last for a few weeks.
Advertisement
What causes allergies?
Allergies happen when your
immune system
mistakenly identifies foreign proteins — in pollen, pet dander, medications, food or other substances — as something harmful (as if it were a
virus
or
bacteria
). Inhaling, eating or touching something you’re allergic to activates mechanisms meant to protect you and flush the allergen out of your system. This causes your symptoms, which can sometimes be life-threatening.
You generally have to be exposed to a substance more than once before you’ll react to it. The first time you’re exposed, your body sees it as foreign and creates
antibodies
to it (sensitization). The next time you’re exposed to the same substance, it activates the antibodies. This alerts your immune system to attack, triggering your symptoms.
Risk factors
You’re more likely to have allergies if you have:
A biological parent with allergies
Conditions like
asthma
or
eczema
(atopy)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose allergies
A healthcare provider can diagnose allergies with a
skin test
or
blood tests
. To determine what allergens to test for, they’ll ask you about your symptoms and any possible allergens you could be exposed to, like through work or hobbies.
Depending on your suspected allergies, they might also recommend breathing tests, drug or
food challenge tests
, or a patch test. A patch test looks for a contact skin reaction that happens over a few days.
Management and Treatment
How are allergies treated?
Avoiding things you’re allergic to is your best bet to manage allergies. This is especially true if your allergies are likely to cause anaphylaxis.
But some common allergens can be hard to avoid. Your healthcare provider might recommend you take certain medications daily or get specific treatments regularly. These can reduce your symptoms or risk of a reaction. Depending on your allergies, options could include:
Antihistamines
like fexofenadine (Allegra®), loratadine (Claritin®) or cetirizine (Zyrtec®)
Steroid nasal spray
(Flonase® or Nasacort®)
Leukotriene modifiers
like montelukast
Omalizumab (Xolair®) injections
for food allergies or hives
Allergy immunotherapy, like
allergy shots
,
sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT)
or oral immunotherapy (OIT)
If you have an allergy that could cause a severe reaction, your provider will recommend you carry an
epinephrine auto-injector
(EpiPen® or Auvi-Q®) to use at the first signs of a severe allergic reaction.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of allergies and want to get to the bottom of what’s causing them. A
primary care provider
might refer you to a specialist, like an
allergist
or
dermatologist
, to get certain tests.
Go to the ER or call 911 if you experience:
Advertisement
Swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat
Difficulty breathing
Chest pain
or tightness
Hives all over your body
Tingling hands, feet or lips
Feeling weak,
dizzy
or faint
Feeling of dread or impending doom
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have allergies?
What to expect when you have allergies depends on what kind they are. Seasonal or pet allergies are generally more likely to cause irritating, but not life-threatening, reactions. Food and drug allergies and bee stings are more likely to cause serious reactions. You’ll probably need to carry an epinephrine injector if you have one of these allergies.
What can I do about allergies?
If you’re still having bothersome allergy symptoms even with treatment, you might get some relief with:
Oral
decongestants
or
saline rinses
for nasal symptoms
A cold washcloth or eye drops made for allergies to help relieve itchy eyes
Showering and putting on fresh clothes to help remove lingering allergens on your body
Hypoallergenic or fragrance-free lotions to help calm itchy rashes
Prevention
Can allergies be prevented?
You can’t really avoid developing allergies to begin with. To avoid reactions to known allergens, you can:
Avoid touching or getting licked by animals you’re allergic to and change your clothes after you’ve been around them (don’t allow them in your bedroom or on your furniture, and don’t touch their toys)
Regularly vacuum rugs, carpets and other surfaces to help remove dust, animal dander, pollen and other allergens
Use high-efficiency particulate (HEPA) air filters to help remove allergens from the air around you
Keep your windows closed during pollen season
Change the filters on your HVAC system on their recommended schedule
Advertisement
If you have a
food allergy
, check food labels, keep allergen-free foods in your house, and only eat at restaurants where you know you can eat something that’s allergen-free.
Additional Common Questions
Do allergies get worse with age?
Allergies can change with age. This can depend on how much (or how little) you’re exposed to an allergen, changes in your immune system and other factors.
Sometimes, existing allergies get worse, or allergies that seemed to have gone away can come back. Other times, existing allergies can get better over time — say, if you’re allergic to cats but you’re around them regularly anyway. Finally, some people can get new allergies as adults.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Allergies are a part of everyday life for millions of people around the world. If you’re not sniffling and sneezing every spring, you’re trying to avoid the rash you’ll get from your neighbor’s overly affectionate dog. Food and drug allergies are often more serious — they mean carefully reading labels and being cautious about new medications. But for most, allergies are manageable. Talk to your healthcare provider about any concerns you have.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergies can wreak havoc on your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our team of experts can help create a treatment plan that’ll help you breathe easier.
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/01/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment