Inductive Reasoning: What It Is, Examples & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Inductive Reasoning
Advertisement
Advertisement
Inductive Reasoning
Inductive reasoning is one way that you make decisions. It’s a mental process where you predict what may happen based on what you’ve experienced yourself or know from other people’s experiences. Inductive reasoning happens in your brain’s frontal lobe. Certain conditions may affect your frontal lobe and your ability to use this type of reasoning.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is inductive reasoning?
Inductive reasoning is a mental process for making decisions. It involves making a prediction about what may happen based on what you know. In a sense, inductive reasoning is your educated guess about any given situation or issue, using what you’ve experienced or learned from others.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When would we use inductive reasoning?
You would use inductive reasoning whenever you need to decide without knowing for sure what will happen. For example, someone in marketing may use what they learned from past campaigns for the same product and focus groups to develop a new advertising campaign.
What are examples of inductive reasoning?
The concept of inductive reasoning goes back centuries, with roots in scientific investigation that researchers still use. Inductive reasoning involves:
Collecting and remembering experiences and information
Developing a hypothesis from that information
Integrating new information
Confirming the hypothesis
Inductive reasoning may sound complicated. But for most people, using inductive reasoning is an everyday process you go through to make decisions.
For example, think of the process you go through if you have school-aged kids who walk to and from a bus stop. You wonder if they need to wear coats or if heavy sweaters will do. Here’s how you might use inductive reasoning:
You check the weather forecast, which calls for temperatures to drop right about the time your kids get off the school bus.
You remember how it feels to walk in cold weather without a heavy coat.
You decide your kids should wear their heavy coats, even though you know at least one of them will argue with you.
The temperature does drop right about the time your kids typically get off the bus and walk home, which makes you feel glad you made the right decision.
Advertisement
Here’s another example of everyday inductive reasoning:
You’re shopping for a Mother’s Day present and feeling overwhelmed by your options. Using inductive reasoning helps you home in on a potentially perfect gift:
You remember your mom likes dark chocolate.
You also remember she doesn’t like dark chocolate with coconut flakes.
You know about a nearby candy store that sells dark chocolate with many different fillings.
You buy an assortment of dark chocolate candies with different fillings.
On Mother’s Day, you notice your parent seems to prefer candy filled with caramel. You’ll keep that in mind for the next time you want to get them a present you know that they’ll appreciate.
One expert used a homeowner’s thought process after a burglary to illustrate how inductive reasoning works. In this scenario, a homeowner comes home to find someone broke into their house and stole things. As a result, the homeowner may use inductive reasoning to reconsider home security. They may:
Wonder if someone will break into their house again when they’re away
Recall many other times when they weren’t home, and no one broke into their house
Check with neighbors or ask police about recent burglaries in the neighborhood
Decide it was a random event but also decide to install home security
What drives inductive reasoning?
Inductive reasoning is one of the mental processes that your
brain
manages. Research shows thinking and reasoning start in the
frontal lobe
of your brain.
What conditions affect my frontal lobe?
Certain medical conditions may affect your frontal lobe and your ability to use inductive reasoning. And some mental health issues may affect how you use inductive reasoning. Medical conditions that affect your frontal lobe include:
Alzheimer’s disease
and other
neurodegenerative disorders
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Brain lesions
Brain tumors
Concussions
and other
traumatic brain injuries
Developmental delay
Frontotemporal dementia
Genetic conditions (such as
Huntington’s disease
or
Wilson’s disease
)
Intellectual disability
Learning disabilities and disorders
Lewy body dementia
Mental health disorders
, including
mood disorders
Seizures
(especially
frontal lobe seizures
) and seizure-related conditions such as
epilepsy
Sleep disorders
Stroke
and
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
What mental health issues have an impact on inductive reasoning?
Certain mental health conditions, like
post-traumatic stress disorder
or
phobias
, may affect the inductive reasoning process.
How are conditions that affect inductive reasoning diagnosed?
Healthcare providers may do several tests to diagnose these conditions, including:
Blood tests
Brain MRI
Cognitive tests
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Electromyogram
Evoked potentials
Neuropsychological testing
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
Advertisement
What are tests to evaluate inductive reasoning?
Tests to evaluate inductive reasoning vary. For example, healthcare providers assessing inductive reasoning often do neuropsychological tests. Employers may use aptitude tests to assess inductive reasoning, particularly for jobs where people often must rely on what they know to predict what may happen next.
What are treatments for conditions that may affect inductive reasoning?
Anything that damages your frontal lobe may affect your ability to use inductive reasoning. In general, healthcare providers focus on treatments that help you manage everyday activities, including:
Cognitive rehabilitation
. This treatment focuses on tactics, like using organization strategies, which help you manage day-to-day activities.
Cognitive behavioral therapy (
CBT
)
. This and other treatments like
light therapy
, help with sleep disorders.
Medication and
psychotherapy
.
Providers may combine these treatments to help people with mood disorders.
Occupational therapy
. In this treatment, an occupational therapist helps you overcome physical, mental and social challenges.
Physical therapy
.
Physical therapy is treatment that helps you improve how your body performs physical movements.
Speech and language therapy
. This treatment involves exercises and other steps that help improve your ability to talk and use language skills.
Treatment for neurodegenerative disorders
.
Treatments vary depending on the disorder.
Advertisement
What about mental health issues that affect inductive reasoning?
That depends on your situation. For example, if you have post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), your healthcare provider may combine medications that help you to manage stress with
psychotherapy
, including:
Cognitive behavioral therapy
EMDR therapy
Exposure therapy
What can I do to protect my ability to use inductive thinking?
The best way is to take care of your brain. Here are some lifestyle suggestions that may help:
Drink in moderation
. If you drink beverages containing alcohol, limit drinks to two a day if you’re
male
and one a day if you’re female.
Eat well
. Fill your plate with vegetables, fruits, whole grains, lean protein and healthy fats.
Get moving
. Consistent exercise is one way to keep your brain in good shape.
Get your rest
. Sleep at least seven to eight hours each night.
Protect your brain
. Use protective gear, like wearing seatbelts when you’re in a vehicle, playing contact sports or on the job.
Quit smoking
. Smoking increases your risk of having an ischemic stroke.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ever ponder the sell-by date information on food and then decide not to take a chance on a semi-aged slice of salami? You based your decision on information about food safety you’ve learned, as well as your own experiences. That’s inductive reasoning, a mental process you use every day. Your brain manages reasoning, including inductive reasoning, which is another reason to protect your brain and keep it healthy.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/02/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment