Parkinson’s Disease Medications: What They Are & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Parkinson’s Disease Medications
Advertisement
Advertisement
Parkinson’s Disease Medications
There are several types of medications for Parkinson’s disease that can help with symptom management. The most common is levodopa. Most people take a combination of medications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parkinson's Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What types of medications are used for Parkinson’s disease?
Medications for
Parkinson’s disease
(PD) mainly help with symptom management. They can’t cure Parkinson’s disease.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Parkinson's disease is a progressive (meaning, it gets worse with time) neurological condition that affects the way your body moves. It can also affect your sense of smell, how you sleep, how your gut works and more. It happens due to the breakdown of certain
nerve
cells in your
brain
. Many of the affected cells are in the region called the
substantia nigra
, which controls movement. These nerve cells die or become damaged, losing the ability to produce an important
neurotransmitter
(chemical) called
dopamine
.
Most medications for PD aim to manage the levels of dopamine in your body and/or other neurotransmitters that affect these levels. Most people with PD take a combination of medications.
Levodopa and carbidopa
Levodopa
is the go-to treatment for Parkinson’s disease. It’s a dopamine replacement agent. Levodopa crosses the
blood-brain barrier (BBB)
and gets converted to dopamine in your
central nervous system
and
peripheral nervous system
.
Blood enzymes in your body break down most of the levodopa before it reaches your brain. So, it’s combined with another medication called
carbidopa
(an enzyme inhibitor). This allows more levodopa to reach your brain. It also helps reduce severe
nausea
and
vomiting
, which are common side effects of levodopa alone.
Advertisement
For most people, levodopa reduces the symptoms of slowness (
bradykinesia
), stiffness and
tremor
. It’s especially effective for people who have a loss of spontaneous movement and muscle rigidity. Brand names for combination levodopa-carbidopa include:
Sinemet®.
Rytary®.
Parcopa®.
Dhivy®.
Dopamine agonists
Healthcare providers may prescribe a
dopamine agonist
medication for the early stages of Parkinson’s disease and/or younger people with the condition. Dopamine agonists activate dopamine receptors in your brain. These medications may lengthen the duration of effectiveness of levodopa.
Dopamine agonists providers prescribe for Parkinson’s disease include:
Pramipexole
(Mirapex®).
Ropinirole
(Requip®).
Rotigotine
(Neupro®).
Enzyme inhibitors
Enzyme inhibitors, like MAO-B inhibitors and COMT inhibitors, slow down the enzymes that break down dopamine in your brain. This allows more dopamine to be available in your brain.
The main MAO-B inhibitor medications are
selegiline
(Carbex®, Eldepryl®) and
rasagiline
(Azilect®). These slow down the activity of the enzyme that metabolizes dopamine in your brain. This delays the breakdown of naturally occurring dopamine and dopamine formed from levodopa. Providers may prescribe it alongside levodopa because it may enhance and prolong the effectiveness of levodopa.
COMT inhibitors include
entacapone
(Comtan®) and
opicapone
(Ongentys®). Providers typically prescribe them to extend the duration of the effect of levodopa.
Amantadine
Providers may prescribe
amantadine
(Osmolex®, Gocovri®, Symmetrel®) to help reduce twitching or writhing movements (dyskinesia) that occur as a result of treatment with dopaminergic medications.
Amantadine is actually an
antiviral
medication, but its antiviral components aren’t what helps with this symptom. Researchers aren’t exactly sure how the medication works to minimize dyskinesia.
Amantadine also treats other movement symptoms of Parkinson’s, including abnormal muscle activations that result in
dystonia
.
Anticholinergic medications
Anticholinergic medications can help reduce tremors and muscle rigidity. They work by blocking
acetylcholine
. This neurotransmitter’s effects become more intense when dopamine levels drop.
Anticholinergic medications your provider may prescribe include:
Benztropine mesylate
(Cogentin®).
Trihexyphenidyl
(Artane®).
Adenosine A2A antagonists
A non-dopaminergic medication,
istradefylline
(Nourianz®), can improve motor symptom control, especially during lapses of symptom control between doses of dopaminergic medications. Researchers don’t know exactly how this medication works, but the result is that it enhances the effects of dopamine.
Advertisement
Other medications
Parkinson’s disease can cause other symptoms that don’t have to do with movement issues. Your healthcare provider may recommend other medications for specific conditions or symptoms related to PD, including:
Sildenafil
(Viagra®) for
erectile dysfunction
.
Modafinil
(Provigil®) for daytime sleepiness (
hypersomnia
).
Polyethylene glycol
(GlycoLax®, MiraLax® and others) for
constipation
.
Methylphenidate
(Methylin®, Ritalin®) for
fatigue
.
Cholinesterase inhibitors for
dementia
.
SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors)
for
depression
and/or
anxiety
.
Antipsychotic medications
(like
pimavanserin
) for
psychosis
-related symptoms, like
hallucinations
.
What is the best medication for Parkinson’s disease?
There’s no single “best” medication for Parkinson’s disease. You typically need to take a combination of medications to manage symptoms. However, levodopa is the main go-to medication for PD.
It’s the most effective at managing slowness of movement (bradykinetic symptoms). It’s also the most effective medication to improve the quality of life in people with idiopathic (unknown cause) Parkinson’s disease.
Risks / Benefits
What are the side effects of Parkinson’s disease medications?
The side effects of Parkinson’s disease medications vary based on the type. Combining certain medications can also cause different side effects. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about side effects to look out for before starting a medication.
Advertisement
Common side effects of Levodopa include:
Nausea and vomiting.
Dizziness
.
Headache.
Daytime sleepiness.
Postural
hypotension (low blood pressure)
.
The most common side effects in older people taking levodopa include:
Confusion.
Hallucinations.
Delusions (strongly held untrue beliefs).
Psychosis.
Agitation.
Abruptly stopping levodopa or lowering the dose increases your risk of parkinsonism hyperpyrexia syndrome, a life-threatening complication. This condition is very similar to
neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS)
.
Dopamine agonist side effects
Side effects of dopamine agonists may include:
Hallucinations.
Delusions.
Confusion.
Drowsiness.
Nausea and vomiting.
Dry mouth
.
Dizziness.
Feeling faint upon standing.
These side effects are common when starting a dopamine agonist. But they usually go away over several days. In older people, these medications are more likely than levodopa to cause confusion, hallucinations or psychosis, so providers prescribe them less often for older people.
Enzyme inhibitor side effects
Side effects of COMT inhibitors include
diarrhea
and dyskinesia.
Side effects of MAO-B inhibitors include:
Heartburn
.
Nausea.
Dry mouth.
Dizziness.
Less common side effects of selegiline include confusion, nightmares and hallucinations.
Amantadine side effects
Side effects of amantadine may include:
Advertisement
Difficulty concentrating.
Confusion.
Insomnia
.
Nightmares.
Agitation.
Hallucinations.
Leg swelling.
Anticholinergic medication side effects
Side effects of anticholinergic medications may include:
Cognitive deficits.
Dry mouth.
Blurred vision
.
Sleepiness (sedation).
Delirium
.
Hallucinations.
Constipation.
Urinary retention
.
Recovery and Outlook
What can I expect when I start taking Parkinson’s disease medications?
How your body responds to medications for Parkinson’s disease varies based on several factors, including:
Your age.
How early into the condition you received a diagnosis and started treatment.
Your overall health.
Most medications for Parkinson’s disease provide good symptom management for three to six years. As Parkinson’s disease worsens, your body’s response to these medications becomes weaker.
Healthcare providers and researchers are developing new ways to adjust the dosing of levodopa and other medications to prolong their usefulness. Research is also underway to try to find medications that slow down the progression of PD.
It’s important to follow your medication schedule carefully and take them as your provider prescribes. If you develop side effects, be sure to tell your provider. Never stop taking a medication without talking to your provider first.
How can I take care of myself if I have Parkinson’s disease?
In addition to prescription medications, other treatments, like
physical therapy
, can help manage symptoms of PD.
People with PD who participate in a structured physical therapy program geared to PD typically have better symptom management and improved quality of life. Physical therapy can help you:
Improve balance and gait (walking pattern).
Improve stability.
Maintain an active life.
Specific types of therapy that especially benefit people with PD include:
Music therapy
in physical fitness programs.
Cycling.
Boxing.
Physical activity is very important in managing Parkinson’s disease. It’s the only intervention that’s been shown to slow down disease progression. People with PD should try to get at least 150 minutes of cardiovascular exercise per week.
A chronic diagnosis like Parkinson’s disease can take a toll on your
mental health
. Be sure to seek help from a mental health professional, like a
psychologist
, if PD is causing you distress, depression and/or anxiety.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should have regular appointments with your healthcare provider when taking Parkinson’s disease medications to assess how well they’re working and to address new symptoms as they occur.
Talk to your provider if:
You develop bothersome side effects.
Your symptoms aren’t improving or they’ve gotten worse.
You’re thinking of stopping the medication(s).
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Parkinson’s disease medications are effective at managing symptoms and improving your quality of life. Like any medication, they can cause certain side effects. It’s important to have in-depth conversations with your healthcare provider before starting these medications to learn about when and how to take them and side effects to look out for. Know that your provider and pharmacist will be by your side to help you with any concerns or questions.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Shaky hands aren’t always because you’re tired or hungry. Cleveland Clinic brain experts can diagnose and treat your tremors and other Parkinson’s disease symptoms.
Parkinson's Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/09/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment