Hyperthermic Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy (HIPEC)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Hyperthermic Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy (HIPEC)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hyperthermic Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy (HIPEC)
HIPEC (hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy) treats cancerous tumors in your abdominal cavity — the area in your belly that holds your liver, stomach and intestines. In this treatment, surgeons remove cancerous tumors. Then, they flood your abdominal cavity with heated chemotherapy drugs. HIPEC doesn’t cure cancer. But the treatment may help you live longer.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC)?
Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) is
cancer treatment
for tumors in your abdominal (peritoneal) cavity. This is the place in your belly that holds your
liver
,
stomach
and several other organs. During treatment, surgeons remove cancerous
tumors
. Then, they circulate heated (“hyperthermic”)
chemotherapy drugs
inside your belly to kill any remaining cancer cells.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers typically use HIPEC to treat cancer that’s spread (metastasized) from another part of your body to your peritoneal cavity.
Metastatic cancers
that HIPEC treats include:
Adrenal cancer
Appendix cancer
Colorectal cancer
Liver cancer
Ovarian cancer
Stomach cancer
They may also use HIPEC to treat cancers that start in your belly, like:
Primary peritoneal cancer
Peritoneal mesothelioma
Pseudomyxoma pertonei
HIPEC doesn’t cure
cancer
, but treatments may help you live longer. Your healthcare provider will review the pros and cons of treatment with you.
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for this procedure?
Your healthcare provider will work with you closely to prepare you for HIPEC. This is an intensive cancer treatment and procedure. You’ll want to be in the best possible health — both physically and mentally — beforehand. Preparation may involve:
Quitting smoking
Stopping alcohol use
Using an
incentive spirometer
to strengthen your lungs
Joining a support group or connecting with a therapist who works with people living with cancer
What happens during HIPEC?
Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy is the second part of a two-part process. The first part is cytoreductive surgery (CRS). This surgery removes
cancerous tumors
and diseased tissue from your abdominal cavity. You’ll receive general
anesthesia
that puts you to sleep for surgery and for the HIPEC treatment that follows. That way, you won’t feel any pain.
Advertisement
During the HIPEC procedure, your healthcare provider will:
Insert a catheter through a cut (incision) in your belly
. The catheter will be connected to a machine that heats the chemotherapy to about 108 degrees Fahrenheit (41 degrees Celsius).
Deliver the chemotherapy drugs
. The machine will pump the heated chemotherapy drugs through the catheter and into your belly.
Distribute the chemotherapy
. Your provider may gently move your body from side to side so the chemotherapy washes over your belly cavity. (Think of rinsing a bowl by tilting it side to side.)
Drain the chemotherapy
. Your provider will drain the chemotherapy drugs from your peritoneal cavity. Then, they’ll rinse it with saline.
Close your incisions
. Your surgeon will close any cuts made during cytoreductive surgery or HIPEC.
How long does this procedure take?
On average, cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC together take from five to 10 and a half hours. The chemotherapy infusion part typically takes from 30 minutes up to two hours of the total time. Much depends on the amount of cancer in your belly.
What are the potential benefits and risks of HIPEC?
HIPEC allows you to receive cancer-killing drugs in an area of your body that systemic chemotherapy can’t normally reach. Systemic chemotherapy travels through your entire body via your bloodstream. But it can’t get past your
peritoneum
barrier. This is the membrane that lines your abdominal cavity.
But HIPEC bypasses the barrier and kills cancer cells directly.
Other benefits include:
High-dose (powerful) chemotherapy
. The heat makes the chemo even more toxic to cancer. The direct application allows the treatment to penetrate tumors, killing the cancer cells inside.
Fewer treatment sessions
. You’re able to complete treatment in a single session. With systemic chemotherapy, treatment usually involves several sessions, or “rounds,” of chemotherapy.
Fewer side effects
. The chemotherapy is mostly limited to your abdominal cavity. This means you may have fewer
side effects
than with systemic chemotherapy.
Still, all surgeries carry risks, like excessive bleeding and
infection
. HIPEC risks vary depending on the type of cancer and the type of chemotherapy drugs you receive. Your provider will explain the risks involved based on your unique treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after this procedure?
What happens after HIPEC depends on your situation. For example, you may need to stay in the
intensive care unit
(ICU) for a few days. In the ICU, you may be on a
ventilator
to help with breathing.
In the next few days or weeks while you’re in the hospital, you may need to use a
feeding tube
to receive nutrition while your system recovers. That’s because HIPEC involves large doses of powerful chemotherapy that can affect bowel function.
Advertisement
During recovery, you may also experience side effects like:
Bloated stomach
Constipation
Diarrhea
Fatigue
Nausea
and
vomiting
Pain at the incision site
Swelling
(the saline rinse can cause parts of your body to retain fluid immediately after)
What’s the recovery time for HIPEC?
It can take four to 12 weeks to recover from the treatment. This includes several days to two weeks of recovery in the hospital. Your healthcare provider will explain what you’ll need to do to prepare for at-home recovery.
Can cancer come back after HIPEC surgery?
It’s important to remember that HIPEC doesn’t
cure
cancer. The tumors in your belly can come back (
recur
). Likewise, you may develop new tumors if cancer outside your abdomen spreads there.
But for many people, HIPEC means longer survival with fewer symptoms. A
recent study
about the benefits of HIPEC found that it extended the life expectancy of people with advanced ovarian cancer. In this study, people received CRS and HIPEC after getting systemic chemotherapy.
Still, your
prognosis
(likely treatment outcome) depends on lots of factors. Ask your healthcare provider which factors will impact the results you should expect.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
After HIPEC, call your provider if you experience:
Fever
above 101 degrees F (38.3 degrees C)
Nausea and vomiting
that don’t improve
Severe swelling, warmth or drainage around your incision site
Worsening pain
Advertisement
These signs may mean an infection or that you’re not healing as you should. It’s important to seek care immediately to get your recovery back on track.
Additional Common Questions
What drugs are used in hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy?
The most common chemotherapy drugs used for HIPEC include:
Carboplatin
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin
Flurorouracil
Mitomycin
Oxaliplatin
Paclitaxel
They’re all powerful cancer fighters, but there are slight differences in how they work. Your provider can explain which drug or drug combinations they’ve chosen and why.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Healthcare providers only recommend HIPEC (hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy) when treatment benefits clearly outweigh the risks. If your provider is suggesting this treatment, ask them to explain why you’re a good candidate. Now is a good time to review your prognosis and your overall care goals. They can help you understand how this treatment may fit into your long-term care goals. They can also walk you through the steps needed to prepare and recover from treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials