Tachycardia (High Heart Rate): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tachycardia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tachycardia
Tachycardia is an abnormal heart rhythm with a fast heart rate of more than 100 beats per minute at rest. It can start in the upper or lower chambers of your heart and can range from mild to life-threatening. Treatments include medicines, an ablation procedure and implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) placement.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
Tachycardia, a heart rhythm that’s faster than normal, is more than 100 beats a minute at rest.
What is tachycardia?
Tachycardia (
ta
-kih-
kar
-dee-uh) is a kind of abnormal heart rhythm (
arrhythmia
). With tachycardia, your heart beats more than 100 times a minute at rest. Your heart beats faster than normal for a few seconds to a few hours. Normally, your
heart rate
is 60 to 100 beats per minute when you’re not active.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Because your
heart
beats too often, it doesn’t have the time it needs to fill with
blood
between beats. This can be dangerous if your heart can’t supply all your cells with the blood and oxygen they need.
Types of tachycardia
Some kinds of tachycardia can come back regularly and can be more serious. Tachycardias can be mild, while others cause issues that are moderately harmful. A healthcare provider can tell you which type of tachycardia you have and how to manage your condition.
Tachycardia can happen in any of your heart’s
four chambers
. It occurs when you have an issue with electrical signals there.
Types of tachycardia include:
Supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs)
, which begin in the atria (upper chambers of your heart). Examples include
atrial fibrillation
and
premature atrial contractions
.
Ventricular tachycardias
, which begin in your ventricles, your heart’s lower chambers. Examples include
ventricular fibrillation
and
Torsades de Pointes
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms?
Some people with tachycardia don’t have symptoms, while others may have mild to severe symptoms. Tachycardia symptoms may include:
Fast heart rate
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
)
Chest pain
Heart palpitations
Dizziness
Lightheadedness
Fainting
Nausea
Fatigue
Advertisement
What causes tachycardia?
Your heart normally responds to electrical signals from your heart’s
sinoatrial (SA) node
. These signals control how often your heart beats. When you’ve had a scare or are very emotional or anxious, or are exercising, your heart may send signals more frequently for a short time. This is called
sinus tachycardia
and goes away when you calm down or rest.
You may also have a fast heart rate from substance or tobacco use or from too much caffeine or alcohol.
Tachycardia causes include:
Stress
Dehydration
High blood pressure
Other heart problems, like
coronary artery disease
Low blood sugar
Pregnancy
Anemia
What are the risk factors?
Risk factors for tachycardia include:
Family history of tachycardia
Obesity
Diabetes
Kidney
or
lung
disease
An untreated
thyroid
issue
Certain kinds of medicines, like
antiarrhythmics
and
antidepressants
What are the complications of this condition?
Without treatment, certain types of tachycardia can cause your kidneys, liver or heart to fail. Tachycardia also can lead to:
Blood clots
Stroke
Heart attack
Cardiomyopathy
(weak heart muscle)
Cardiac arrest
Diagnosis and Tests
How is tachycardia diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will ask for your medical history and do a
physical exam
. They may also order tests like:
Electrocardiogram
(EKG)
Holter monitor
or other
wearable monitor
Tilt table test
Stress test
Electrophysiology test
or EP study
Echocardiogram
Blood tests
Genetic tests
Cardiac imaging
Management and Treatment
How is tachycardia treated?
Procedures and medications are the main kinds of treatment for tachycardia. Treatments vary depending on the type of tachycardia and what’s causing it. Treatments may include:
Vagal maneuvers
Ablation
Cardioversion
Implantable cardiac defibrillator
(ICD)
Pacemaker
Left atrial appendage closure
Medications providers prescribe may include:
Beta-blockers
Calcium channel blockers
Potassium channel blockers
Sodium channel blockers
Antiarrhythmic medicines
Blood thinners or
anticoagulants
(for
atrial fibrillation
)
In some situations, you may need
CPR
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have tachycardia?
Your experience will depend on which type of tachycardia you have. You may have harmless symptoms, life-threatening symptoms (from ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation) or something in between. Medicines and other treatments can help you manage your high heart rate.
You may need to wear a Holter monitor or do electrophysiology testing to see how well your medicine is working.
How long can tachycardia last?
If you have sinus tachycardia, your symptoms will go away once the fear, anxiety or other emotion that caused it ends. For most other types of tachycardia, you’ll need medication or even a procedure to keep your fast heart rate and other symptoms from coming back.
Tachycardia that puts you in danger doesn’t go away on its own. You’ll need to live a healthy lifestyle and take medicines to manage your condition. You may also need to have a procedure, like an ablation.
Advertisement
Can tachycardia be cured?
Although medications can’t cure tachycardia, they can help you regulate it. Ablation may be a long-term solution to certain types of tachycardia. It may even cure them.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
You may be able to calm down your tachycardia if your provider teaches you vagal maneuvers.
You can care for yourself in the following ways:
Manage conditions like high blood pressure and
high cholesterol
.
Follow your healthcare provider’s instructions for taking your medicines.
Drink fewer beverages that contain caffeine and alcohol.
Stop using tobacco products
.
Aim for a weight that’s healthy for you.
Eat
heart-healthy foods
.
Manage your stress
.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
After you get a tachycardia diagnosis, you can expect to have follow-up appointments with your provider. But you should contact them if your medicine isn’t helping you or if you start having new symptoms.
When should I go to the ER?
Get medical help right away if you:
Have trouble breathing
Feel your heart pounding
Have chest pain
Feel faint or dizzy
You should also get help right away for someone who collapses or is unconscious from ventricular fibrillation. They’ll need CPR to survive until paramedics arrive.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask your provider may include:
Do I have a dangerous type of tachycardia?
What kind of treatment do you recommend for me?
What are your success rates with cardiac ablation?
Is my family at risk of developing tachycardia?
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Feeling your heart race can make you stop what you’re doing and wonder what’s going on. Tachycardia symptoms can range from mild to severe, depending on which type of tachycardia you have. For peace of mind, talk to your healthcare provider if you’re having symptoms. They can tell you if you have a reason to be concerned.
Keep taking the medicines your provider prescribed for you, especially heart medicines. Don’t stop taking them without your provider’s approval. And be sure to keep going to all your follow-up appointments.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/31/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment