MCA (Middle Cerebral Artery) Stroke: What It Is & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
MCA (Middle Cerebral Artery) Stroke
Advertisement
Advertisement
MCA (Middle Cerebral Artery) Stroke
An MCA (middle cerebral artery) stroke happens when a stroke blocks the middle cerebral artery in your brain. These strokes are ischemic (caused by clots). Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) for emergency treatment if you think you’re experiencing stroke symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is an MCA stroke?
An MCA stroke is a
stroke
that affects the middle cerebral artery (MCA) in your
brain
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The middle cerebral artery is one of the biggest
blood vessels
in your brain. It’s connected to your
carotid artery
and supplies blood to the areas of your brain that control your ability to use your senses, move and use language. The MCA is the blood vessel that strokes most commonly affect.
An MCA stroke happens when your middle cerebral artery is blocked by a blood clot.
Symptoms and Causes
What are MCA stroke symptoms?
Some of the most common MCA stroke symptoms include:
Weakness or
paralysis
on one side of your face and body
Sudden worsening or loss of your senses (including
vision
,
hearing
,
smell
,
taste
and touch)
Slurred or garbled speaking (dysarthria)
Aphasia
(trouble speaking or a complete loss of speech)
Neglect (not noticing things on one side, usually your left)
Loss of coordination or clumsiness (ataxia)
The MCA divides into branches on the left and right sides of your brain. These separate branches supply blood to each of your brain’s halves (hemispheres). Each hemisphere of your brain controls the opposite side of your body. So, if the stroke affects the left side of your brain, you’ll experience symptoms on your right side. And if the stroke damages tissues in the right side of your brain, you’ll have symptoms on your left side.
Advertisement
Strokes in the left side of the brain cause language problems (aphasia) in most people. Strokes on the right may make you neglect the left side of your body.
What are the warning signs of an MCA stroke?
Middle cerebral artery strokes can cause many different symptoms. To recognize the warning signs of a stroke in yourself or a loved one, remember the acronym
BE
FAST
:
Balance:
Watch for a sudden loss of balance.
Eyes:
Look out for
sudden vision loss
or changes in one or both
eyes
.
Face:
Smile. Look for a droop on one or both sides of your face.
Arms:
Raise both arms. If you’re having a stroke, one arm may not move or will be very weak and sag.
Speech:
You might slur your speech or have trouble choosing the right words.
Time:
Time is critical — call for help immediately. If possible, look at your watch, phone or a clock to track when symptoms start. Telling a healthcare provider when symptoms began can help them know which treatment options are best for you.
Transient ischemic attack
A
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
— sometimes called a “mini-stroke” — is like a stroke, but the effects are temporary. These are often warning signs that a person has a very high risk of having a true stroke soon. A person who has a TIA needs emergency medical care as quickly as possible.
What causes MCA strokes?
MCA strokes are
ischemic strokes
. They happen when a
blood clot
blocks your middle cerebral artery. Health conditions that increase your risk of blood clots can include:
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
Clotting disorders
Atherosclerosis
(hardened arteries)
Atrial fibrillation
(especially when
sleep apnea
causes it)
Heart defects (including
atrial septal defect
and
ventricular septal defect
)
Risk factors
Anybody can have a stroke, but some groups have a higher risk, including people who:
Smoke
or use other forms of tobacco or nicotine (like
vaping
)
Are older than 65
Use recreational or nonprescription drugs
Don’t have regular access to healthcare
Have a history of strokes in their biological families
Don’t get enough physical activity
Having certain health conditions can increase your stroke risk, including:
High blood pressure (hypertension)
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
COVID-19
Diabetes
Alcohol use disorder
Obesity
Diagnosis and Tests
How is an MCA stroke diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose an MCA stroke with a
neurological exam
, a
physical exam
and some tests. Providers in the emergency room may diagnose a stroke if emergency services transport you to the ER.
Your provider will use some of the following tests to confirm that you’ve had a stroke:
Advertisement
CT scan
CT angiogram
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
MRI
Magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA)
Cerebral angiogram
Blood tests
Management and Treatment
What are MCA stroke treatments?
Your healthcare providers will work to restore normal blood flow to your brain as fast as possible to reduce your risk of permanent brain damage and death.
Your providers will break up or remove the blood clot. You’ll need
thrombolytic medications
(clot-busting medications) like tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). You may need surgery (usually a
mechanical thrombectomy
) to break up and remove the clot. Your providers may also give you medications to manage your blood pressure.
Get emergency treatment right away if you think you’re having a stroke. Providers can only use some treatments (like tPA) within a certain amount of time after a stroke starts.
Your providers will tell you exactly which treatments are best for you and what to expect.
Middle cerebral artery stroke rehabilitation
Stroke rehab is an important part of stroke treatment. You’ll need rehab to help you adjust to changes in your brain and body after a stroke. You may need to regain abilities you had before or adjust to new or different disabilities. You might need a combination of:
Cognitive rehab
to help improve your memory, concentration and other mental abilities.
Speech therapy
to regain or improve your language and speaking abilities and control the muscles that help you talk, breathe, eat and swallow.
Occupational therapy
to help you safely complete your daily tasks, especially chores or activities that need precise body movements.
Physical therapy
to strengthen your muscles, improve your balance and regain the use of your arms and legs.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy after an MCA stroke?
It’s hard for experts to estimate an accurate MCA stroke survival rate. A stroke can be fatal, cause permanent disabilities and affect how long you live (your life expectancy). But there’s no one standard recovery timeline or outlook that’s accurate for everyone.
Middle cerebral artery stroke prognosis
What you can expect (the prognosis) after an MCA stroke depends on a few factors, including:
How quickly it was treated
Your overall health
Your age
Most people take at least a few months to recover. Your provider will tell you what to expect. They’ll help you set recovery goals and expectations that fit your unique health and situation.
Prevention
Can you prevent a middle cerebral artery stroke?
Maintaining your overall health is the best way to reduce your risk of an MCA stroke. In general, try to:
Quit smoking
.
Manage your blood pressure, cholesterol and any health conditions you have.
Eat plenty of healthy foods and maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Get regular physical activity.
Visit a healthcare provider every year (or as often as they suggest). Many of the health conditions that can cause MCA strokes develop or build up over time. Some don’t cause symptoms you can feel or notice. For example, many people with high cholesterol or high blood pressure never sense anything wrong before they’re diagnosed. Your provider will help you catch and manage any warning signs before they increase your risk of a stroke.
Advertisement
Living With
Recovering and rehabbing after a stroke is hard work. Once you and your provider finalize your treatment plan, follow it as closely as possible. In general, you should:
Take your medications.
Taking your medicine as often as your provider instructs will help your body heal.
Go to your rehab and other therapy appointments.
Tell your therapists if anything makes you feel unsafe or uncomfortable. Rehab is hard work, but you shouldn’t be in constant pain or discomfort.
Remember your mental health.
Depression
and
anxiety
are extremely common after a stroke. You’re not weak or a quitter for feeling sad or upset. Your emotional health can be just as important as how your physical body is doing. Talk to your provider or a mental health professional if you feel like you need help processing anything during your recovery.
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) if you think you’re experiencing stroke symptoms again. Another stroke has an even higher risk of being fatal or causing severe complications. Don’t wait to call for help.
People who’ve had a stroke have an increased risk of other potentially serious complications, including:
Pulmonary embolism
Heart attack
Seizures
Pneumonia
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Call emergency services or go to the ER if you think you’re experiencing any symptoms of these complications.
Which questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Which medications will I need and how do I take them?
Which kinds of rehab will I need?
What’s my risk of another stroke in the future?
Are there any support services or resources you recommend?
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between an MCA stroke and an ACA stroke?
MCA and ACA strokes are both strokes. The difference is which blood vessel in your brain they affect. The MCA is your middle cerebral artery. It’s divided into branches on each side of your brain. Your anterior cerebral artery (ACA) is closer to the front of your skull. “Anterior” is the medical term for front or front-facing. Unlike MCA strokes, ACA strokes may affect your ability to control and use your legs.
Both of these strokes can share causes and symptoms, and both can be fatal. You won’t be able to tell the difference between them until a healthcare provider identifies which blood vessel is blocked or damaged with imaging tests. Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) immediately if you think you’re experiencing any kind of stroke symptoms.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The middle cerebral artery (MCA) is one of the biggest pipelines that bring fresh blood to your brain. That’s why a stroke that blocks it can be so harmful. But you can recover. And you’re still you, even if you have to adjust to a new disability or re-learn some movements that used to be second nature.
Rehabbing after any kind of stroke is hard work. Some days may feel easier than others, but remember to celebrate all of your progress. Small wins are still wins. Talk to your providers or therapists about how your recovery is going. They’re there to support you, even if it’s just to help you reflect on how far you’ve come when you’re having a tough day.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
After a stroke, it’s essential to get treated right away. Cleveland Clinic’s stroke care specialists can help you manage recovery and improve your quality of life.
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/19/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment