Adenomas: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Adenomas
Advertisement
Advertisement
Adenomas
Adenomas are noncancerous tumors. They grow in the tissue that lines your glands and organs. If your adenoma is small, your healthcare provider may use a “watch-and-wait” approach. Larger adenomas may require surgery. The outlook is good with treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What are adenomas?
An adenoma (pronounced “add-a-NO-muh”) is a
benign (noncancerous) tumor
. Adenomas start in
epithelial tissue
, the tissue that covers your organs and glands. These tumors grow slowly and look like small mushrooms with stalks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Adenomas are a type of polyp. In fact, another name for an adenoma is an adenomatous polyp.
By definition, adenomas are noncancerous. But they can sometimes turn into
cancer
, especially larger ones. It’s important for a healthcare provider to monitor adenomas and treat them if necessary.
Types of adenomas
Adenomas most commonly grow along your glandular organs. Glandular organs produce and release chemicals called hormones.
Hormones
regulate many of your body’s functions.
There are many types of adenomas, including:
Adrenal adenomas
: These form your adrenal glands.
Colon adenomas (a type of
colon polyp
)
: Colon adenomas grow along the lining of your colon. Cauliflower-like adenomatous polyps larger than 10 millimeters are called advanced adenomas.
Parathyroid adenomas
: These growths appear on your parathyroid glands. They cause an overproduction of
parathyroid hormone
.
Pituitary adenomas
: These may be microadenomas (smaller than 1 centimeter) or macroadenomas (larger than 1 centimeter).
Pleomorphic adenomas
: These growths form in your salivary glands.
Sebaceous adenomas
: These grow along your oil-producing glands.
Adenomas can be functioning or nonfunctioning. A functioning adenoma secretes excess hormones. A nonfunctioning adenoma doesn’t produce hormones at all. If you have a nonfunctioning adenoma, you might not have any noticeable symptoms.
Advertisement
Adenoma categorization
Healthcare providers categorize adenomas based on how they grow. An adenoma can be:
Tubular
: Grows in a round or oval shape and is most common in small adenomas measuring less than 0.5 inches (1.27 centimeters).
Villous
: Grows in a shaggy, cauliflower-like pattern and is most common in larger adenomas.
Tubulovillous
: A mixture of tubular and villous growth patterns.
Sessile
: Grows in a flattened shape and has a larger base (instead of a stalk-like base).
Serrated
: Has a saw-tooth pattern under a microscope.
Sessile serrated
: A mixture of sessile and serrated growth patterns.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of an adenoma?
Symptoms vary depending on the location. Small adenomas may not cause any symptoms at all.
General adenoma signs and symptoms may include:
Abdominal pain
Fatigue
Headache
Iron-deficiency anemia
Muscle weakness
Nausea
or
vomiting
Rectal bleeding
What causes adenomas?
Adenomas develop when cells in your body grow and divide uncontrollably instead of following your body’s instructions for
programmed cell death
. This is how cancerous tumors form, too. But adenomas are less aggressive than cancer, and they grow more slowly.
Risk factors
Factors that can increase your risk of adenomas include:
Age
. Adults in their 30s or 40s are more likely to develop pituitary adenomas.
Ethnic background
. People of Ashkenazi Jewish descent have a higher risk of adenomas.
Gene variations
. Genetic conditions like
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1)
make adenomas more likely. These types of gene variations are hereditary (inherited from your biological parents).
Genetic diseases
. Some adenoma causes, like
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP
), run in families.
Sex
.
Women
are twice as likely to develop parathyroid adenomas.
What are the complications of adenomas?
Even though adenomas are benign tumors, they can lead to health complications. Some adenomas press on surrounding organs or disrupt hormone production as they grow. The severity of an adenoma can vary depending on its size and location.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are adenomas diagnosed?
To diagnose an adenoma, your healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
and review your medical history. They may also need to take imaging tests, including:
CT scans
MRI scans
PET scans
Your healthcare provider may also order a
biopsy
of the adenoma. During a biopsy, your provider takes a small tissue sample and sends it to a laboratory. The laboratory analyzes the sample and rules out or confirms the presence of an adenoma.
Management and Treatment
How are adenomas treated?
Adenoma treatments include:
Medication
: Your healthcare provider may prescribe medications if an adenoma causes hormone problems.
Surgery
: In general, larger adenomas are more likely to become cancerous. Because of this, healthcare providers usually remove polyps larger than 5 millimeters. They may also recommend surgical removal if the adenoma causes significant health problems.
Active surveillance
: Your provider may recommend a “watch-and-wait” approach if an adenoma is small and doesn’t cause any health complications.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for people with adenomas?
If you receive treatment for an adenoma, the outlook is typically very good. Many types of adenomas respond well to treatment and don’t turn into cancer.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can adenomas be prevented?
Adenomas aren’t always preventable because you can’t always control the risk factors. But you can improve your chances of staying healthy by getting regular
cancer screenings
. If you have a higher risk of developing an adenoma, ask your healthcare provider how often you should get screenings.
You can also support your overall health by:
Avoiding
smoking
Eating plenty of fruits, vegetables and whole grains
Increasing physical activity
Limiting alcohol intake
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Some adenomas, like ones in the
colon
, carry a higher risk of cancer. It’s important to seek treatment right away if you think you have an adenoma. Having a
colonoscopy
when your provider recommends it can catch adenomas while they’re small.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you have an adenoma or are prone to them, here are some questions you might want to ask your healthcare provider:
How often do I need screenings?
What can I do to lower my risk of developing another adenoma?
What symptoms should I watch for?
How does having an adenoma affect my overall health risks?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that you have a growth can be scary. “Is it cancerous?” is probably your first question. Adenomas aren’t cancer, and they usually don’t turn into cancer. But cancer screenings and preventive care, like surgical removal, can reduce your risk for future problems. Ask your healthcare provider for more information.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hormonal conditions can be tricky to find and complicated to treat. The experts in endocrinology at Cleveland Clinic are here to provide the best care.
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/04/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials