Macular Hole: Symptoms, Causes, & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Macular Hole
Advertisement
Advertisement
Macular Hole
A macular hole is a full-thickness defect in your macula, part of your retina. If this happens, you may have problems seeing clearly, especially in your central field of vision. Surgery to treat a macular hole has high success rates if the hole is small.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Retinal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Macular Hole
What is a macular hole?
A macular hole is an actual hole or full-thickness defect in the
macula
of your eye, the central part of your
retina
. Your retina is the part of your
eye
that contains nerve cells that react to light and allow you to see. A macular hole generally happens in just one eye, but it can happen in both eyes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In the middle of the retina (the macula), the nerve cells are very close together. Sometimes, the jelly-like substance that fills your eye — the
vitreous humor
— changes its consistency and, as it shrinks, it can pull on the central macula and cause a macular hole to form. A macular hole can affect your
vision
in a variety of ways, but it mainly affects your central vision (the things that you can see in the center of your visual field). It affects activities like driving and reading.
How common is this condition?
One U.S. study indicates that the number of new cases of macular hole is 7.8 people per 100,000 people per year. It's more common in
women
. It happens much more often in people aged 55 and over, but it can happen to anyone.
Are there types of macular holes?
There are primary and secondary macular holes. A primary macular hole is one that develops without any
eye injury
and isn’t due to another medical condition. A secondary macular hole is one that occurs with or due to another disease or condition, such as trauma or eye inflammation (
uveitis
).
There are a couple of ways that ophthalmologists may classify macular holes. These are called staging systems. One system uses four stages, with the first stage being the least severe and the fourth being the most severe. A newer system has three stages based on the results of imaging tests. Your eye care provider will give you information on how severe your macular hole is.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
A macular hole is a gap in the macula, which is the center of the retina of your eye.
What are the symptoms of a macular hole?
The early symptoms of a macular hole include:
Blurred vision
.
Distorted vision. Straight lines might be curvy or wavy.
Difficulty reading small print.
A later sign of a macular hole is a dark or blind spot in the center of your vision.
If any of these symptoms occur, it’s important to make an appointment with your
eye care provider
as soon as possible.
What causes a macular hole?
In most people, macular holes are due to vitreous traction that’s more likely to happen with
aging
. Sometimes a macular hole is the result of an injury or a medical condition that affects the eye, including being very
nearsighted
.
You may be more likely to develop a macular hole if you have:
A very high degree of myopia (nearsightedness).
Inflammation within your eye (uveitis).
Eye trauma (
injury
).
What are risk factors for developing a macular hole?
Risk factors for macular holes include:
Aging.
Female sex.
History of eye trauma.
Being very nearsighted.
Previous
eye surgeries
or eye inflammation.
What are the complications of a macular hole?
An untreated macular hole may lead to these complications:
A loss of
vision
, especially central vision.
A macular-hole-associated
retinal detachment
.
Increased size of the macular hole.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a macular hole diagnosed?
Your eye care provider will begin by asking you about your family and medical history. You’ll want to tell them about any type of medication — prescription and over-the-counter (OTC) drugs — that you take. Your provider will then do a complete
eye exam
, which will include a
slit lamp exam
. Your provider will put eye drops in your eyes to make your pupils larger and allow for retina examination.
What tests will be done to diagnose a macular hole?
Your ophthalmologist will probably order one or more of these tests to examine your retinas:
Optical coherence tomography
.
Fundus
fluorescence angiography
(also called fluorescein angiography).
Fundus photography
.
Management and Treatment
How is a macular hole treated?
The most common treatment for macular holes is a procedure called a
vitrectomy
. A vitrectomy is a surgery during which a retina specialist removes the vitreous gel of your eye. Your surgeon, an
ophthalmologist
trained in retina surgery, may also remove any bits of tissue (membranes) that may be putting tension on your macula.
Your surgeon will put a sterile gas into your eye to keep pressure on the hole until it heals. You may have to stay in a facedown position for one to seven days to keep the bubble in place so the hole will close.
If you have a small hole, your retina specialist may suggest watching and waiting rather than treating it. Sometimes an early-stage macular hole will close on its own.
What are the complications of a vitrectomy for a macular hole?
Possible complications of a vitrectomy may include:
Retinal detachment.
Infection.
Glaucoma
.
Bleeding.
The macular hole reopening or never closing.
Cataracts
are expected to progress in any person who’s having retina surgery.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
If you have a vitrectomy, you may need to spend up to a week with your head down to keep the gas bubble in the correct position. The gas bubble lasts three to eight weeks, and your vision remains blurry while the gas bubble’s in your eye. It may take several months for your vision to improve and stabilize.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Retinal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a macular hole?
The success rate for vitrectomy surgeries is over 90%. The surgery is most successful when the hole is smaller and more recent. You may regain most or some of your lost vision.
When can I go back to work or school?
You’ll need to take some time away from work or school. The length of time may vary depending on the type of work you do. Ask your surgeon about what you need to do or to avoid doing after the procedure.
You probably won’t be able to drive for six to eight weeks, and you won’t be able to fly for about that long, either. It takes this long for your body to absorb the gas. Changes in air pressure may make the bubble in your eye get bigger and dangerously increase the pressure in the eye. Avoid any type of activity that involves changes in air pressure.
What is the outlook for a macular hole?
If you get treatment sooner, or if the hole is small, your prognosis (outlook) is good.
Without treatment, you may lose much of your central vision, but you’ll retain your
peripheral
(side) vision.
Prevention
Can a macular hole be prevented?
There’s no way to prevent a macular hole. You may reduce your risk by:
Using protective eye coverings when working or participating in contact sports.
Having regular eye examinations. This may not prevent a macular hole, but your provider will be able to find a macular hole earlier if you follow a recommended exam schedule.
Taking care of your eyes and managing your blood sugar levels, if you have
diabetes
, and your blood pressure, if you have
hypertension.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Everyone should get regular eye appointments. Apart from these, see your eye care provider any time you notice a change in your vision. If you experience extreme pain, or if you have a
sudden loss of vision
, go to an emergency room.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider about a macular hole?
If you have a macular hole, you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of treatment do you recommend?
What are the side effects or complications related to this treatment?
Will the macular hole happen again?
How can I take care of my eyesight?
Will I still be able to drive?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Eyes are fragile and important. Knowing that you have an eye condition like a macular hole may cause anxiety. Surgery to treat a macular hole is typically successful, and the odds are better when your provider can find the hole when it’s recent and small. That’s one reason to see your eye care provider on a regular basis.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your eyes are one of your most important senses. If something goes wrong, it can change your world. Cleveland Clinic can help treat all types of retinal disease.
Retinal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/12/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment