What Is a Medical Emergency?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Medical Emergency
Advertisement
Advertisement
Medical Emergency
Medical emergencies are illnesses or events that need professional medical care as soon as possible. Without it, there’s a risk of permanent effects like losing an ability, permanent damage to part of your body or even death. You should call your local emergency services number if you or someone you’re with experience one.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
What is a medical emergency?
A medical emergency is a health condition or situation that needs immediate medical attention. Without professional medical care right away, it could lead to outcomes like permanent disability or even death.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Depending on where you live, “medical emergency” might have a specific legal definition. In the U.S., the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) defines medical emergencies. They’re conditions with acute symptoms severe enough to result in:
Placing health in serious jeopardy
. This includes conditions that might make a person a danger to themselves or others. It also applies to conditions that endanger the health of a pregnant
woman
and/or the fetus they carry.
Serious impairment of bodily functions
. That means the condition could disrupt your body’s ability to do certain things. An example would be losing your ability to see.
Serious dysfunction in bodily organs or parts
. Dysfunction like this means the affected organ or part no longer works correctly (or at all). An example would be losing part or all of a limb.
What are some examples of medical emergencies?
The average person can’t diagnose a medical condition. But people may recognize symptoms of a possible emergency. Some of the most common emergency symptoms include:
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
), poop (especially dark blood, known as
melena
) or
vomiting blood
Dislocated
bones or joints
Fever
at or above 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius)
Infections, especially when they turn into
gangrene
or show signs of spreading
Pain in specific places, like
chest pain (angina)
, especially when severe
Severe
diarrhea
or
vomiting
, especially when they could lead to
dehydration
Severe pain in other places, like your
abdomen
or
head
Severe swelling, especially around your
airway
or
eyes
Sudden vision loss
Trouble breathing (dyspnea)
Unexpected passing out or fainting (
syncope
)
Weakness or
paralysis
on one side (
hemiplegia
or
hemiparesis
), in specific body parts or with a possible
spinal cord injury
Advertisement
Symptoms can also be medical emergencies if providers need to rule out dangerous conditions or complications. An example would be needing emergency care if you have symptoms that can happen with both
migraines
or stroke.
What conditions count as medical emergencies?
Appendicitis
Asthma attacks
(when they don’t respond to rescue medications)
Deep vein thrombosis
(because it can cause a
pulmonary embolism
or stroke)
Eye trauma
Heart attacks
Irregular heart rhythms (
arrhythmias
)
Mental health emergencies, like
thoughts of harming yourself
or others
Ovarian
or
testicular torsion
(twisting)
Poisoning
Priapism
Strokes
and
transient ischemic attacks (TIAs)
Seizures
, including any first-time seizure, seizures lasting over five minutes or back-to-back seizures without recovering between (
status epilepticus
)
Sepsis
Severe allergic reactions, like
anaphylaxis
Substance use-related emergencies like overdoses or withdrawal-related effects
Trauma and injuries, like
broken bones
, or wounds that are large or have
severe bleeding
Vision-related emergencies, like
detached
or
torn retinas
Conditions also don’t have to be life-threatening to be medical emergencies. An example is
cauda equina syndrome
, where you have leg tingling or numbness and need tests to check if you’re in danger of paralysis.
What should I do if I have symptoms or a condition that indicates a medical emergency?
If you think you or someone you’re with is having a medical emergency, call your local emergency services number immediately. Examples include 911 in the United States, 999 in the United Kingdom and 112 in the UK or European Union. You shouldn’t try to drive yourself or others having a medical emergency to a hospital or emergency room. The reasons why include:
Expertise and training
. If your emergency condition suddenly takes a turn for the worse on the way to a hospital, first responders can help you. They have the training and equipment to try to stabilize you during transport.
Travel safety
. Many emergency medical conditions can make you pass out or experience other dangerous effects. If you’re behind the wheel and those effects happen, you could become a danger to yourself or others around you.
Travel speed
. Emergency vehicles like ambulances can go faster regardless of speed limits, traffic lights and more.
Treatment timing
. First responders can start assessing your situation on the way to the nearest medical facility. They may start some early treatments like intravenous (IV) lines or oxygen. They can also call ahead and tell the hospital providers your symptoms and vital signs. That can speed up diagnosis and treatment.
Advertisement
Can I go to an urgent care or a clinic if I have a medical emergency?
No, urgent care and medical clinics aren’t emergency facilities. They can handle less severe but still urgent, conditions. But if the condition is too severe for them to treat, they’ll call emergency services to get you immediate transport to a hospital.
You can
choose an urgent care
for conditions that need treatment soon, but that aren’t an emergency. That includes minor broken bones or stitching larger — but still simple — wounds. They can’t treat severe symptoms or conditions, especially ones that might indicate a life-threatening issue. So, when in doubt, it’s best to err on the side of caution and call your local emergency services so they can take you to the nearest emergency room.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you or someone you’re with might be having a medical emergency, take a deep breath and do your best to stay calm. When in doubt, the safest thing to do is to call 911 or your local emergency services number. You may feel worried about how healthcare providers will react if it turns out not to be an emergency, but their job isn't to judge you. And acting quickly could make all the difference.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider