Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillators (ICDs)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD)
An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is a device that monitors your heart and treats abnormal heart rhythms when needed. It’s surgically placed under your skin and connects to your heart with thin wires (leads). The battery-powered device can deliver an electric shock to correct life-threatening arrhythmias and treat sudden cardiac arrest.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is a device that treats life-threatening heart rhythms (arrhythmias).
What is an implantable cardioverter defibrillator?
An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is a device that fixes life-threatening irregular heart rhythms (
arrhythmias
). It constantly monitors your
heart
. If it senses that your rhythm is one of the abnormal, life-threatening ones, it sends an electrical shock to your heart to correct it. Many ICDs have a built-in
pacemaker
, too.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A surgeon places an ICD under the skin on your chest. It has a pulse generator and a thin wire called a lead. You may have more than one lead if the ICD is also meant to function as a pacemaker. The pulse generator is about the size of a stopwatch. It contains a battery and electrical circuits that read your
heart’s electrical activity
. The leads go into your
heart chambers
to monitor your rhythm and deliver a shock if need be.
A subcutaneous ICD is a different type of ICD. It has a thin wire that travels under your skin to the outside of your heart. Its purpose is to deliver a shock to correct dangerous heart rhythms if they occur.
ICDs can:
Correct dangerous arrhythmias
Prevent
sudden cardiac arrest
Record info about your heart’s function to help your
cardiologist
recommend treatments
Other names for an ICD include:
Automatic implantable cardiac defibrillator (AICD)
Internal cardiac defibrillator
“Shock box”
You may need an ICD if you’re at high risk of sudden cardiac death from an abnormal heart rhythm. Conditions that can cause this include:
Previous sudden
heart attack
or
cardiac arrest
Ventricular tachycardia
Ventricular fibrillation
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Brugada syndrome
Certain types of
congenital heart disease
Long QT syndrome
, in certain cases
Advertisement
Procedure Details
How should I prepare for an ICD procedure?
Before you get an implantable cardiac defibrillator, your healthcare provider may ask you to:
Get
blood tests
,
urine tests
and an
electrocardiogram
to ensure you’re healthy enough for the procedure
Get an echocardiogram to understand why you may need an ICD
Tell them if you have any
blood disorders
or take
blood thinners
Report any
allergies
to contrast dye or iodine
Tell them if you have
asthma
,
diabetes
,
kidney disease
or any other medical conditions
Fast for several hours before the procedure (not eat or drink anything except water)
What happens during an ICD procedure?
The type of procedure you have depends on your health and other treatments you need at the same time.
The transvenous approach is the most common for ICD implantation. It involves a small incision (cut) near your
collarbone
. Your healthcare provider threads the leads through
veins
to get to your heart. In some cases, implantation requires
open-heart surgery
.
ICD implantation processes can vary widely. But in general, your provider will:
Give you
local anesthesia
with an injection to numb the skin near your collarbone, or they may give you
general anesthesia
through an IV to put you to sleep
Make an incision near your collarbone, chest or abdomen (belly)
Access your
subclavian vein
and put the wires into your heart chambers
Place the ICD under your skin
Connect the lead to your heart and the ICD
Test the device and the wires to ensure they’re connected correctly and working well
Close the incision
Test the system again before sending you to recovery
The procedure typically takes a couple of hours.
What are the advantages of this procedure?
An ICD can treat life-threatening arrhythmias and sudden cardiac arrest. It can also provide important information about your heart to your cardiologist.
What are the risks or complications of this procedure?
ICD implantation is generally safe. But as with any surgery, the procedure comes with risks, including:
Bleeding or
bruising
Collapsed lung
(pneumothorax)
Damage to
blood vessels
from the leads
Device malfunction
Device-related infection
Infection of the
incision site
Movement of the device, which can tear internal tissue
Swelling
Shocks in response to other rhythms that aren’t life-threatening
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after this procedure?
After ICD implantation, you may feel tired and sore, especially near the incision. Your healthcare provider may suggest
pain medications
to make you more comfortable.
Many people go home the day after surgery. Depending on your health and the type of procedure you had, you may have to stay in the hospital for a few days.
Before you go home, your healthcare provider may test the ICD system again.
How many shocks will an ICD deliver?
Most people need only one shock to restore a normal heart rhythm. But you may get two or more shocks in 24 hours. Your provider can adjust the frequency and intensity of shocks depending on the situation.
You should let your provider know if you have any shocks.
It could mean you’re having a cardiac emergency or that the ICD isn’t functioning properly.
Advertisement
What should I know about living with an ICD?
If you have an ICD, carry a card in your purse or wallet to alert emergency personnel. This will help them care for you if you have a medical emergency and can’t communicate.
Similarly, you should tell all your healthcare providers about your ICD. This includes
dentists
and imaging technicians. They may use equipment that can interfere with an ICD’s function.
What should I avoid with an ICD?
Strong magnetic fields and some technology can interfere with an ICD’s function. Ask your healthcare provider if you should avoid or minimize:
Antitheft systems at retail stores and metal detectors at airports
Arc welding equipment
Cellphones (keep yours at least 6 inches away from your ICD)
Citizen’s band (CB) radios and amateur “ham” radios
Electric fences, like invisible fences for pets
Jumper cables and portable car battery chargers
Machinery that contains magnets, like those that lift vehicles in a junkyard
MRI machines
Powerful stereo speakers
Some medical alert systems
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Tell your healthcare provider if you develop any signs of infection, like:
Bleeding or other fluids (like
pus
) coming from the incision
Fever
or
chills
Pain that’s getting worse or isn’t getting better with time
Redness or swelling that doesn’t improve
Get medical help immediately if you receive several shocks from your ICD in a short time.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What does an ICD shock feel like?
An ICD can be programmed to give low-energy or high-energy shocks. A low-energy shock can feel like a flutter or thump in your chest. High-energy shocks can be painful for a moment, like a blow to the chest.
How long does an implantable cardioverter defibrillator last?
ICD batteries last up to seven years. But this can vary depending on how often you’re receiving shocks. Your healthcare provider should check your ICD every three to six months.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Heart problems that put you at risk for sudden cardiac arrest can be scary. The good news is that an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) may help protect your heart and life. Your healthcare provider will talk you through the procedure and what having an ICD is like.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart rhythm is out of sync, the experts at Cleveland Clinic can find out why. We offer personalized care for all types of arrhythmias.
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Get Arrhythmia Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment