Male Breast Cancer: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Male Breast Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Male Breast Cancer
Male breast cancer develops in breast tissue. Your chest contains undeveloped milk ducts and other tissue where cancer can grow. Without treatment, it can spread throughout your body. Symptoms include a firm, painless lump on one side of your chest. Treatment includes surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, hormone therapy and targeted therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Male Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Male Breast Cancer?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Male Breast Cancer?
Ductal carcinoma, which forms in your breast ducts, is the most common form of male breast cancer.
Male breast cancer is a rare form of
cancer
that grows in the breast tissue in your chest. When most people think of
breast cancer
, they typically think of
women
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But males also have
breast
tissue that can become cancerous. One out of every 100 breast cancer diagnoses affects males. About
2,800
males in the U.S. receive this diagnosis each year.
Because it’s so rare, it can be easy to dismiss a lump in your breast as no big deal if you’re male. But it’s important to get all suspicious lumps checked by a healthcare provider.
Types of male breast cancer
Cancer is most likely to form in your breast ducts. Ducts are tubes that connect glands called lobules to your nipple. The types of male breast cancer are:
Ductal carcinoma
. Up to
9 out of 10
male breast cancers are
invasive ductal carcinoma
. Cancer starts in your breast ducts and spreads to other parts of your breast.
Ductal carcinoma in situ
is less common. With this type, the cancer starts in your breast ducts but doesn’t spread beyond them.
Lobular carcinoma
. With
invasive lobular carcinoma
, cancer forms in the lobules of your breast. Like invasive ductal carcinoma, lobular breast cancer can spread. This type is uncommon, though, because males have few, if any, lobules.
Breast cancer cells can have receptors on them that cause them to grow in response to specific
hormones
. Think of a receptor as a lock that fits a specific key (hormone). When the hormone attaches to the receptor, cancer cells divide and multiply. Most male breast cancers have receptors that cause cancer cells to grow in response to
progesterone
and
estrogen
.
Advertisement
The most common form of breast cancer in males is
estrogen receptor-positive (ER+)
invasive ductal carcinoma.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of male breast cancer
The first sign of male breast cancer is often a firm, painless
lump
in one of your breasts. Usually, it’s behind a nipple. Other
signs and symptoms
include:
A lump in your armpit
Skin on your chest that looks
dimpled or pitted
, like the skin of an orange
Red, flaky or scaly
skin
on your chest or near your nipple
Pain or tenderness in your chest or underarm
Clear or bloody
nipple discharge
or an
inverted nipple
(a nipple that’s sunken inward)
Male breast cancer causes
Male breast cancer happens when the
DNA
inside breast cells changes, or mutates. The mutated cells start multiplying rapidly and don’t die. Eventually, the cancer cells form masses called
tumors
. Parts of the tumor may break off and spread to other body parts through your
lymphatic system
or bloodstream. Cancer that’s spread is called
metastatic
cancer.
Scientists continue to research what causes healthy cells to transform into cancer cells in the first place.
Risk factors
Several risk factors may increase your breast cancer risk, including:
Age
. Most people diagnosed are in their 60s.
Biological family history
. You’re at greater risk if you have a parent, sibling or child with breast or ovarian cancer. This is because certain
breast cancer genes
run in families.
Genes
.
Genetic mutations
increase your breast cancer risk. These include
BRCA1
and (especially)
BRCA2
mutations. Less common mutations occur in
Cowden syndrome
(
PTEN
gene),
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
(
TP53
) and
Lynch syndrome
(
MMR
gene).
High estrogen levels
. Conditions that raise your estrogen include
cirrhosis of the liver
,
obesity
and a genetic disorder called
Klinefelter syndrome
. Alcohol use can also raise your levels.
Testicular issues
. Your risk increases if you’ve had surgery to remove a testicle (
orchiectomy
), an injury or a condition involving your testicles. These include having inflamed testicles (
orchitis
) or
undescended testicles
.
Radiation therapy
. You’re more likely to develop breast cancer if you’ve had prior
radiation therapy
directed at your chest.
How to lower your risk
Get
genetic testing
if you likely have a gene mutation that increases your cancer risk. A family history of breast or ovarian cancer is a clue that the
BRCA2
mutation may be in your genes. Not only does it cause breast cancer, but this mutation can also lead to
melanoma
,
pancreatic cancer
and
prostate cancer
.
A healthcare provider can help you decide if you’d benefit from genetic testing.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and risk factors. Providers perform various tests to diagnose male breast cancer, including:
Breast exam
. Your provider will examine your breast tissue. They’ll check for skin changes, lumps or other abnormalities.
Imaging tests
.
Mammograms
can find most male breast cancers. Your provider may also perform an
ultrasound
before or after the mammogram to give more information about the tumor.
Biopsy
. Your provider will perform a
biopsy
to look for cancer cells in your breast tissue. This involves removing tissue from the tumor and sending it to a lab for testing.
If the cells are cancerous,
pathologists
in the lab will check for hormone receptors and the HER2 receptor. (HER2 is a protein that fuels cancer growth.) The results will help your provider plan treatment.
Advertisement
Stages of male breast cancer
After diagnosing breast cancer, healthcare providers stage it.
Staging
uses information like tumor size and location to figure out how advanced the disease is. At this point, you may need more imaging tests and a
sentinel node biopsy
. For this procedure, your provider removes one or more
lymph nodes
near a tumor and tests them for cancer cells.
The stages of male breast cancer are:
Stage 0
. Cancer cells are only in your breast ducts. Stage 0 breast cancer is another name for ductal carcinoma in situ.
Stage I
. The tumor is small and hasn’t spread to your lymph nodes.
Stage II
. The tumor is larger than in stage I. It may have spread to a few of the lymph nodes in your armpit (axillary lymph nodes).
Stage III
. Cancer has spread to several lymph nodes, and the tumor may be larger. Cancer cells may also be in your chest wall or skin.
Stage IV
. Cancer cells have spread to other parts of your body. In male breast cancer, the most common locations for cancer spread are your
bones
,
lungs
and
liver
.
Management and Treatment
How is male breast cancer treated?
Your treatment depends on the cancer type and stage. You’ll likely need a combination of treatments that follow a timeline that your provider will explain to you.
Surgery
Breast cancer surgery
is the most common treatment for early-stage male breast cancer. Surgery to remove your entire breast (
mastectomy
) is more common than surgery to remove the lump only (
lumpectomy
).
Advertisement
A radical mastectomy removes all of your breast tissue. It removes the
lymph nodes in your armpit
and some chest muscle, too. But it’s more common to get a modified radical mastectomy. This procedure doesn’t remove muscle tissue or as many lymph nodes.
Radiation
Radiation for breast cancer
uses X-rays or other energy sources to kill cancer cells. Radiation usually follows a lumpectomy to kill any remaining cancer cells. It’s possible for surgery to miss small tumor cells close to your chest wall or skin. But radiation can destroy what’s left, so tumors don’t grow back.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy
uses
drugs
to kill cancer cells throughout your body. For local tumors (those that haven’t spread), you may get chemo before surgery to shrink tumors. Or you may need radiation and chemo after surgery to reduce the chance that a tumor will grow back or come back somewhere else in the body. You won’t receive treatments at the same time, but rather one after the other.
Hormone therapy
Providers use
hormone therapy
to lower estrogen levels or block their effects. You’ll likely get this treatment if the cancer cells use hormones, like estrogen, to grow.
Tamoxifen
is a common medication used to treat male breast cancer. Other medicines that keep hormones from fueling cancer growth in males are
aromatase inhibitors
combined with
gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) agonists.
Advertisement
Targeted therapy
Targeted therapy
treatments interfere with processes that allow cancer cells to grow. Targeted treatments only work on specific types of cancer cells. For example, some treatments only work on breast cancers with hormone receptors. Others, like
PARP inhibitors
, work on cancer cells with
BRCA
gene mutations.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a provider if you have an unexplained lump in your chest that doesn’t go away within two weeks. Follow your healthcare provider’s advice about how often you need
cancer screenings
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Male Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have male breast cancer?
The biggest factors that affect your
prognosis
(outlook) are the cancer type and stage. The survival rate is higher for early-stage cancers.
A recent
study
tracked the mortality (death) rate of males diagnosed with breast cancer based on cancer stage. All had hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer. Within 20 years of diagnosis, researchers found that:
Stage I
: 12.4% had died of breast cancer.
Stage II
: 26.2% had died of breast cancer.
Stage III
: 46% had died of breast cancer.
Unfortunately, many men delay seeing their provider. So, most aren’t diagnosed until the cancer has already advanced. At this point, it’s much harder to treat.
This is why it’s important to seek care if you notice an unexplained breast lump.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Many men don’t think breast cancer can happen to them. So, they may not recognize the signs. But men can and do get breast cancer. This is why it’s vital to see a provider if something isn’t quite right with your chest tissue. Getting diagnosed and treated in the early stages can save your life. If breast cancer runs in your family, talk to a provider about how to detect cancer in the early stages.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s patient-centered care for breast cancer in men includes the latest diagnosis and treatment — with compassionate support at every step.
Get Male Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials