Infant Mortality
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Infant Mortality
Advertisement
Advertisement
Infant Mortality
Infant mortality is the death of a baby within their first year of life. Pregnancy complications, preterm birth, birth defects, SIDS and accidental injuries are leading causes in the U.S. If you’re coping with a loss, reach out to a healthcare provider or counselor. They can help you work through your feelings and find a way forward.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
What is infant mortality?
Infant mortality is when a baby dies within 12 months of birth. Healthcare providers, researchers and others use this term when discussing the causes of infant death and ways to prevent it. Neonatal mortality is a related term that means a baby dies within 28 days of birth.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Some terms, like infant mortality, have a very specific meaning within healthcare or statistics. But in daily life, such words don’t capture the thoughts, feelings or lived experiences of the people behind the stats. If you’ve lost a baby or know someone who has, you likely don’t say “infant mortality” to describe the situation. It’s a heartbreak. It’s losing part of yourself and not knowing how to move forward.
Infant deaths are a focus of research because providers and others know this situation should never happen. In a perfect world, all babies would have a healthy start and go on to celebrate their first, second and many more birthdays. But so many things affect the health of babies and their families.
Social drivers of health — all the nonmedical things that can affect our health and longevity — are a big part of the story. When you’re
pregnant
and can’t access basic resources like
prenatal care
, you’re automatically fighting against the stream to have a healthy baby. Researchers and healthcare providers are trying to find ways to give everyone a fairer chance at having healthier pregnancies and giving birth to babies who thrive.
What are the causes of infant mortality?
The most common causes of infant mortality in the U.S. today include:
Advertisement
Congenital abnormalities (
birth defects
)
Being born too early (
preterm birth
) and having a
low birth weight
Sudden infant death syndrome (
SIDS
)
Accidental injuries, like car accidents or suffocation
Pregnancy complications
Leading causes among newborns, specifically, include:
Bacterial
sepsis
Respiratory distress syndrome
Congenital heart disease
Hemorrhage
Historical causes of infant mortality
The causes of infant mortality change over time. In the late 1800s, most infant deaths in the U.S. were due to
infectious diseases
like:
Diarrhea
-causing diseases
Diphtheria
Measles
Pneumonia
Influenza (flu)
Scarlet fever
Tuberculosis
Typhoid fever
Whooping cough (pertussis)
By 1920, these diseases didn’t cause nearly as many deaths as they had in the past.
Public health
efforts made a huge difference. For example, water sanitation and pasteurization of cow’s milk played a big role in protecting infants from dangerous infections. Vaccination has played a major role in reducing the prevalence and severity of many infectious diseases, as well.
As public health measures and medical practices continued to improve throughout the 1900s, infectious diseases became less of a threat to infants. In 1900, 61.6% of all infant deaths were due to infectious diseases. By 1998, that number dropped to 2%.
What does IMR mean?
IMR stands for infant mortality rate. Researchers define IMR as the number of infant deaths per 1,000 live births.
Stillbirths
and
miscarriages
aren’t included in IMR.
Researchers calculate the IMR among defined groups of people. For example, they might study death rates among infants born within a specific U.S. state or more broadly within an entire country. Or they might examine the IMR among populations defined by other things like race, ethnicity, income or mother's age.
Infant mortality rates help researchers identify who might need more resources to have a healthy pregnancy and delivery. But these numbers also have an impact beyond pregnancies and births. IMRs shed light on the overall health of broader groups of people. This is because infant mortality doesn’t happen in isolation. Many of the things that can contribute to infant deaths — like access to healthcare and resources — affect everyone in the group.
Researchers use IMRs to find ways to support healthy pregnancies and babies. They also use this data to help develop policies and make changes that affect all of us.
What is the infant mortality rate in the U.S.?
In 2022, the infant mortality rate in the U.S. was 5.6 per 1,000 live births. From 2002 to 2021, the IMR had been dropping. But from 2021 to 2022, the IMR increased.
Research
shows the IMR in the U.S. today is higher than that in most European nations.
Advertisement
Racial and ethnic gaps in infant mortality
Some racial and ethnic groups carry a heavier burden of infant mortality. For example, among non-Hispanic Black people, the infant mortality rate was 10.9 per 1,000 live births in 2022. This was almost twice the national average. Among non-Hispanic American Indians or Alaskan Natives, the rate was 9.1.
These gaps
aren’t new
. For instance, in 1940, the IMR for Black babies was 72.9 while for white babies, it was 43.2. Researchers are working to understand the root causes of these differences. Meanwhile, public health experts are trying to find ways to give all babies an equal chance at survival. Improving access to prenatal care is one key area of focus.
Infant mortality rates by state
Infant mortality varies widely by state. The
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
provides IMR data for each state.
As of 2022, states with some of the highest infant mortality rates include:
Mississippi
South Dakota
Arkansas
Delaware
Louisiana
West Virginia
States with some of the lowest infant mortality rates include:
Massachusetts
New Hampshire
New Jersey
Rhode Island
California
Connecticut
What are infant mortality rates by country?
Infant mortality rates vary widely by country. The
World Bank Group
provides updated IMRs for every country.
As of 2022, the nations with some of the highest infant mortality rates include:
Advertisement
Sierra Leone
Central African Republic
Nigeria
Somalia
Chad
South Sudan
The nations with some of the lowest infant mortality rates include:
Estonia
Japan
Norway
Singapore
Slovenia
Italy
In Sierra Leone, the infant mortality rate was 76 per 1,000 live births. In Japan, the rate was 2 per 1,000 live births. As you can see, the chances of a baby surviving to their first birthday can be very different depending on where they’re born — and, more specifically, the resources available in that area.
How can infant mortality be prevented?
It’s not always possible to prevent infant mortality. Some causes are out of anyone’s control — including healthcare providers with the best technology. But we know that pregnancy care can make a big difference.
Not everyone has the same access to care and related resources. This is a problem that requires the constant, dedicated efforts of researchers, policymakers and others to solve. Ideally, the U.S. and other nations can remove barriers to care. This means everyone has access to the resources they need to support their health and the health of their children.
If possible, you can improve the odds of a healthy pregnancy and baby by:
Seeing a
healthcare provider
regularly before becoming pregnant to manage any underlying conditions
Attending
prenatal appointments
according to the timeline your provider recommends
Following your provider’s guidance for what to do or
avoid
while pregnant
Making your baby a safe sleep environment to
lower your baby’s risk of SIDS
Following
car seat safety
guidelines
Advertisement
Providers will check your baby for health issues right after they’re born. Routine
newborn care in the hospital
can catch issues early and help your baby get quick treatment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Infant mortality isn’t easy to talk about or think about. The topic can stir up many emotions — from fear or anxiety to grief. If you’ve experienced a loss, you may be trying to find answers. If you’re coming to this topic simply to learn more, you may feel compelled to find ways to make a difference.
No matter your personal story, it may help to know that public health experts are working hard every day to reduce infant mortality. No family should have to suffer the loss of their baby. The more knowledge we gain, the better we’ll be able to support families and give all babies a chance at a healthy start.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us