Multiple Chemical Sensitivity: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Multiple Chemical Sensitivity
Advertisement
Advertisement
Multiple Chemical Sensitivity
Multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS) is a proposed name for a variety of symptoms that seem to happen after exposure to small amounts of certain substances. Symptoms could include difficulty breathing, trouble focusing, shaking, sweating, heart palpitations and more. But some experts suggest that other conditions, not MCS, cause these symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Overview
What is multiple chemical sensitivity?
Multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS) is a proposed name for a set of symptoms that seem to happen after exposure to small amounts of various substances. These could be anything from air freshener to ink. Symptoms vary from person to person but often include issues that affect your breathing and ability to focus. You may also feel tired or achy. You might hear multiple chemical sensitivity called idiopathic environmental intolerance.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It’s common for things like scents, smoke and workplace chemicals to trigger
asthma
, headaches or other medical conditions. But for some people, even a small amount of certain substances seem to trigger long-lasting symptoms. These can be so severe that they keep you from seeing friends, working or enjoying hobbies.
These symptoms are real. But healthcare providers may have a hard time pinpointing the cause. The American Academy of Allergy and Immunology and the American Medical Association don’t currently recognize multiple chemical sensitivity as a diagnosis. But your provider wants you to feel better. They may suggest ways to manage your symptoms or avoid things that could trigger them.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of multiple chemical sensitivity
The symptoms attributed to multiple chemical sensitivity vary. They generally involve more than one body system — for instance, you might have both heart palpitations and difficulty focusing. The symptoms can be similar to other long-term conditions, like
chronic fatigue syndrome
,
fibromyalgia
and
irritable bowel syndrome
.
Common symptoms include:
Generally feeling unwell
Feeling of pins and needles in the skin (
paresthesia
)
Chest/throat tightness
Difficulty breathing
Nausea
Heart palpitations
Shaking
Sweating
Weakness
Trouble with focusing or memory (“
brain fog
”)
Impending sense of doom
Feeling like you may faint
Desire to escape a situation
Advertisement
Multiple chemical sensitivity causes
There’s no doubt that certain substances around your house or at work can irritate your skin or your
airways
. But experts disagree about whether low levels of these substances could cause the symptoms people report. And scientific studies haven’t been able to prove it, either.
Some experts think it’s more likely a combination of environmental and psychological factors, like
anxiety
. Others have theorized that a strong sense of smell or an
immune system
response might have something to do with it.
Common substances thought to be associated with multiple chemical sensitivity include:
Air fresheners/deodorizers
Cleaning products
Deodorants, perfumes and colognes
Cigars and cigarette
smoke
Asphalt pavement and fumes from tar
Diesel and gasoline fumes
Nail polish and nail polish remover
Varnish, shellac and lacquer
Paint thinner
Pen, newspaper or magazine ink
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose multiple chemical sensitivity
Not all providers recognize MCS as an official diagnosis. There aren’t any specific tests for it. Tests of organ function usually come back normal, which makes it difficult to pinpoint health issues.
Your provider will listen to your symptoms. They may ask you about your health history and whether you work with any specific chemicals or irritants. They’ll likely have you get routine blood tests. Depending on your symptoms, your primary care provider might refer you to one or more specialists.
Additional testing might include:
Allergy tests
Lung function tests
Neurological exam
Management and Treatment
How do you recover from multiple chemical sensitivity?
There are no specific treatments for MCS. You can work with your provider to manage your symptoms and try to find ways to avoid substances or situations that make you feel sick. This might take some trial and error. Desensitization therapy, like
EMDR
, can sometimes help certain people to reduce symptoms from specific triggers.
If you have other conditions that are contributing to your symptoms, like asthma or anxiety, your provider will recommend specific treatment for those conditions.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re having symptoms that disrupt your life, especially if you can’t figure out the cause. It’s usually best to start with a
primary care provider
or family doctor. They can work with you to determine causes, discuss strategies for treating your symptoms and refer you to a specialist if need be.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Mysterious symptoms can be frustrating, and sometimes even completely debilitating. We all want to know what’s making us feel bad — and how to make it better. Many conditions can have symptoms that might make you think of multiple chemical sensitivity. But often there’s another explanation. Working with your provider, you can put together the clues to try to help you feel better.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment