Tenosynovitis: Symptoms, Causes, Types & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tenosynovitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tenosynovitis
Tenosynovitis is inflammation of the connective tissue that protects your tendons. When this tissue (also called a tendon sheath) is overused, it can become inflamed, leading to pain and stiffness. If you have symptoms of tenosynovitis, be sure to rest the affected body part and see your provider. Untreated tenosynovitis can lead to complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Tendinopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Tenosynovitis is inflammation of the thin layer of tissue (synovial membrane) that surrounds your tendons.
What is tenosynovitis?
Tenosynovitis (pronounced “ten-oh-sin-oh-vyt-us”) is inflammation of the thin layer of tissue (your
synovial membrane
) that surrounds your tendons. The condition can be painful and make it hard for you to move your joints like you usually can.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
tendons
are cords that connect your muscles to your bones. They let your bones move as you tighten and relax your muscles. Your synovial membrane is full of fluid. It protects your tendons and helps them move smoothly.
When something irritates, damages or infects your synovial membrane,
inflammation
can occur. In addition to symptoms from the tenosynovitis itself, this inflammation can lead to other serious issues if you don’t seek treatment. You’ll usually need to rest your affected tendon while it heals.
Types of tenosynovitis
Healthcare providers classify tenosynovitis in a few ways:
Stenosing tenosynovitis
. This type happens when inflammation around a tendon narrows the space in the tendon sheath, making it difficult for the tendon to move smoothly (
stenosis
). Examples include
trigger finger
and
de Quervain’s tenosynovitis
.
Infectious tenosynovitis
. A virus or bacterium that causes an infection in your tendon sheath can lead to this kind of tenosynovitis.
Noninfectious inflammatory tenosynovitis
. Overuse and autoimmune diseases like
gout
and
rheumatoid arthritis
can cause this type of tenosynovitis.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of tenosynovitis?
The most common tenosynovitis symptoms include:
Pain along the course of your tendon
Swelling around your tendon
Difficulty moving a part of your body like you usually can
Pain when moving a part of your body
Discoloration in a straight line along a tendon
Advertisement
What does tenosynovitis feel like?
Tenosynovitis is usually painful. It can affect tendons connected to any
muscle
that helps one of your limbs push, pull, bend or straighten (your flexor and extensor muscles). You might also have trouble moving the affected part of your body like you usually can. The most common places tenosynovitis affects include your:
Fingers
Hands
Wrists
Feet
What causes tenosynovitis?
Tenosynovitis causes include:
Autoimmune diseases
. Any condition where your body’s defenses attack itself can cause damage to your synovial membrane.
Overuse
. Repeating one movement or motion constantly over a long period of time can lead to
overuse syndrome
. The damage from overuse syndrome often includes tenosynovitis.
Infections
. Many common
infections
can spread to your synovial membrane and lead to infectious tenosynovitis.
Trauma
. Any injury or accident that damages your tendons or the area around them can cause tenosynovitis.
Risk factors for tenosynovitis
Tenosynovitis can affect anyone. You’re more likely to develop tenosynovitis if you have:
Rheumatoid arthritis
Diabetes
Hand infections
Gout
Thyroid disease
Dupuytren’s disease
Fibromyalgia
Complications of tenosynovitis
Tenosynovitis can be a serious condition because it can lead to complications, including:
Joint stiffness
Tendon rupture
Necrosis
(death) of the tendon tissue
Adhesions (scar tissue)
Need for
amputation
Diagnosis and Tests
How is tenosynovitis diagnosed?
To diagnose tenosynovitis, your healthcare provider starts with a history and
physical exam
. They’ll check your symptoms and your range of motion (how far you can move a part of your body). They might also order
blood tests
or other labs to check for infections and inflammation.
What tests will be done to diagnose this condition?
After a physical exam, you might need at least one imaging test to confirm or show the extent of your disease. Imaging tests can also ensure there’s not another problem causing pain and stiffness, like a fracture or dislocation. These tests can include:
X-rays
. An X-ray can show any hardening (calcifications) of your synovial membrane and other signs of inflammation, like swelling.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
. Your provider might use an MRI to get a complete picture of your tendon and the area around it.
Ultrasound
.
An ultrasound is like an X-ray for soft tissue. Your provider can use it to take pictures of the area around your tendon that will show any inflammation and areas of swelling.
CT scan
. A CT (computed tomography) scan will give your provider a more detailed picture of your tendon, bone and the surrounding soft tissue than an X-ray.
Management and Treatment
How is tenosynovitis treated?
How tenosynovitis is treated depends on what’s causing it. Tenosynovitis treatment can include:
Advertisement
Rest and stopping the activity that caused the tenosynovitis
Wearing a brace or
splint
to reduce stress on your tendon
Applying heat or cold to the area to reduce pain or inflammation
Oral steroids or
steroid injections
to calm down the inflammation
Hand therapy to help decrease swelling and improve range of motion
Surgery if an infection caused the tenosynovitis, or to open up areas of tightness that are restricting your tendons from moving normally
Your provider will tell you which specific treatments you’ll need based on how severe your symptoms are.
What medications are used to treat tenosynovitis?
Which medications you’ll need depends on the cause of the tenosynovitis. Some medications your provider might prescribe include:
Antibiotics
. If an infection caused the tenosynovitis, you’ll need antibiotics.
NSAIDs
. Over-the-counter NSAIDs like aspirin or ibuprofen can reduce pain and inflammation.
Corticosteroids
. Your provider might give you an injection or prescription of anti-inflammatory corticosteroids.
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
.
In people with inflammatory arthritis, these prescription medications can reduce pain and inflammation while protecting the joint from damage.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Tendinopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for tenosynovitis?
The outlook for tenosynovitis is generally positive, depending on the cause. Almost everyone who develops it makes a full recovery and resumes their normal activities. You might need to take a break from the activity that caused you to overuse your tendon, but — once you’ve healed — you should have no long-term effects. Most people recover
within a few weeks
, even if they need surgery.
Advertisement
If an infection caused the tenosynovitis, your outcome depends on several factors. People who are older or have a history of diabetes, peripheral vascular disease and/or kidney disease have a higher risk of complications and a longer recovery time. A delay in diagnosis or treatment of infectious tenosynovitis may also cause permanent damage.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk of tenosynovitis?
The best way to reduce your risk of tenosynovitis is to avoid overusing your tendons. Give your body time to recover after workouts, sports, jobs or other activities that require you to perform the same movements repeatedly.
You can prevent strain on your body (including your tendons) by wearing proper safety equipment. It’s also important to work out safely and avoid too much stress on your tendons.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Make sure you’re following all the instructions from your provider or surgeon. Because the most common treatments for tenosynovitis take time to work, it’s important to be patient and let your body heal.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if your symptoms get worse or aren’t getting better after a few weeks. Go to the emergency room if you notice any of the following:
Extreme pain
Swelling
Drainage
Discoloration
Fever or chills
Bleeding at your surgery site
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your provider include:
Advertisement
How long will I need to rest my tendon?
Will a brace help?
What medicines will I need?
Do I need any additional tests or imaging?
Will therapy help?
Will I need surgery?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Tenosynovitis is painful and can be dangerous if you don’t seek treatment right away. But most people make a full recovery, and you’ll likely only need conservative treatments like rest to give your body time to heal. Don’t “play through the pain” or push your body beyond its limits. If you notice symptoms, talk to your healthcare provider right away.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic experts are here to treat your tendinopathy (tendon pain) and get you back to doing the things you love.
Tendinopathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/30/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment