Periodontitis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Periodontitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Periodontitis
Periodontitis is an oral health condition that causes sore, bleeding, swollen gums. Left untreated, periodontitis can lead to tooth loss, bone loss, bad breath and other oral health problems. You can manage mild periodontitis with a deep dental cleaning. More severe cases require surgery. Your outlook is good with treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Periodontal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Plaque, bone loss and red, bleeding gums are all hallmark symptoms of periodontitis.
What is periodontitis?
Periodontitis (pronounced “peh-ree-uh-don-TIE-tus”) is a form of
gum disease
. It’s a
bacterial infection
that causes your
gums
to bleed and swell. Eventually, it can damage the bone that supports your
teeth
, leading to wiggly teeth and tooth loss.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Periodontitis is more likely to happen as you age. It’s most common in people over 30. Still, it can affect anyone with poor oral hygiene. Some people are also more genetically prone to periodontitis than others. If your biological parents or grandparents have a history of gum disease, you’re more likely to develop it as well.
Healthcare providers classify periodontitis as mild, moderate or severe. They base this on how much bone you’ve lost around each tooth and on how much inflammation you have in your gums. There are surgical and nonsurgical treatments that can help treat this oral infection and keep your gums healthy.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of periodontitis?
Periodontitis symptoms include:
Bad breath
Bite changes
Bleeding gums
Gum recession
Loose teeth
Pain when chewing
Pus (infection) around your gum line
Reddish or purplish gums
Swollen gums
Often, periodontal disease doesn’t hurt, so you may have no idea that you have the disease. Catching periodontitis early helps prevent complications. See a dentist as soon as possible if you have these symptoms, and even if you don’t have any symptoms.
What causes periodontitis?
The main cause of periodontitis is poor
oral hygiene
.
Bacteria
create
plaque
and
tartar
that cling to your teeth surfaces. If you don’t clean your teeth as well or as often as you should, bacteria travel down beneath your gum line, where your toothbrush and floss can’t reach. These harmful bacteria wear away the tissues that support your teeth, leading to infection, bone loss and tooth loss.
Advertisement
Risk factors
The following risk factors can increase your chances of developing periodontitis:
A family history of gum disease
Hormonal changes
Inflammatory diseases like
diabetes
and
high blood pressure
Infrequent visits to the dentist
Poor oral hygiene
Smoking
and
vaping
What are the complications of periodontitis?
Left untreated, periodontitis could lead to complications like:
Gum or
tooth abscesses
Gum pain
Gum recession
Loose teeth
Tooth loss
Diagnosis and Tests
How is periodontitis diagnosed?
Dentists
typically diagnose periodontitis during routine examinations. During your appointment, they’ll likely:
Ask about your symptoms, medical history and smoking history.
Examine your gums for signs of
inflammation
.
Take
dental X-rays
to check for bone loss.
Use a periodontal probe, which is like a tiny ruler, to measure areas of bone loss (periodontal pockets) around your teeth.
Management and Treatment
How is periodontitis treated?
Periodontitis treatment depends on the severity of the condition. Options include nonsurgical and surgical procedures. Your dentist should refer you to a gum specialist (
periodontist
) unless your disease is mild.
Nonsurgical periodontitis treatments
Healthcare providers may treat milder cases with nonsurgical procedures or lifestyle changes. These include:
Antibiotics
. Your dentist may prescribe oral antibiotics to fight infection. Or they may place topical antibiotics under your gums to target the affected area.
Oral hygiene instructions
.
Your dentist and hygienist will review the tools, products and techniques you use to clean your teeth.
Scaling and root planing
. Your dentist or
hygienist
will numb your mouth with local
anesthesia
and clean deep beneath your gums.
Surgical periodontitis treatments
Severe periodontitis usually requires surgery. These treatments include:
Osseous surgery
. A periodontist makes a cut (incision) along your gum line and temporarily lifts your gums. This allows them to see your teeth roots easily and clean them thoroughly. Your periodontist can smooth your bone to stabilize the periodontal disease.
Dental bone grafts
. These materials help rebuild your jawbone in areas where you’ve lost bone density.
Guided tissue regeneration
. A surgeon places a tissue-friendly (biocompatible) membrane between your jawbone and tooth. This membrane keeps unwanted tissue from growing into the area and encourages bone to grow back instead.
Gum grafts
. This procedure addresses gum recession, which often happens in combination with periodontitis. Gum recession is when you can see too much of your teeth roots.
Platelet-rich plasma (PRP)
. This treatment helps rebuild lost bone or gum tissue. Healthcare providers obtain platelet-rich plasma from a sample of your own
blood
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Periodontal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for periodontitis?
Your outlook depends on the severity of your condition and how soon you begin treatment. When you treat periodontitis early, you reduce your risk for long-term damage to your teeth and gums. Severe or untreated periodontitis can lead to bite changes, tooth loss and a host of other oral health problems.
Advertisement
If you already have missing teeth due to periodontitis, talk to your dentist about replacement options.
Dental implants
or
bridges
can restore your smile and your oral health.
Can periodontitis be cured?
You can’t
cure
periodontitis, but you can manage it with treatment. Talk to your dentist or periodontist about a personalized plan.
Prevention
Can periodontitis be prevented?
The best way to prevent periodontitis is to see a dentist regularly and practice good oral hygiene at home. People who are prone to periodontitis may need more frequent
cleanings
than people without gum disease. Ask your dentist how often you should have cleanings to maintain healthy teeth and gums.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you develop sore, swollen or bleeding gums, schedule an appointment with a dentist right away. Early intervention is key to getting your oral health back on track.
The longer you wait, the worse the disease may get. As a result, you might need more extensive (and more costly) treatment. For example, you may be able to treat early-stage periodontitis with a deep dental cleaning. But late-stage periodontitis usually requires surgery, which is more expensive and invasive.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you have periodontitis, here are a few questions you may want to ask your dentist:
What stage of gum disease do I have?
Do I have bone loss?
What are my treatment options?
How long will treatment take?
How long will my recovery take?
How often should I have my teeth cleaned to maintain my results?
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Can periodontitis kill you?
No, periodontitis doesn’t directly cause death. But it’s associated with many other health conditions like rheumatoid arthritis, cardiac disease, low birth weight babies, Alzheimer’s disease and even some cancers. Some scientists believe that bacteria in your mouth can travel throughout your body via your bloodstream.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Some of the symptoms that come along with periodontitis, like swollen gums and bad breath, can take a toll on your self-esteem. Maybe you even cover your mouth when you smile or avoid social situations altogether. Most importantly, the infection can cause problems in your mouth and, in some cases, may spread to other parts of your body. You can’t fix periodontitis with brushing and flossing alone. You’ll need a dentist to help you. But don’t worry. Treatment can get rid of the infection and set you on the path to better oral health.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
At Cleveland Clinic, we have expert knowledge when it comes to slowing and reversing gum disease. We’ll craft a treatment plan that focuses on you and your needs.
Periodontal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/19/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment