Thiamine Deficiency: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Thiamine Deficiency
Advertisement
Advertisement
Thiamine Deficiency
Thiamine deficiency (vitamin B1 deficiency) can cause a range of symptoms, from fatigue to paralysis. It’s rare in areas with access to enriched foods and supplements. But people with certain medical conditions can still get it. When diagnosed and treated early, you can reverse most effects within a few months.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Low thiamine levels can cause a range of symptoms, including fatigue, loss of appetite and behavioral changes.
What is a thiamine deficiency?
A thiamine deficiency means your body doesn’t have enough thiamine (vitamin B1) to function properly. Your body needs thiamine to stay healthy. Specifically, thiamine helps with cell function, growth, development and converting food into energy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Consistently low thiamine levels can negatively impact your
heart
,
immune system
and
nervous system
. Symptoms like fatigue, loss of appetite and nerve damage can start in as little as three weeks.
Thiamine deficiency is rare in areas with regular access to food and supplements. But certain conditions can cause low thiamine even if you have access to these things. In the United States, most people with thiamine deficiency experience it as a symptom of another health condition.
The term “beriberi” refers to severe thiamine deficiency.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of low thiamine?
Thiamine deficiency symptoms may be vague, and they often mimic symptoms of other conditions. They can include:
Balance issues
Blurred vision
Confusion
Delirium
Fatigue
Hallucinations
Irritability
Loss of appetite
Mental impairment
Nausea
and
vomiting
Tingling and burning in your arms and legs
Short-term memory
issues
Tell your healthcare provider if you develop any of these symptoms. They can run tests to determine the cause.
What causes thiamine deficiency?
Causes of thiamine deficiency include:
Conditions that increase your need for thiamine, like
hyperthyroidism
Conditions that disrupt how your body metabolizes thiamine, like
liver disease
Conditions that prevent your body from absorbing thiamine, like chronic
diarrhea
Some medications, like certain
diuretics
, cardiovascular drugs and
antiseizure medications
Advertisement
Not getting enough thiamine in your diet can also cause thiamine deficiency. This can happen in people who mainly eat highly processed carbohydrates like white rice, white sugar and white flour. It also occurs in people with severe
anorexia nervosa
due to a lack of food intake.
Thiamine deficiency risk factors
A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a certain condition. Even though thiamine deficiency is rare, these things could raise your risk:
Alcohol use disorder
Congenital beriberi (being born without the ability to absorb thiamine)
Kidney disease
Lack of access to nutritious foods
Prior
gastric bypass
surgery
Poor diet or starvation
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
(a memory disorder linked to thiamine deficiency and alcohol use disorder
Babies who drink breast milk from parents with thiamine deficiency have a higher risk of developing it, too.
What are the complications of thiamine deficiency?
Left untreated, thiamine deficiency can lead to serious and life-threatening complications like:
Brain damage (
encephalopathy
)
Cognitive impairment
Coma
Congestive heart failure
Loss of coordination (
ataxia
)
Nerve damage (can be permanent in severe cases)
Memory loss
Muscle atrophy
(reduced muscle mass)
Diagnosis and Tests
How is thiamine deficiency diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
and check for obvious symptoms. They’ll also run
blood tests
to confirm a diagnosis.
Providers can’t directly measure the level of thiamine in your blood. But they can check the activity of an
enzyme
called transketolase. Transketolase needs thiamine to work. So, if a blood test reveals low transketolase activity, it points to a lack of thiamine.
Management and Treatment
How do you fix low thiamine?
The only way to fix low thiamine is to get more of it into your system. Adults need between 1.1 to 1.2 milligrams of thiamine every day. Ideally, you can hit this quota by eating thiamine-rich foods. But if you have severe thiamine deficiency, you’ll need supplements to replenish your body’s stores.
Thiamine-rich foods
Keep your thiamine levels healthy by eating foods like:
Black beans
Enriched or fortified white carbs (rice, bread, flour)
Fish (salmon)
Lentils
Macadamia nuts
Pork
Seafood (mussels)
Sunflower seeds
Whole wheat bread
Yogurt
Thiamine supplements
Sometimes, food isn’t enough to raise your thiamine levels quickly. You may need to take a supplement, too. Over-the-counter options include multivitamins or
vitamin B complex
formulas.
But you may need high-dose supplementation if you have a severe thiamine deficiency. Under medical supervision, a healthcare provider can give you thiamine in one of these forms, from least to most involved:
Tablets
Injections
IV (intravenous) infusions
Advertisement
How long does it take to reverse thiamine deficiency?
It depends on the severity of your condition and how long you’ve been deficient. For instance, some heart symptoms can go away within the first few hours or days. But nerve and motor symptoms can take up to six months to improve. In severe cases, nerve damage can be permanent.
Your healthcare provider will continue to supplement thiamine until your levels return to normal. This can look different for everyone, so it’s important to ask your provider what to expect in your situation.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for people with thiamine deficiency?
When diagnosed and treated early, thiamine deficiency is reversible. Most symptoms should go away once your thiamine levels return to normal.
But in severe or untreated cases, thiamine deficiency can result in serious complications or even death.
Prevention
Can thiamine deficiency be prevented?
The only way to prevent thiamine deficiency is to eat thiamine-rich foods. If you have a condition that affects your thiamine levels, be sure to manage it well and follow your provider’s recommendations. You should also see your healthcare provider for regular checkups.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see your healthcare provider any time you develop new or troubling symptoms. Even if your symptoms end up pointing to another condition, it’s important to get a diagnosis as soon as possible so you can start treatment.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Thiamine deficiency is rare in areas with prevalent food sources. If you live in an industrialized region, you probably don’t think much about thiamine because it’s in the foods you eat every day. But if you start to develop symptoms like fatigue, irritability or loss of appetite, tell your healthcare provider. You could have a condition that interferes with the way your body absorbs nutrients. They can find out why you developed sudden symptoms and recommend appropriate treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/21/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us