Deep Infiltrating Endometriosis: Causes, Symptoms & Diagnosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Deep Infiltrating Endometriosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Deep Infiltrating Endometriosis
Deep infiltrating endometriosis (DE) causes tissue that’s similar to the lining of your uterus to invade other places where it doesn’t belong. It can cause intense pelvic pain and affect bodily functions like pooping and peeing. Treatment for DE includes medication, surgery or a combination of both.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endometriosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Deep Infiltrating Endometriosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Deep Infiltrating Endometriosis?
Deep infiltrating endometriosis (DE) happens when tissue that’s similar to the lining of your uterus embeds deeply into other parts of your body. It often causes severe symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
DE is the most aggressive form of
endometriosis
. It’s sometimes called stage IV endometriosis. But healthcare providers base staging on many factors. DE can occur in earlier or later stages.
It affects around 1 in 5
women
with endometriosis.
DE can invade tissues in your pelvis and abdomen, including your:
Pouch of Douglas — the space between your uterus and
rectum
Pelvic sidewall — where your pelvic nerves are
Uterosacral ligaments and cardinal ligament
Vaginal wall
Ureters (urine tubes)
Bladder
Colon
Rectal wall
DE is an invisible disease — everything is happening on the inside of your body. But that doesn’t make your symptoms or pain any less real. You deserve to be heard and to get relief. Medication and/or surgery can help. It just might take some time to find what works best for you.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of deep infiltrating endometriosis
The symptoms of DE can vary based on which body parts it affects. Symptoms may include:
Chronic pelvic pain or tenderness
Painful intercourse
Very painful period cramps
Urinary symptoms may include:
Peeing frequently or an urgency to pee
Pain while peeing
Blood in your pee
Flank pain
Bowel symptoms may include:
Diarrhea or constipation
Intestinal cramping
Pain while pooping
, even if your poop is soft
Bloating
These symptoms may come and go. The pain can range from mild to severe. It’s typically worse during your period.
Advertisement
It may help to keep a journal of your symptoms. Write down when they happen and how severe they are. That way, when you talk to your healthcare provider about them, you’ll have a lot of information.
Deep infiltrating endometriosis causes
Researchers don’t know for sure what causes DE. They think many factors may contribute to it, like your genetics and hormone issues.
Researchers are studying possible roles of immune system changes and intestinal permeability (“
leaky gut
”). But these aren’t proven causes.
Complications of this condition
The main complications of deep infiltrating endometriosis can include chronic pain and infertility. But not everyone develops these complications.
DE can greatly affect your quality of life. It may be difficult to predict when you’ll get hit with pain or other symptoms. This can make working and socializing difficult, as well as affect
sexual intimacy
. All these complications can take a toll on your mental health, too.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll do a physical exam and pelvic exam.
Your provider will likely recommend more tests to confirm a DE diagnosis. They’ll look to see where endometrial growths are in your body and how deeply they’re embedded in tissues. The tests may include:
Pelvic or
transvaginal ultrasound
MRI
Cystoscopy
to check urinary system issues
Laparoscopy
and biopsy to test the tissue that your provider suspects is endometriosis
Your provider may also recommend specialized imaging if they think DE affects your bowels.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Your healthcare provider will help create a treatment plan for endometriosis based on a few factors, including:
Which body parts DE affects
If you want to get pregnant
Your age
The severity of your symptoms
Your treatment plan will focus mainly on managing your pain, improving your quality of life and improving fertility issues (if applicable). Your healthcare provider may recommend medication and/or surgery.
It’s important to consider mental health therapies, too. DE can cause you to carry a heavy emotional load.
Medication
Medications may help stop the growth of endometriosis lesions and help them go away. This can help improve your symptoms. Many of them involve hormone therapy.
Medications include:
Progesterone
Combined
oral contraceptives
(COCs)
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
analogues
Aromatase inhibitors (AI)
Surgery
Your provider may recommend
surgery
if medication isn’t helping and you have severe symptoms. The goal is to remove as much of the endometriosis lesions as possible while sparing healthy tissue.
Advertisement
Minimally invasive surgical options include
laparoscopic surgery
and robotic-assisted laparoscopic surgery.
Your healthcare provider may consider a
hysterectomy
if other treatments haven’t worked and your symptoms are severe. But this procedure doesn’t cure endometriosis outside of your uterus.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Endometriosis is a long-term disease. So, it’s possible for it to come back, even after surgery. Talk to your healthcare provider if your symptoms return or get worse. Pain with sex or bowel/bladder changes are important red flags.
Also, let them know if you have any side effects from medications.
It may be helpful to ask your provider these questions:
How can I tell if endometriosis is growing again?
What are the long-term risks of hormone therapy?
How can I manage pain during sex?
What’s the best way to handle bowel symptoms — should I see a GI specialist, too?
Are there any clinical trials for DE?
What are my chances of conceiving?
Should I consider a hysterectomy?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endometriosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
With the right care, many people see major improvement in pain and quality of life. You’ll likely need continuous treatment to manage symptoms. It’s important to keep a regular appointment schedule with your healthcare provider. You can work together on managing DE long-term.
Advertisement
It may be difficult to explain to loved ones how much your symptoms affect your life. Consider joining a support group. It can help to talk to others who “get it.”
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Putting a name on what’s been causing so much pain and discomfort can be empowering — finally, you have an answer. The good news is that a proper diagnosis means you can start treatment. The not-so-good news is that deep infiltrating endometriosis is a chronic condition. This means you’ll have to manage it for a long time. Lean on your healthcare provider — and loved ones — for support.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endometriosis symptoms can interrupt your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts create a treatment plan that matches your lifestyle and goals.
Endometriosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment