What Is Occupational Medicine?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Occupational Medicine
Advertisement
Advertisement
Occupational Medicine
Occupational medicine is a medical specialty that focuses on how your job affects your health. Providers in this field can treat work-related health issues. But the benefits of their care can stretch beyond your job, too. Coordinating your care with them and a primary care provider can bring benefits to your health both on the job and elsewhere.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What is occupational medicine?
Occupational and environmental medicine is a medical specialty that focuses on keeping people safe at work and helping them stay healthy. This specialty falls under the American Board of Preventive Medicine. And it doesn’t just apply to workers in industrial jobs. It applies to all jobs, from factory to office.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
As this field evolved, experts realized that your job isn’t the only factor when it comes to your health. The environment around you also affects your well-being.
Is occupational medicine the same as occupational health?
No, occupational medicine is a distinct medical specialty. And the World Health Organization (WHO) groups occupational medicine under the occupational health umbrella.
Occupational medicine provider types
Occupational medicine providers can have many different backgrounds. Some common ones include:
Physician (
MD or DO
):
Occupational and environmental specialists are fully educated and trained doctors. They can then choose to specialize and get certified by the American Board of Preventive Medicine.
Nurse:
These include
registered nurses
(RNs),
nurse practitioners
(APRNs),
licensed practical nurses
(LPNs) and more. Nurse practitioners can also complete training to become certified occupational health nurses.
Physician assistant (PA):
PAs can do some types of care but still work under the direction and supervision of a physician.
Physical therapist
or
occupational therapist
:
These providers can check for and treat
musculoskeletal
injuries and conditions.
What kinds of care do occupational medicine providers offer?
Occupational medicine providers may offer services like:
Fitness for duty certification:
This is when providers make sure you’re physically capable of doing your job, usually with a
physical exam
. This can happen when you start a job or when you return after an injury or illness.
Screenings and lab testing:
These include lab tests to look for communicable diseases like tuberculosis and more. These are often routine and need to happen regularly to maintain a license or certification.
Disability assessment:
If you have a disability or develop one, an occupational medicine specialist can document it and help you get accommodations.
Education:
One example is showing you how to use
personal protective equipment (PPE)
properly. Teaching you how to adjust your posture to avoid injuries is another. Occupational medicine specialists work closely with experts who teach you how to stay safe on the job.
Environmental monitoring:
Your occupational medicine provider may survey workspaces to make sure they’re safe. Examples include noise and air quality checks.
Preventive care:
Your occupational medicine provider might deliver routine vaccinations against common illnesses like the flu. They can also give you more specific preventive care related to your work, like vaccinating against tetanus.
Injury care:
Occupational medicine providers can sometimes treat injuries at on-site clinics. Some providers can even respond to workplace injuries that need on-scene care.
Hazardous exposure care:
Occupational medicine specialists are part of care for exposure to toxic substances or diseases. They might also offer care to prevent conditions from an exposure or injury. An example would be vaccinating you for tetanus after you step on a nail on the job.
Follow-up care and monitoring:
Occupational medicine providers may work with you during your recovery and help guide your care. That may also include recertifying your return to work.
Emergency planning and preparedness:
Occupational medicine providers can play a vital role in planning for workplace emergencies.
Advertisement
Conditions that occupational medicine providers can treat
Trauma and injuries
:
These can be minor, like a laceration that needs a simple bandage or a few stitches. But in severe injury cases, an occupational medicine provider can lead first aid. That can make a huge difference before an injured person gets emergency transport to a hospital.
Repetitive strain injuries
:
An occupational medicine provider can diagnose posture- and position-related injuries. They can also recommend
ergonomic
fixes to prevent further injuries.
Workplace medical emergencies:
This may or may not link directly to your job. Examples include having an
asthma attack
, a
seizure
or
anaphylaxis
from an insect sting allergy.
Mental health needs:
Occupational medicine providers are also there to help with mental health concerns. One example might be helping you manage stress (either related or unrelated to your job).
Substance and alcohol use:
Occupational medicine specialists are part of regular testing for
substance
and
alcohol
use disorders. They can also help with getting you treatment for these conditions and certifying you when you’re ready to come back to work.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
No matter where you work or what your job title is, occupational medicine can help you. This field of medicine is about much more than just treating workplace injuries. Occupational medicine providers are there to prevent injuries, too. They also work with you on ways to improve your health overall.
If your workplace has an occupational medicine provider, don’t hesitate to ask them questions about ways to improve your health. They can coordinate with other providers and offer you resources and options.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider