Poikiloderma of Civatte: What It Is, Causes, Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Poikiloderma of Civatte
Advertisement
Advertisement
Poikiloderma of Civatte
Poikiloderma of Civatte is a noncancerous skin condition that appears as reddish-brown spots usually on your neck and cheeks. Avoiding sun exposure can prevent the condition and reduce discoloration. Creams and laser therapies can also help, but there isn’t a cure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is poikiloderma of Civatte?
Poikiloderma of Civatte is a skin condition that appears as
mottled
, reddish-brown patches usually on the sides of your neck, upper chest and cheeks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This condition is mainly cosmetic and not a health concern. It doesn’t cause symptoms. Long-term sun damage is the primary contributing factor. So, while it’s a cosmetic condition, it’s also a sign that you may need better sun protection.
A French dermatologist named Achille Civatte first described the condition in 1923.
Who does poikiloderma of Civatte affect?
This condition is most common in individuals who have fair skin. Women who completed
menopause
are also more at risk.
How common is poikiloderma of Civatte?
Healthcare providers don’t know how often it occurs, as many people don’t seek treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
What does poikiloderma of Civatte look like?
This condition causes changes to your skin, including:
Discoloration:
You may develop an uneven skin tone marked by reddish-brown spots.
Telangiectasias:
These are
spidery red lines
on your skin. They occur when the tiny blood vessels (capillaries) near the surface of your skin break.
Skin thinning (atrophy):
This can appear as dry, wrinkly and sensitive skin.
These changes usually occur on the sides of your neck and cheeks but not the area under your chin. The pattern is similar on both the left and right sides of your body (symmetrical). Poikiloderma of Civatte can also affect other areas of your body frequently exposed to the sun, including your:
Chest,
usually in a V pattern from the neck to the center of your breasts.
Arms,
especially your forearms.
Advertisement
What are the symptoms of poikiloderma of Civatte?
Most people don’t have any symptoms. Rarely, you may experience slight burning or itching in the affected areas.
What causes poikiloderma of Civatte?
The exact cause of this condition isn’t known, but most experts think ultraviolet (UV) light from sun exposure plays a major role.
Other factors that may increase your chance of developing poikiloderma of Civatte include:
Chemicals,
certain perfumes and cosmetics can react with light and cause skin damage.
Fair skin,
which is more easily damaged by UV light than darker skin.
Genetic factors,
inherited from your parents.
Hormonal changes,
including low estrogen levels that occur in people after menopause or removal of their ovaries.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is poikiloderma of Civatte diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose this condition by examining your skin and reviewing your medical history. If the diagnosis isn’t clear, they may perform a
skin biopsy
. This is a sample of skin tissue your healthcare provider collects and sends to a laboratory for analysis.
A biopsy can help distinguish poikiloderma of Civatte from other conditions that may look similar. These include:
Genetic conditions
that affect the skin such as congenital poikiloderma (also called Rothmund-Thomson syndrome) and Bloom syndrome. Both syndromes involve other body systems. They can also cause severe disability and an increased risk for different types of cancer.
Skin diseases
such as
cutaneous lupus
,
dermatomyositis
and
mycosis fungoides
.
Management and Treatment
How is poikiloderma of Civatte treated?
The types of treatments range from:
Taking steps to protect your skin.
Medicated creams.
Light and laser therapies.
General treatments
These include measures to help you avoid additional damage to your skin:
Protect your skin from further
sun damage
. Apply sunscreen with an SPF (sun protection factor) of at least 30 when you go outdoors and wear protective hats and clothing. Poikiloderma of Civatte is preventable in many people if they use appropriate sunscreen and sun protection.
Stop using products containing skin irritants, such as perfumes. If you wear cosmetics, ask your healthcare provider about what types of products are safe to use on the affected area.
Lasers and light therapies
These treatments reduce brown pigmentation and red telangiectasia and improve skin texture. This technology uses various types of light energy to precisely destroy damaged skin cells. Your skin produces new, healthier cells to replace the old ones.
These types of treatments include:
Pulsed dye lasers.
Intense pulsed light (IPL) therapy.
Fractional nonablative lasers.
How effective are the treatments for poikiloderma of Civatte?
When you compare your skin before and after treatment, you’ll likely notice some improvement in skin coloration. But treatment won’t eliminate the signs of poikiloderma of Civatte entirely.
Advertisement
Are natural remedies for poikiloderma of Civatte effective?
You may see home treatments and natural remedies online for poikiloderma of Civatte. Some of these include plant and herbal extracts, supplements, natural oils, baking soda and hydrogen peroxide. There’s no scientific evidence showing that any of these remedies are effective. Talk to your healthcare provider before using any natural products to treat this skin condition.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for poikiloderma of Civatte?
Poikiloderma of Civatte is a chronic condition that doesn’t have a cure. Treatments may improve the look of your skin and prevent the condition from getting worse.
Prevention
How can I prevent poikiloderma of Civatte?
You can prevent this condition by limiting your exposure to UV rays from the sun:
Apply a sunscreen with an SPF of 30 or higher whenever you go outside. Reapply every two hours, or after swimming or exercising.
Avoid the sun when it’s brightest — between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m.
Wear a hat and protective clothing that shields the skin on your neck and face from the sun.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider about any new changes in the color or texture of your skin. Early detection and treatment can help reduce the extent of skin damage and rule out more serious health conditions.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Poikiloderma of Civatte is mainly a cosmetic condition that causes brown and reddish spots on your neck and cheeks. It may show some improvement with medicated creams and laser and light therapies. The best thing you can do to prevent this and other more serious skin issues is to protect your skin from the sun. Consistent use of sunscreen, wearing protective clothing and avoiding midday sunrays are essential.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/24/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment