ER-Positive Breast Cancer: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Estrogen Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer (ER+)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Estrogen Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer (ER+)
Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer (ER+) happens when high levels of estrogen in breast cancer cells help cancer grow and spread. Finding out if cancerous cells have estrogen or progesterone receptors helps healthcare providers plan breast cancer treatment. Providers often treat ER+ breast cancer with surgery and hormone therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is ER-positive (ER+) breast cancer?
ER-positive breast cancer (ER+) is a
breast cancer
subtype. If tests show you have estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, it means
cancerous
cells in your breast have high
estrogen
levels helping them to grow. Checking estrogen receptor levels helps healthcare providers to plan treatment. Healthcare providers treat this condition with surgery and hormone therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This breast cancer subtype is also known as estrogen-positive breast cancer and estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.
How common is ER-positive breast cancer?
It’s relatively common. About 70% of all breast cancer cases — including
males
— in the United States are ER-positive.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of ER+ breast cancer?
People with ER-positive breast cancer typically have common breast cancer symptoms, including:
A change in the size, shape or contour of your
breast
.
A mass or
lump
, which may feel as small as a pea.
A lump or thickening in or near your breast or in your underarm that persists through your
menstrual cycle
.
A change in the look or feel of the
skin
on your breast or nipple. Your skin may look dimpled, puckered, scaly or inflamed. It may look red or darker than other parts of your breast.
A marble-like hardened area under your skin.
A blood-stained or clear fluid
discharge from your nipple
.
What causes ER-positive breast cancer?
Cells in your body have hormone receptors. The hormone receptors are a type of protein. Estrogen in your bloodstream can attach to the receptors. This hormone-receptor process is part of typical body function. In healthy cells, estrogen aids normal cell function and growth.
ER-positive breast cancer occurs when estrogen connects with proteins inside cancer cells, causing the cells to grow. It may also happen when estrogen and another hormone,
progesterone
, connect with proteins inside cancer cells. Breast cancer with high progesterone levels is PR-positive breast cancer.
Advertisement
What are the risk factors?
The overarching risk for females is long-term exposure to estrogen. Risks for males are linked to situations where they have more estrogen and less
testosterone
than usual (
hormonal imbalance
).
Risk factors for females include:
Having early
periods
.
Having late
menopause
.
Giving birth later in life.
Taking
hormone therapy for menopause symptoms
.
Risk factors for males include:
Having
obesity
.
Having
diabetes
.
Having
cirrhosis of the liver
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is ER-positive breast cancer diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider does a
breast biopsy
to obtain samples of cancer tumor tissue. They send the samples to a lab. There, a medical
pathologist
tests tissue for signs of hormone receptors. A hormone receptor-positive (HR+) result means estrogen, progesterone or both hormones are fueling cancer growth. If tests don’t find high estrogen levels, the breast cancer is considered estrogen receptor-negative (ER-negative).
Management and Treatment
What are treatments for ER-positive breast cancer?
Healthcare providers may treat ER-positive breast cancer with:
Breast cancer surgery
to remove tumors.
Radiation therapy
.
Chemotherapy
.
Hormone therapies like
aromatase inhibitors
to reduce the amount of estrogen in your body or
selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMS)
to reduce the risk that breast cancer will
recur
(come back).
Treatment side effects
Common
chemotherapy and radiation therapy side effects
include
fatigue
,
nausea
and
vomiting
. Common
hormone therapy
side effects may include:
Joint pain
or stiffness.
Fatigue
.
Weight gain.
Less or loss of interest in sex.
Hot flashes
.
Tender or swollen breasts.
If you’re receiving ER-positive breast cancer treatment, ask your healthcare provider about
palliative care.
This care may help you manage breast cancer symptoms and treatment side effects.
Outlook / Prognosis
What are ER-positive breast cancer survival rates?
Data from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) show that overall, more than 90% of females were alive five years after diagnosis. NCI data doesn’t break out ER-positive survival rates for males.
When you think about
survival rates
, it’s important to remember these rates are based on the experiences of large groups of people with the same condition. More than that, these are estimates based on what was going on during a specific time that may be years in the past. If you have questions about survival rates, ask your healthcare provider what you can expect.
Can ER-positive breast cancer come back after treatment?
While this breast cancer type is considered to be less aggressive, there’s a risk of recurrence after treatment, including treatment for early-stage, low-risk ER-positive breast cancer. If you’re concerned that breast cancer will come back, ask your oncologist about your individual risk and what you can do to reduce your risk.
Advertisement
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
If you have ER-positive breast cancer, the following suggestions may be helpful:
Get enough rest
. Breast cancer and treatment can be exhausting. Try to remember to rest when you need to, not just when you think you have time.
Eat well
. Treatment may affect your appetite. A diet of
fruit, vegetables, lean protein and healthy grains
can help you stay strong during treatment.
Manage your stress
. Cancer is stressful. Exercise can help, from regular walks to exercise programs.
Find support
. You’re a breast cancer survivor, starting the day you were diagnosed. Ask your healthcare provider about
cancer survivorship programs
, which may help you manage some of the challenges of living with breast cancer.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if your symptoms seem to be getting worse or if you have new symptoms, like pain or weakness in a different part of your body.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask the following questions:
What treatment do you recommend?
Will I need to have chemotherapy and radiation or just hormone therapy?
Will I need hormone therapy for the rest of my life?
Additional Common Questions
Where does ER-positive breast cancer spread?
Breast cancer may spread to people’s
lungs
,
brain
s, bones and
liver
s. ER-positive breast cancer accounts for about 70% of all breast cancer cases.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Estrogen receptor-positive breast (ER+) cancer is powered by estrogen, a hormone that helps cells to grow. Healthcare providers check breast cancer cells for estrogen levels and plan treatment accordingly, such as hormone treatment that reduces estrogen’s impact on cancerous cells. If you have ER+ breast cancer, ask your healthcare provider to explain treatment options and how each treatment may help.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/24/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials