Dyskeratosis Congenita Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Dyskeratosis Congenita
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dyskeratosis Congenita
Dyskeratosis congenita is a genetic disorder that some children are born with. It’s often passed down within families. Symptoms like skin discoloration and small or missing fingernails usually begin by age 10. Bone marrow failure and cancer are common complications. There’s no cure, but supportive treatments can help with symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bone Marrow Failure and Cytopenias Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Dyskeratosis Congenita?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
What Is Dyskeratosis Congenita?
Dyskeratosis congenita (DC or DKC) is a rare
genetic disorder
that affects many different parts of your child’s body. The first signs usually appear on your child’s
skin
, nails and the inside of their mouth before age 10. DC can lead to complications like bone marrow failure or
cancer
in childhood, adolescence or adulthood.
Bone marrow failure
is the first sign of DC in some children.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
DC is part of a spectrum of conditions called telomere biology disorders. Telomeres are the protective caps at the ends of your child’s
chromosomes
(structures that contain their DNA). Telomeres allow
organs
and tissues in your child’s body to develop normally and work as expected. With DC, your child’s telomeres are shorter than they should be. This can lead to a wide range of issues.
Other telomere biology disorders (sometimes called TBDs or telomeropathies) include:
Hoyeraal Hreidarsson Syndrome (HH)
Revesz syndrome (RS)
Coats plus syndrome
Symptoms and Causes
What are the features of dyskeratosis congenita?
Children with “classic DC,” or the form researchers first recognized, have:
Abnormal skin color
. Skin on your child’s neck, upper chest and arms might appear to have a net-like or lacy pattern. The affected skin might be lighter or darker than your child’s normal skin tone.
Malformed or missing nails
. Your child’s fingernails and/or toenails may have ridges or cracks. They may peel away or grow slowly. In some cases, the nails may be smaller than normal or missing. These changes might affect just some nails, with others appearing normal.
Leukoplakia
. You may notice thick, white patches on your child’s tongue or the insides of their cheeks.
Experts call these features the “mucocutaneous triad.” “Muco” refers to the mucous lining of your child’s mouth, and “cutaneous” refers to their skin. But DC is a complex condition that affects every child a little differently.
Advertisement
For example, some children develop bone marrow failure before the “triad” features. In this case, providers do testing to uncover the cause of bone marrow failure, which may lead to a dyskeratosis congenita diagnosis.
Other children have a wide range of features that, on the surface, seem unrelated. But through exams and testing, providers sometimes recognize that DC is what causes all of them.
Other possible features of DC include:
Bone
problems, including
osteoporosis
, fractures and
avascular necrosis
of the hips and shoulders
Cancers such as blood cancer (leukemia), skin cancer and head/neck squamous cell cancer
Coordination and balance issues (
ataxia
)
Decreased production of sex hormones (hypogonadism)
Decreased immune function (immunodeficiency)
Dental issues beyond what’s typical — like many
cavities
or extensive tooth loss
Developmental delays
or disabilities
Esophageal narrowing
. This can lead to regurgitation and problems with feeding or weight gain
Excessive sweating
Hair loss or early greying
Liver disease
Lung
disease
Short stature
Small head size (
microcephaly
)
Urethral narrowing
Watery eyes
and inflammation of the eyelids
What causes dyskeratosis congenita?
Genetic variations
(changes from what’s expected, sometimes called mutations) cause dyskeratosis congenita. The specific
genes
affected are those that control the function of telomeres (protective caps on the ends of your child’s DNA).
When telomeres don’t work right, certain cells in your child’s body also can’t work normally. This leads to a shortage of blood cells, problems with organ function and other complications.
Is dyskeratosis congenita inherited?
Yes, dyskeratosis congenita can pass from one generation to the next. A child can
inherit
it from one or both of their biological parents. It’s also possible for dyskeratosis congenita to appear for the first time in a child without a family history of the condition.
Which genes are associated with dyskeratosis congenita?
Genes that researchers commonly link with dyskeratosis congenita and telomere biology disorders include:
DKC1
TERC
TERT
TINF2
ACD
CTC1
DCLRE1B
NHP2
NOP10
NPM1
POT1
RPA1
STN1
TCAB1
PARN
RTEL1
What are the complications of dyskeratosis congenita?
Dyskeratosis congenita can lead to a wide range of complications, including:
Bone marrow failure (most common complication, typically before age 30)
Pulmonary fibrosis
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
Head and neck cancer
Skin cancer
Liver fibrosis
Diagnosis and Tests
At what age is dyskeratosis congenita diagnosed?
Diagnosis usually happens in childhood or adolescence. That’s when the earliest signs of dyskeratosis congenita usually appear. But some people don’t notice signs or receive a diagnosis until they’re adults.
How do healthcare providers diagnose this condition?
Providers diagnose dyskeratosis congenita by:
Talking to you about your child’s signs and symptoms
Reviewing the medical history of your child and their biological family members
Doing a physical exam
Ordering tests
Advertisement
Providers look for known features of the disease (like skin changes, nail changes and white patches in your child’s mouth). They use test results to confirm or rule out DC as the cause of those features.
Tests for DKC
Your child’s provider may order many tests. Some directly help with diagnosis. Others uncover additional features of the disease that may affect your child’s health and treatment plan.
The main tests for diagnosing dyskeratosis congenita are:
Flow cytometry
, which measures how long your child’s telomeres are. Test results provide a telomere length and a percentile — the percentile shows how your child’s telomere length compares with that of their peers
Genetic testing
, which looks for gene variants associated with DKC
Providers usually draw a sample of blood for these tests. In unique situations, they take samples of other types of tissues (for example, they might perform a skin biopsy).
Additional tests
Other tests your child might need include:
Dental exam
Endoscopy
Eye exams
Skin exams
Bone marrow exams
Imaging tests to check various parts of the body, like their brain, heart, lungs, liver or bones
Lung function tests
Immune function tests
Neuropsychological testing
Management and Treatment
How do providers treat dyskeratosis congenita?
Providers tailor treatment to your child’s needs. There’s no standard treatment plan because DC affects each child differently.
Advertisement
Possible treatments include:
Blood transfusions
to give your child healthy red blood cells and platelets
Androgen
therapy to support healthy blood cell counts and possibly lengthen your child’s telomeres (temporarily)
Stem cell transplant
to cure bone marrow failure, MDS or leukemia (but only in certain situations when the benefits outweigh the risks)
Your child’s providers will discuss available treatment options with you. Currently, treatments can’t
cure
DC or permanently change telomere length. Instead, treatment targets specific features or complications of the condition. Researchers are hard at work trying to find new treatments that may help children and adults with DC.
What providers will care for my child?
Providers from many different specialties will work together to plan treatment. Your child may have one “medical home,” or a provider who works most closely with you and coordinates care with other providers.
Your child’s care team may include general
pediatricians
as well as pediatric:
Dentists
Dermatologists
Endocrinologists
Gastroenterologists
Hematologists/oncologists
Immunologists
Neurologists
Ophthalmologists
Otolaryngologists
Pulmonologists
Geneticists
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bone Marrow Failure and Cytopenias Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has dyskeratosis congenita?
Your child’s outlook, or what you can expect going forward, is hard to predict. DC may limit your child’s lifespan. It’s difficult to say what their life expectancy might be.
Advertisement
Dyskeratosis congenita comes with many unknowns. Your child’s care team will give you as much information as possible. They’ll also explain how often your child needs exams and testing.
What is the most common cause of death in dyskeratosis congenita?
Bone marrow failure is the leading cause of death in people with dyskeratosis congenita. This is because the lack of healthy blood cells leads to serious infections and bleeding.
Other common causes of death include lung disease and cancer.
Prevention
Can dyskeratosis congenita be prevented?
There’s no known way to prevent this genetic condition. If you or a biological family member has DC, you may wish to speak with a
genetic counselor
. They can help you understand the chances of your children inheriting the condition.
Living With
What can I do to care for my child?
Learning your child has dyskeratosis congenita might make you feel helpless. But there’s a lot you can do to support your child’s health and lower their risk of complications.
People with DC face an increased risk of certain cancers and lung disease. Environmental factors, like sun exposure and
smoking
, raise their risk even further. You can help your child by encouraging them to:
Use sunscreen and protective gear (like hats and long sleeves) when outdoors
Limit their time in strong sunlight
Avoid all tobacco products
Limit or avoid alcohol
Your child’s care team will give advice according to your child’s needs. They may also recommend advocacy or support groups. For example, there are many organizations that support people with rare diseases. Team Telomere is a group for people with DC and other telomere biology disorders.
When should I seek medical care for my child?
Your child will have many medical appointments. Their care team will tell you exactly which providers to see and how often.
These visits are very important. They help providers keep an eye on your child’s condition and adjust treatment. DC causes a wide range of complications that you can’t always notice at home. Testing can show issues like
bone density
loss or the early signs of cancer.
Providers may explain how to do self-checks at home for things like skin cancer or oral cancer. These don’t take the place of seeing a provider. But they’re an important way to catch certain signs early so your child can get care right away.
What questions should I ask my child’s care team?
Questions that may help you learn more after a dyskeratosis congenita diagnosis include:
Which disease features does my child have?
What complications are possible?
What treatments do you recommend?
What are the benefits and risks of these treatments?
Can you recommend a support group or other resources?
How can I explain this condition to my child?
Do you recommend genetic testing for me or other biological relatives?
For older children and teens, it may help to ask:
How can I help my child take charge of their own healthcare in ways appropriate to their age?
How and when should we prepare to transition my child from pediatric to adult providers?
Additional Common Questions
What are telomeres?
Telomeres are repeat sequences of DNA found at the ends of each of your child’s chromosomes. All your child’s genes are lined up in between them. Providers often compare telomeres to the plastic caps at the tips of shoelaces. These caps protect your shoelaces from damage. Similarly, telomeres protect your child’s genes.
Chromosomes are in virtually all the cells in your child’s body. And those cells are constantly making copies of themselves (replicating) to keep your child’s organs and tissues working normally.
Each time a cell replicates, its chromosomes get copied. And each time this happens, a chromosome’s telomeres get a little bit shorter. This is normal. An enzyme called telomerase jumps into action and builds the telomeres back up to a healthy length so the cell can keep replicating. If telomeres get too short, the cell stops replicating.
With dyskeratosis congenita, gene variants cause
abnormal
telomere shortening. This can happen in several ways. For example, a gene variant might interfere with telomerase production. Or it might keep telomerase from reaching the telomere. So, your child’s telomeres get shorter and can’t build back up again.
Once the telomeres inside a cell get too short, that cell stops making copies of itself. As more and more cells stop replicating, various organs and tissues in your child’s body don’t have what they need to work properly. This is how short telomeres lead to the signs, symptoms and complications of dyskeratosis congenita.
What is Zinsser-Cole-Engman syndrome?
Zinsser-Cole-Engman syndrome and dyskeratosis congenita are two different names for the same condition. In 1906, researchers who discovered this condition named it Zinsser-Cole-Engman syndrome. But today, most people refer to it as dyskeratosis congenita.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Knowledge is power. But sometimes, all the knowledge in the world can still leave you feeling powerless. If your child has received a dyskeratosis congenita diagnosis, you probably have many questions. This is true even if you have the condition yourself — because genetic conditions that run in families don’t always affect each person in the same way.
Your child’s providers will help you understand your child’s condition and needs. They’re your best source of information on how this condition is affecting your child’s body. But you can also take heart in knowing that there’s a whole community of people with rare diseases who are ready to support you. They can offer advice and tips from their own lived experiences. They’ll value what you have to say, too. Knowing you’re not alone may help you move forward.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you hear a rare diagnosis like bone marrow failure and cytopenias, you want the best possible care. At Cleveland Clinic we’re experts in these rare conditions.
Bone Marrow Failure and Cytopenias Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us