Nummular Eczema: vs Ringworm, Causes, Symptoms, Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nummular Eczema
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nummular Eczema
Nummular eczema is a chronic skin condition that causes raised, round spots on your skin. The coin-shaped lesions are often itchy, sometimes ooze clear fluid and may become crusty. The condition usually responds well to treatment, but episodes can recur even after successful treatment. Several skincare strategies can prevent and ease flare-ups.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is nummular eczema?
Nummular eczema is a skin condition that causes circular, raised spots on your skin. Nummular comes from a Latin word for “coin,” and the patches are coin-shaped. The lesions are often itchy, sometimes ooze clear fluid and may become crusty on top.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The condition is chronic. Patches can last for weeks to months, and flare-ups or episodes can repeatedly happen over a long period of time.
Nummular eczema is also called nummular dermatitis and discoid eczema.
What is the difference: Nummular eczema vs. ringworm?
Ringworm and nummular eczema both cause circular patches on your skin. But the causes and treatments are different.
Ringworm is a contagious skin infection caused by a fungus. Nummular dermatitis is a type of
eczema
rather than a fungal infection. Ringworm tends to appear as one or two patches on your skin, but nummular eczema often causes multiple patches.
Is nummular eczema a fungus?
Nummular dermatitis isn’t a fungus, and it’s not contagious.
What is the difference: Nummular eczema vs. psoriasis?
It can be difficult to tell the difference between eczema and
psoriasis
.
Psoriasis tends to cause thick scales on your skin. Nummular eczema causes bumps that may ooze and become crusty. Eczema tends to be itchier than psoriasis.
Who might get nummular eczema?
Discoid eczema (nummular eczema) can affect anyone, but it’s more common among
males
. It tends to occur in:
Females between the ages of 15 to 25 years.
Males between the ages of 50 to 65 years.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes nummular eczema?
Scientists aren’t sure why nummular
dermatitis
occurs, but it may be triggered by:
Allergies
.
Bacterial infection (for example,
Staphylococcus
).
Exposure to rough fabrics (for example, wool).
Extremely
dry skin
or dry environments.
Frequent bathing or showering with hot water.
Skin trauma or injury, like a burn, scrape or bug bite.
Use of irritating and drying soaps.
Advertisement
Is nummular eczema caused by stress?
Although stress doesn’t cause discoid (nummular) eczema directly, some research shows that it can contribute to flare-ups.
What are the symptoms of nummular dermatitis?
Nummular eczema lesions usually appear on your arms, legs, hands or torso. The early signs are tiny bumps or blisters. The bumps may join together into a coin-like shape. They often leak clear fluid and become crusty on top.
Nummular dermatitis spots tend to be intensely itchy. Your skin may burn or sting.
The color of the lesions may vary, depending on your skin tone. They may be pink, red or brown. They can be lighter than your skin or darker.
Is discoid eczema contagious?
Nummular eczema isn’t contagious. You can’t spread it to other people, and it won’t spread on your own body, but you may get additional patches in other areas.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is nummular eczema diagnosed?
For diagnosis, consider visiting a
dermatologist
, who specializes in skin conditions. They can tell the difference between ringworm, nummular dermatitis, psoriasis, additional types of eczema and other skin conditions.
Your healthcare provider can usually diagnose nummular eczema by examining your skin. Tests are generally not necessary, but sometimes, a healthcare provider will scrape your skin and look at it under a microscope.
Management and Treatment
Is there a cure for nummular eczema?
There’s no cure for this condition. Treatment aims to:
Clear or prevent infection.
Ease symptoms.
Restore the natural skin barrier.
Teach good skincare to prevent future flare-ups.
How do you get rid of nummular eczema?
To help clear nummular dermatitis flare-ups, your healthcare provider may prescribe topical treatments. These creams or ointments are applied to your skin:
Corticosteroids
.
Antibiotics
.
Calcineurin inhibitors (for example,
tacrolimus
).
Some people with broad areas of discoid eczema have difficulty covering all spots with topical treatments. Healthcare providers may suggest ultraviolet light therapy two to three times per week or oral corticosteroids.
Researchers continue to study additional treatment options.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have nummular dermatitis?
With correct diagnosis, treatment and self-care, nummular eczema usually clears up.
The nummular eczema healing process usually takes one to several weeks. The spots will flatten, get lighter in the middle and disappear.
Does discoid eczema usually return after treatment?
Nummular eczema is a chronic condition, which means you can have additional episodes after successful treatment. You may experience flare-ups every few months or years.
Prevention
How can I prevent nummular eczema episodes?
To reduce your risk of discoid eczema flare-ups, try these
skincare strategies
:
Avoid skin products and laundry detergents that contain fragrances or dyes.
Avoid tight clothing and irritating fabrics.
Manage stress
, which may contribute to flare-ups.
Moisturize with thick products, such as petroleum jelly or hydrating cream, especially when the skin is still damp after bathing or showering.
Prevent skin injury. If an injury occurs, clean the area and cover it with a bandage.
Take short (five-minute), lukewarm showers.
Avoid hot long baths.
Use gentle cleansers that contain moisturizers.
Avoid rubbing exfoliating skin.
Avoid using a washcloth, buff puff or loofah.
Advertisement
Living With
How do I take care of myself with nummular eczema?
To ease the symptoms of nummular dermatitis at home, use the prevention tips above. Also:
Avoid scratching the spots, as that can cause infections and
scars
.
Cover lesions with a moist bandage (for example, an adhesive bandage with petroleum jelly on the pad).
Follow your healthcare provider’s instructions carefully.
Take an
antihistamine
, such as
hydroxyzine
or
diphenhydramine
, to reduce itchiness and help you sleep at night.
When should I call my healthcare provider about nummular dermatitis?
If you have nummular eczema, you should talk to a healthcare provider and receive treatment. They can help you clear the flare-up more quickly and prevent infection.
During treatment, call for any signs of infection, such as:
Feelings of pain or tenderness on or near affected areas.
Red or brown streaks on the skin near a lesion.
Swelling.
Yellow or gold fluid or crust on the lesions, indicating the presence of pus.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Nummular eczema is a skin condition that causes raised, coin-shaped lesions on your skin. If you have any unusual spots on your skin, talk to a healthcare provider such as a dermatologist. They can differentiate between fungal infections such as ringworm, chronic problems such as eczema and other skin conditions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/19/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment