Waldenström Macroglobulinemia: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Waldenström Macroglobulinemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Waldenström Macroglobulinemia
Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) — also known as lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma — is a rare, slow-growing cancer that affects your blood cells. WM happens when genetic mutations change your B cells. Healthcare providers can’t cure this condition, but they do have treatments that can manage symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Waldenström Macroglobulinemia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Waldenström Macroglobulinemia?
Waldenström macroglobulinemia (pronounced “wal-den-strom” “mac-ro-glob-u-lin-e-mia”) is a slow-growing
blood cancer
. It’s a type of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma
that also goes by another name: lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. A rare cancer, Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) only affects about
3 to 4 out of every 1 million
people in the U.S.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
WM happens when
B cells
(immune cells) in your
bone marrow
(where blood cells get made) change into cancer cells. The cancer cells copy themselves and can crowd out your normal blood cells. This can lead to low numbers of red blood cells (
anemia
), white blood cells (
neutropenia
) and platelets (
thrombocytopenia
).
The cancer cells also release an abnormal protein called immunoglobulin M (IgM). Too much IgM can thicken your blood, turning it into a syrup-like liquid. This is called hyperviscosity syndrome. The thickened blood doesn’t flow easily through your body’s tiny
blood vessels
and can cause serious symptoms.
There’s no
cure
for Waldenström macroglobulinemia. But there are treatments that ease and sometimes eliminate symptoms. As WM tends to progress slowly, it’s possible that you’ll live many years with this condition.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Waldenström macroglobulinemia
One in 4
people diagnosed with WM don’t have symptoms. They learn they have this condition while visiting their healthcare provider for other reasons. When WM does cause symptoms, they come on slowly. Symptoms include:
Weakness and
fatigue
Fever
Loss of appetite
Night sweats
Weight loss
Confusion
Enlarged liver
,
spleen
or
lymph nodes
Signs of
peripheral neuropathy
(tingling sensation in your fingers and toes)
Signs of thickened blood (
nosebleeds
,
bleeding gums
,
dizziness
,
headaches
and
blurred vision
)
Advertisement
Waldenström macroglobulinemia causes
Genetic mutations
cause Waldenström macroglobulinemia. More than
90%
of people (9 out of 10) with WM have a mutation involving the
MYD88
gene. And about
40%
(4 out of 10) have changes to their
CXCR4
gene. Both mutations help the abnormal cells in Waldenström macroglobulinemia multiply.
These changes aren’t inherited (hereditary). This means you can’t pass this on to your children, and you didn’t get it from your parents. Instead, they develop during your lifetime. But researchers don’t know what triggers the mutations in the first place.
Risk factors
Factors that may increase your chance of developing Waldenström macroglobulinemia include your:
Age
. Most people diagnosed are 65 and older.
Race
. WM is most common in people who are white.
Sex
.
Males
are more likely to have WM.
Medical history
. Having
hepatitis C
,
AIDS
,
Sjögren's Syndrome
or
MGUS
may increase your risk. MGUS is a precursor for WM. But just because you have MGUS doesn’t mean that you’ll develop WM.
Family’s medical history
. Having biological family members who have WM or other kinds of
lymphoma
may increase your risk.
Complications of this condition
In severe cases, WM can cause complications, including:
Amyloidosis
. This condition happens when faulty proteins build up in organs like your heart, lungs and kidneys.
Cryoglobulinemia
. This condition happens when certain blood proteins that react to cold conditions gather in clumps in your hands and feet. This can cause pain and turn your hands and feet blue or white (
cyanosis
).
Diagnosis and Tests
How do doctors diagnose this condition?
Your healthcare provider may use several tests to diagnose Waldenström macroglobulinemia. They look for cancer cells and IgM proteins. Tests include:
Blood
and
urine
tests
. Providers examine blood and urine samples for signs of WM. Signs include
low blood cell counts
and abnormal IgM proteins.
Imaging tests
. Tests like a
CT scan
or a combined CT and
PET scan
(CT-PET) can show signs of WM inside your body. Providers look for things like enlarged organs or lymph nodes.
Eye exam
. This test can check for
bleeding in the back of your eyeball
. This is a sign of thickened blood.
Bone marrow biopsy
. Providers examine bone marrow samples under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells.
Management and Treatment
How is Waldenström macroglobulinemia treated?
As there isn’t a cure for this condition, the best treatment is one that relieves symptoms with the least amount of side effects. Your healthcare provider will work with you to customize treatment. Options for WM include:
Watchful waiting
. Your provider may not start treatment if you don’t have symptoms. Some people with WM don’t need treatment for years.
Plasmapheresis (plasma exchange)
. Providers use a machine to filter abnormal IgM from your
plasma
, the liquid part of your blood. They return the plasma to your bloodstream. Providers use this treatment to ease symptoms caused by thickening blood.
Immunotherapy
. This treatment uses your body’s
immune system
to destroy or slow the growth of WM cells. Providers commonly prescribe
rituximab
(Rituxan
®
) alone or with chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy
. Your providers may prescribe
cancer-killing medications
alone or in combination with immunotherapy.
Corticosteroids
. You may take a steroid, like
dexamethasone
, along with immunotherapy and chemo. This treatment fights cancer and reduces the side effects of treatment.
Targeted therapy
. This treatment blocks proteins that cancer cells use to make more copies.
Ibrutinib
(Imbruvica
®
) and
zanubrutinib
(Brukinsa
®
) are both targeted therapies approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat WM.
Stem cell transplant
. Providers replace bone marrow affected by abnormal cells with healthy bone marrow. This is uncommon and used only in select people.
Advertisement
When should I seek care?
Contact your healthcare provider if you’ve been diagnosed with WM and have a symptom that’s new or bothering you. If you learn you have this condition, it’s important to ask questions so you know what to expect. Here are a few questions you may want to ask your provider:
How serious is WM, and how will it affect my life?
What should I expect in the short term and long term?
Do I need treatment right away?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
What treatment side effects should I expect?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Everyone’s situation is different, particularly with a condition that progresses slowly like Waldenström macroglobulinemia.
Research
shows that 66% of people (more than 2 out of 3) are alive 10 years after they’re diagnosed. But life expectancy varies by age. Many people diagnosed over age 65 (the most commonly diagnosed age group) die from causes unrelated to WM.
Your
prognosis
(likely outcome) depends on lots of factors, including your:
Age
Blood test results
Mutation type (not having an
MYD88
mutation sometimes suggests a worse outcome)
If you have questions about your situation, talk to your healthcare provider. They know you and the circumstances that may affect your health.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Living with a lymphoma
like Waldenström macroglobulinemia often requires major life adjustments. It’s important to take advantage of every resource you can. Talk with your healthcare provider about what
foods to eat
and what activities will promote
self-care
.
Advertisement
Reach out to others with rare conditions to combat possible feelings of isolation. You’re not alone in your diagnosis — even if it feels like it at first. Ask your provider to connect you with support groups.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Researchers haven’t discovered a cure for Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) yet. But they’ve found several treatments that can make living with it more manageable. Many people live with this condition for years without symptoms. Treatments are helping people with WM live longer than ever without sacrificing their quality of life. If you receive this diagnosis, ask your healthcare provider about your short-term and long-term outlook. They can help you decide on the best care plan.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
We offer comprehensive Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia care. Our experts use the latest tests and treatments to offer the most personalized care.
Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials