What Is Cancer? Symptoms, Causes & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cancer
Having cancer is a life-changing event. Knowing what to expect — from diagnosis to recovery — can empower you and help you take control of your health. This is a general overview of what cancer is, what causes it, how healthcare providers treat it and how you can take care of yourself throughout your journey.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Cancer happens when normal cells become cancerous cells that multiply and spread. Cancer is the second most common cause of death in the U.S.
What is cancer?
Cancer is a large group of diseases with one thing in common: They happen when normal cells become cancerous cells that multiply and spread. Your
genes
send instructions to your cells — like when to start and stop growing, for example. Normal cells follow these instructions, but cancer cells ignore them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cancer is the second most common cause of death in the U.S. But
fewer people
are dying of cancer now than 20 years ago. Early detection and innovative treatments are curing cancer and helping people with cancer live longer.
Types of cancer
There are
over 100 types
of cancer. Healthcare providers categorize them according to where they start in your body and the type of tissue they affect. There are three broad cancer classifications:
Solid cancers:
This is the most common type of cancer, making up about
80% to 90%
of all cases. This includes
carcinoma
that forms in epithelial tissue (like your skin, breast, colon and lungs) and
sarcoma
that forms in bone and connective tissues.
Blood cancers
:
These are cancers that start in your blood cells or lymphatic system. Examples include
leukemia
,
lymphoma
and
multiple myeloma
.
Mixed:
Cancers that involve two classifications or subtypes. Examples include carcinosarcoma and adenosquamous carcinoma.
How common is cancer?
Cancer is the second most common cause of
death
worldwide. Researchers estimate that in 2024,
over 2 million people
living in the U.S. will receive a cancer diagnosis, and over 611,000 people will die from the disease.
About
1 in 4
people will develop cancer at some point during their lifetime.
Advertisement
The most common cancers in the U.S. are:
Breast cancer
.
Lung cancer
.
Prostate cancer
.
Colorectal cancer
.
Blood cancers
.
Anyone can develop cancer, but cases vary based on race and sex. According to the 2022 Annual Report on Cancer, the disease:
Affects slightly more
men than women
.
Affects people over 60 more than any other age group.
Affects more Black men than those in other racial groups.
Affects more women who are American Indian or Alaska Natives than those in other racial groups.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of cancer?
Symptoms of cancer vary from person to person. They depend on what type of cancer you have and how advanced it is.
General cancer symptoms may include:
Fatigue
.
Fever
that occurs mostly at night.
Loss of appetite
.
Night sweats
.
Persistent pain.
Skin changes, particularly
moles
that change shape and size or new moles.
Unexplained weight loss
.
In some cases, cancer may cause additional organ-specific symptoms. These may include:
Blood in your pee
or
in your stool
.
Changes in the shape, color or size of a skin mole.
Coughing up blood
.
New lumps or bumps.
This isn’t an exhaustive list. And having these symptoms doesn’t necessarily mean you have cancer.
Cancer is a complicated disease. Different types cause different symptoms. It’s also possible to have cancer for years without knowing it. Other times, it can cause obvious symptoms that get worse very quickly.
A good rule of thumb is to let a healthcare provider know any time there’s a change in your body that lasts for more than two weeks.
What causes cancer?
Cancer is a
genetic disorder
. But that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s inherited. It happens when genes that manage cell activity
mutate
(change). They create abnormal cells that divide and multiply, eventually disrupting how your body works.
These cells create cancer clusters, or
tumors
. Cancerous cells may break away from tumors and travel to other areas of your body through your
lymphatic system
or
bloodstream
. (Healthcare providers call this
metastasis
.)
For example, a tumor in your breast may spread to your lungs, making it hard for you to breathe. In some types of blood cancer, your
bone marrow
makes abnormal blood cells that multiply uncontrollably. Eventually, the abnormal cells crowd out normal blood cells.
According to medical researchers,
inherited genetic mutations
(changes you can’t control) cause about
5% to 10%
of all cancers. More often, cancer occurs as an acquired genetic mutation (change). That means it happens over the course of your life. Medical researchers have identified several risk factors that increase your chance of developing cancer.
Advertisement
Risk factors
There isn’t one single cause for cancer. Rather, certain things can increase your chance of developing it, like:
Family history.
If you have close biological family members (parents, siblings, grandparents) who have cancer, you have a higher risk of developing it.
Smoking
.
Smoking tobacco or using
e-cigarettes
increases your chance of developing lung,
esophageal
,
pancreatic
and
oral cancer
.
Environmental factors.
Exposure to toxins in your environment, like asbestos, pesticides and radon, can eventually lead to cancer.
Malnutrition
.
High-fat or high-sugar foods can increase your risk for many types of cancer. You’re also more vulnerable to disease if you don’t get enough physical activity.
Hormone therapy
.
Women taking hormone replacement therapy may have an increased risk for breast cancer and
uterine cancer
.
Radiation exposure.
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation
from the sun significantly increases your risk of developing
skin cancer
. Over-exposure to radiation therapy can also be a risk factor.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is cancer diagnosed?
Healthcare providers begin a cancer diagnosis by doing a complete
physical examination
. They’ll ask you to describe your symptoms and your family medical history. They may also need to do:
Advertisement
Blood tests for cancer
, which may include
complete blood count (CBC)
, blood protein tests and
tumor marker
tests.
Imaging tests
like CT scans, MRI, ultrasound or
iodine metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIGB)
.
Biopsies
, which could be surgical (with an incision) or nonsurgical (with a
needle
).
Genetic testing for cancer
to diagnose and plan treatment for inherited forms of cancer.
How is cancer stage determined?
Healthcare providers use
cancer staging systems
to plan treatment and develop a prognosis or expected outcome.
Most cancers have four stages. The specific stage is determined by a few different factors, including the tumor’s size and location.
Stages I-III (1-3) (early-stage or locally advanced) usually describe cancer that has grown directly into surrounding tissue or has spread to nearby lymph nodes.
Stage IV (4) (or metastatic cancer) means that cancer cells have spread to distant areas of your body through your bloodstream or lymphatic system.
Management and Treatment
How is cancer treated?
Healthcare providers may use several different treatments, sometimes combining treatments based on your situation. Common
cancer treatments
include:
Surgery:
Can remove cancerous tumors that haven’t spread.
Chemotherapy
:
Destroys cancer cells with powerful drugs in pill form or intravenously (through a needle into a vein).
Radiation therapy
:
Kills cancer cells with high dosages of radiation.
Immunotherapy
:
Engages your
immune system
to fight the disease.
Targeted therapy
:
Targets the genetic mutations (changes) that turn healthy cells into cancer cells.
Hormone therapy
:
Blocks cancer-causing hormones. For example, people who have prostate cancer might receive hormones to lower
testosterone
, which can contribute to prostate cancer.
Bone marrow transplant
:
Replaces damaged blood
stem cells
with healthy ones.
Advertisement
Cancer treatments can cause several side effects. These side effects vary depending on which treatment you have and how your body tolerates it. If you develop side effects during your cancer treatment, let your healthcare provider know. They may be able to give you recommendations or medications that can help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for cancer?
You are unique, and so is your prognosis. Your healthcare providers will base your outlook on factors like:
Your overall health.
The type of cancer you have.
The stage of your cancer.
How you respond to treatment.
While there’s no single
cure
for cancer, some cancers respond well to treatment. Many people notice a reduction in their signs and symptoms. When this happens, healthcare providers call it
remission
. Partial remission is when you have fewer signs and symptoms. Complete remission is when you no longer experience symptoms at all.
Different cancers require different treatments, so outcomes vary. In general, people who receive their diagnosis and begin treatment before cancer spreads have a more positive outlook. But even if your cancer has spread beyond where it started, treatment can slow its growth, ease your symptoms, help you live longer and improve your quality of life.
What are cancer survival rates?
Survival rates
are estimates based on the experiences of large groups of people with different kinds of cancer. Like prognoses, survival rates vary based on cancer type, stage and treatment.
It’s important to remember that survival rates are only estimates. They can’t tell you how long you’ll live or how your body will respond to certain treatments. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about survival rates and what they mean for you.
Prevention
Can cancer be prevented?
You can’t always prevent cancer, especially when unavoidable risk factors cause it. But there are things you can do to lower your risk:
If you smoke or use tobacco, try to stop. Ask a healthcare provider about smoking cessation programs that can help you
quit tobacco
.
Follow a nutrition plan that’s healthy for you.
Include physical activity in your daily routine.
Avoid environmental toxins like asbestos and pesticides.
Protect yourself against
sun damage
.
Have regular
cancer screenings
.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Self-care is an important part of living with cancer, and it looks different for everyone. Giving yourself some TLC when you need it can reduce stress and enrich your mental, emotional and spiritual well-being. The following are some self-care ideas:
Explore art or
music therapy
.
Find a support group so you can talk with others who are having similar experiences.
Get a
massage
(but get the “OK” from your healthcare provider first).
Meet with a
nutritionist
to develop a personalized plan.
Practice
yoga
,
meditation
or other forms of
mindfulness
.
Read a cherished book or watch a favorite movie.
Rest whenever you need to, not just when you can.
Set your own “visiting hours” so you can spend time with your loved ones and still protect your downtime.
Talk with a therapist or counselor about the emotional impact of your illness.
Write your thoughts in a journal.
Some of these things might not be your cup of tea, and that’s OK. The bottom line? Do things that bring you joy and satisfaction. Find meaningful ways to spend your time.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Tell your healthcare provider about any issues you have while you’re undergoing cancer treatment, including any treatment side effects. In many cases, your
oncologist
can find ways to make you more comfortable. Don’t hesitate to reach out if you’re not feeling well.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Knowledge is power. If you have cancer, you’ll want to gather as much information as you can. Here are some questions to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of cancer do I have?
Has the cancer spread to other areas of my body?
What are my chances of survival?
Which treatments do you recommend?
What are the risks and benefits of my treatment?
How long will treatment take?
Will I be able to work during cancer treatment?
Will cancer treatment affect my fertility?
Will I need to stay in the hospital for my treatment?
Would a clinical trial be a good option for me?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
“You have cancer” may be one of the scariest things you’ll ever hear. Suddenly, everything seems uncertain. You might feel sad, alone, frustrated or angry. Maybe you’re all these things at once. Or maybe you’re totally numb. Whatever you’re feeling is valid and OK.
How will this diagnosis change me? What will my life look like now? How long do I have to spend with my loved ones? If these are the questions running through your mind, you’re not alone. The day of your diagnosis, you became a
cancer survivor
— a member of a global community. You’ll meet many people on this journey. Lean on them and your loved ones for support. Your healthcare providers understand the gravity of this life-changing event — and they’re here to help in whatever ways you need.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/19/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials