Fluid in Ear (Otitis Media With Effusion, Glue Ear)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Glue Ear
Advertisement
Advertisement
Glue Ear
Glue ear is a common condition in children that affects their hearing. It makes fluid build up inside their ear, dampening and muffling sound waves passing through their eardrum. You can’t see the fluid yourself, so parents noticing behavior changes and symptoms is usually how pediatricians find it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Glue Ear?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Glue Ear?
Glue ear happens when sticky fluid, sometimes bubbly (as seen here), builds up behind your ear drum and can’t drain out.
Glue ear is a common condition where inflammation makes thick, sticky fluid fill up your middle ear, the space behind your eardrum. This condition can affect one or both ears at a time. It’s a specific subtype of a condition called otitis media with effusion (middle ear inflammation with fluid buildup).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Glue ear usually happens because of an ear infection, but it can happen for other reasons, too. While glue ear is most common in children under 6 years old, anyone can develop it. It’s temporary and usually not serious, but having it long-term can damage your child’s hearing.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of glue ear
The main symptom of glue ear is hearing loss. That’s because fluid buildup inside your child’s middle ear muffles sound waves.
Other symptoms your child might have include:
Ringing or buzzing in their ears (
tinnitus
)
Feeling pressure or fullness in the affected ear
Ear pain
Popping sensation in their ears when swallowing
Balance difficulties
Younger children and babies may not be able to tell you when they experience symptoms like these. Instead, they may behave differently. Some behaviors you might see include:
Sleepiness
Fussiness or irritability
Lack of concentration
Wanting to play alone
Not responding when you call their name or talk to them
Asking you to repeat what you said
Asking you to turn up the volume on the TV or electronics
Talking unusually loudly
Pediatricians often find glue ear after parents notice symptoms or behavior changes and ask for an appointment. It takes a special medical instrument called an otoscope to see the fluid buildup that happens with glue ear.
Advertisement
Glue ear causes
Ear infections are the most likely cause of glue ear. Your body uses inflammation as part of its immune response to an infection. Inflammation inside your middle ear can narrow or block your
eustachian tubes
, making it hard for fluid inside to drain out. When the fluid is thicker and stickier, it looks like glue, which is where this condition gets its name.
As fluid builds up, it presses on your eardrum (tympanic membrane). It’s like holding your hand on the head of a drum. Pressure from your hand dampens the vibration, keeping the drum from making as much sound as it should. Likewise, dampening the sound waves as they pass through your eardrum is what muffles sounds in your affected ears.
But inflammation that causes glue ear can also happen for other reasons, including:
Allergies
Enlarged
adenoids
Having
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
Increases in air pressure, including
flying in an airplane
, altitude changes while driving on a mountain or scuba diving
Irritants, like cigarette smoke
Congenital and genetic conditions, like
Down syndrome
or
cleft palate
Viral
upper respiratory infections
, like a cold or the flu
Earwax buildup doesn’t cause glue ear. Getting water in your ear while showering or swimming doesn’t cause the condition either.
Glue ear risk factors
The main risk factors for glue ear include:
Attending daycare
Being under 6 years old
Bottle feeding
Exposure to tobacco
Having many siblings
Having frequent upper respiratory infections
Complications of this condition
Glue ear can muffle sounds, causing hearing loss in your affected ear. Hearing loss can also make it harder for children to communicate and learn to speak, and may cause a speech delay. They also might have trouble learning and keeping up in school.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose glue ear
Your child’s pediatrician can diagnose glue ear with a combination of methods. The first thing they’ll do is perform a
physical exam
and ask you about your child’s symptoms.
In some cases, your provider might recommend that your child see an audiologist for further testing. This specialist might run tests like a hearing test or
tympanometry
.
Management and Treatment
How is glue ear treated?
Most of the time, glue ear goes away on its own without treatment within three months. But depending on what’s causing it and how severe it is, your child’s provider might recommend one or more of the following treatments:
Antibiotics
Steroid nasal sprays
Myringotomy
(a surgery that might include placing a tube in the eardrum)
Adenoidectomy
Hearing aids
Surgery usually isn’t a first-line treatment. If your child still has glue ear after three months of trying other treatments, your provider may recommend surgery at that point.
Advertisement
When should I take my child to their pediatrician?
You should take your child to their pediatrician if you notice signs that they might have trouble hearing. You should also take them if they have symptoms of an ear infection, especially when the symptoms last longer than two days.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has glue ear?
If your child has glue ear, they might not be able to tell you about the symptoms. That makes spotting behavior changes especially important. And it’s important to remember that while it might look like your child is ignoring you or acting out, they can’t help what’s happening to them.
Is there anything I can do to treat glue ear at home?
You might be able to use home remedies for glue ear. But it’s best to call your child’s provider and ask them for guidance before trying to treat it yourself. Some remedies you might try include:
The
Valsalva maneuver
Keeping a warm, damp cloth or compress on the affected ear
Nasal balloons (your provider can recommend these and guide you on using them)
You should never use ear candles as a treatment for glue ear. There’s no evidence to support their effectiveness. Worse still, using them can lead to injuries like burns.
Prevention
Can glue ear be prevented?
You can reduce the odds of your child getting glue ear by making ear infections less likely to develop. Some things you can do include:
Breastfeeding:
Breast milk provides vital nutrients that your baby needs to help fight off infections.
Holding your baby upright during feeding:
Keep your baby in a seated position rather than lying them flat while they eat. This may help prevent fluid from entering their Eustachian tubes during feeding.
Avoiding cigarette smoke:
Try to keep smoke out of your house and car as much as possible.
Testing for allergies:
Ask your child’s healthcare provider about allergy testing if you think allergies might be a factor behind your child’s glue ear.
Cleaning and disinfecting:
Teach your child proper
handwashing
. And sanitize surfaces and clean toys regularly.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe your child has been fussier or more withdrawn lately. Or maybe it takes a few tries to get them to respond when you call them. Young children often can’t tell you their symptoms, so it’s up to you to notice behavior changes that could signal an issue. And glue ear is one condition you might help your pediatrician diagnose if you bring the behavior changes to their attention.
Glue ear usually isn’t serious, especially when caught and treated early. If you have questions about it or think your child might have it, talk to their pediatrician. Glue ear may not need treatment, but knowing what’s happening and what to do about it will help both you and your child as they recover from this condition.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment