Follicular Lymphoma: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Follicular Lymphoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Follicular Lymphoma
Follicular lymphoma is a slow-growing cancer that may appear in your lymph nodes, your bone marrow and other organs. There are ways to treat follicular lymphoma, but the condition often returns. Healthcare providers are hopeful that newer treatments, like immunotherapy drugs, may mean a cure is on the horizon.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Follicular Lymphoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Follicular Lymphoma?
Follicular lymphoma is a form of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma
that may appear in your lymph nodes, bone marrow and other organs. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is cancer that affects your
lymphatic system
. Follicular lymphoma is the second most common type of NHL, with about 15,000 to 20,000 new diagnoses in the U.S. each year.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Follicular lymphoma is an indolent (slow-growing) cancer. But there’s a small chance it can progress to a more aggressive cancer called
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
.
It’s not curable — at least not yet. But new treatments are helping people live longer with follicular lymphoma. Most people with this condition die
with
it, not from it.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of follicular lymphoma
You can have follicular lymphoma without having any symptoms. When people do have them, the ones that usually show up are painless swelling in the neck, armpit or groin. This is a sign of enlarged lymph nodes.
Other symptoms include:
Fatigue
Fever
Night sweats and chills
Unexplained weight loss (especially losing 10% or more of your weight within the past six months)
Follicular lymphoma causes
Researchers don’t know what causes follicular lymphoma. They do know changes in people’s chromosomes happen in about
85%
of cases. The changes transform normal B cells into cancer cells.
B cells
are white blood cells that make antibodies to fight infections. But cancer cells don’t function in this way. Instead, they multiply and grow. Eventually, they may cause symptoms.
These changes happen at some point in your lifetime. Follicular lymphoma isn’t inherited.
Risk factors
People age 65 and older are more likely to have this condition. People who are white receive this diagnosis more often than people of other races.
Advertisement
Children can develop follicular lymphoma. But it’s so different from the adult form that researchers consider it a different type of cancer. Unlike the adult type, pediatric follicular lymphoma is often curable.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Having a
biopsy
done is the only way to know for sure if you have follicular lymphoma. After confirming your diagnosis, your healthcare provider will order tests to stage it.
Cancer staging
can show how early or advanced the disease is. You may need:
Blood tests
PET scans
CT scans
Stages of follicular lymphoma
Follicular lymphoma stages range from I to IV:
Stage I
: Cancer is in one or more lymph nodes.
Stage II
: Cancer is in lymph nodes above or below your diaphragm. Your diaphragm is a band of muscle that separates your chest from your abdomen.
Stage III
: Cancer is in lymph nodes on both sides of your diaphragm.
Stage IV
: Cancer has spread beyond your lymph nodes.
Since follicular lymphoma doesn’t cause symptoms right away, most people have Stage III or IV disease by the time they’re diagnosed.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
You may not need treatment if you don’t have symptoms.
Research
shows that early treatment of asymptomatic follicular lymphoma doesn’t improve survival. Instead, your provider may suggest active surveillance. They’ll check on your condition regularly. You’ll only get treatment if you develop symptoms that treatment can ease or that keep the disease from getting worse.
Treatments include:
Radiation therapy
: Providers often use radiation therapy to treat Stage I follicular lymphoma. In about half of people, it sends the cancer into long-term remission. This means there are no signs or symptoms of cancer.
Chemotherapy
: You may need chemotherapy with or without immunotherapy. For many people, it sends the cancer into remission.
Immunotherapy
: You may need immunotherapy alone or with chemotherapy. It helps people achieve and stay in remission. New immunotherapy drugs treat lymphoma that comes back (relapsed disease).
Targeted therapy
: This treatment targets cancer cell weaknesses related to certain mutations. It treats some forms of follicular lymphoma that relapse.
Stem cell transplant
: This treatment sends healthy blood-forming cells into your body to replace the cancer cells. You may need this treatment if follicular lymphoma comes back. But it carries risks. So, it’s not an option for everyone.
Experts are constantly finding new treatments that work on follicular lymphoma. In particular, immunotherapy drugs like
rituximab
have been a game-changer for people with this diagnosis. Researchers are hopeful that follicular lymphoma may one day be curable.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll see your provider regularly. You may need blood or imaging tests so your provider can monitor your condition or treatment. But you should also contact them if you notice changes that may be signs of new or worsening symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Follicular lymphoma is a slow-growing condition that’s considered a chronic illness. About
half
of all people diagnosed with it are alive 20 years later. About
9 out of 10
of people are alive five years after diagnosis. Since most people diagnosed are over 50, this means that many people eventually die of causes unrelated to the cancer.
But there are lots of ways this disease can unfold. You may never need treatment, or you may develop more aggressive disease, like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Your chances of cancer progression increase slightly each year.
Managing the disease in the long term often becomes a way of life with this diagnosis.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Your healthcare provider can suggest ways to
cope with a lymphoma diagnosis
. You may be living with cancer for a long time. Long-term survival is good news, of course, but living with a chronic illness may be challenging.
Making
changes to your diet
may help you feel better. Talking to a therapist or finding a support group can help, too. Finding
cancer survivorship support
is an important part of living with this disease.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Can follicular lymphoma be cured?
There’s currently no cure for follicular lymphoma. Radiation to treat Stage I disease sends the cancer into long-term remission for many people. But there’s always the chance that the cancer may come back.
This is why your healthcare provider will check on you even after treatment.
Does follicular lymphoma metastasize?
It’s possible. When it does, it usually spreads to your bone marrow and other organs in your lymphatic system.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You can have follicular lymphoma without symptoms for years. If they start, you may find yourself cycling through periods of treatment, remission, relapse and more treatment. The back-and-forth can take a physical and emotional toll. This is why it’s important to learn as much as you can from your healthcare provider about what to expect. Ask them about new therapies that may be effective. More and more, providers are using treatments that may one day move follicular lymphoma from the list of chronic diseases to the list of curable ones.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you hear that you might have lymphoma, you want care from experts you can trust. At Cleveland Clinic, we craft a treatment plan tailored for you and your needs.
Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials