Alzheimer’s Disease: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Alzheimer’s Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s disease is a brain condition that slowly damages your memory, thinking, learning and organizing skills. It’s the most common cause of dementia. Symptoms usually first appear in people older than 65. There’s no cure, but medications may manage symptoms and slow its progression.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Alzheimer's Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Alzheimer’s disease?
Signs and Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Is Alzheimer’s disease?
Learn more about living with Alzheimer's disease.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of
dementia
. Alzheimer’s is pronounced “alz-HAI-mers.” It’s a
neurodegenerative disease
that affects your
brain
. This means it damages and destroys cells in your brain over time. Eventually, people with AD lose some of their brain functions, including memory and language.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Alzheimer’s disease affects approximately 24 million people worldwide. One in 10 people older than 65 have it. Nearly 1 in 3 people older than 85 have AD.
Healthcare providers can suggest treatments to manage symptoms, but there’s no cure for Alzheimer’s disease. Talk to a provider if you’re worried you or a loved one have AD symptoms.
Signs and Symptoms
Talk to a healthcare provider if you’re worried you or a loved one have Alzheimer’s disease symptoms.
What are Alzheimer’s disease symptoms?
Alzheimer’s disease affects everyone differently. But in general, it can weaken or completely eliminate your:
Memory
Reasoning
Language
Behavior and personality
Spatial understanding
People with memory loss or other Alzheimer’s symptoms may have difficulty recognizing changes in their own mind and body. These signs may be more obvious to loved ones.
Symptoms will get noticeably worse over time (a progressive decline). See a healthcare provider right away if you or a loved one have any dementia-like symptoms.
Memory
Memory loss
is the most common Alzheimer’s symptom. It can affect your ability to recall recent events (short-term memory) or things that happened a long time ago (long-term memory).
You may have trouble remembering:
Faces or names
Facts
Where you are (even in familiar places like at home)
Memory issues from AD are different and more serious than occasionally forgetting where you left your phone or wondering if you locked the door when you came home.
Advertisement
Reasoning
Someone with Alzheimer’s might seem confused or like they’re taking an unusually long time to make a choice or decision. This can affect your ability to:
Decide what to do next
Follow a recipe
Make plans
Language
Alzheimer’s disease can make it hard for you to speak, read or understand language (
aphasia
). You may:
Communicate or talk less than you used to
Mix-and-match languages (if you speak more than one)
Revert to speaking in the language you spoke most when you were growing up
Say or use the wrong word
Behavior and personality
You might notice mood or personality changes in a person with Alzheimer’s disease. They might:
Act more suspicious (even around people they’ve known for years)
Experience
mood swings
(including being more aggressive than usual)
Feel increased agitation,
paranoia
or hallucinations
Strop trusting themselves or loved ones
Everyone has a bad day or feels upset sometimes. But mood and personality changes caused by Alzheimer’s are more intense or sudden than everyday anger or grumpiness.
Spatial understanding
You may have a hard time understanding how close objects around you are from your body or feel less coordinated than usual. This can include:
Bumping into furniture
Having a tough time picking something up
Struggling to do delicate hand motions (like tie your shoes or type on a keyboard)
Experts classify Alzheimer’s disease with
stages
. These stages can refer to how close you are to having dementia, the Alzheimer’s severity or how quickly it developed.
Causes
What causes Alzheimer’s disease?
An abnormal build-up of proteins in your brain causes Alzheimer’s disease. Specifically, two proteins called amyloid and tau.
Your brain has billions of
nerve cells
called neurons. Your neurons let you think, learn, remember and plan. Amyloid protein sticks together in your brain cells, forming clumps called plaques. Tau proteins twist together in fiber-like strands called tangles. The plaques and tangles prevent neurons from working as they should. They block neurons’ ability to send electrical and chemical signals back and forth.
When amyloid and tau proteins build up in your brain, they slowly kill neurons. This causes permanent damage that leads to Alzheimer’s symptoms. Nerve cell death starts in one area of your brain and then spreads to other areas. It’s most common for Alzheimer’s to begin in the area of your brain that controls memory — your
hippocampus
.
Experts are still studying Alzheimer’s disease to learn more about what exactly causes these proteins to build up. Researchers think the protein build-up happens a long time before it causes symptoms. It might happen up to 10 years before you notice any changes.
Advertisement
Is Alzheimer’s disease hereditary?
Yes, Alzheimer’s can be
hereditary (genetic)
.
Your risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease is 10% to 30% higher if you have a biological parent or sibling with it. You’re three times more likely than average to develop AD if two or more of your biological siblings have it.
Having the
APOE
ε4 gene
increases your risk of developing Alzheimer’s. It’s also associated with developing AD at a younger age (an earlier age of onset). But not everyone who has the
APOE
ε4 gene will get Alzheimer’s. It’s just one factor that can increase your risk.
What are Alzheimer’s risk factors?
Researchers don’t know why some people get Alzheimer’s disease and others don’t. Some risk factors may include:
Being Black or Latino
Environmental factors (something about where you live, work or spend a lot of time)
Genetic changes
Having a
traumatic brain injury
Smoking
Your age (AD usually affects people older than 65)
Your overall health
Some health conditions may increase your Alzheimer’s risk, including:
Cardiovascular disease
Diabetes
Down syndrome
caused by trisomy 21
High blood pressure
High cholesterol
Obesity
What are the complications of Alzheimer’s disease?
The biggest complication of Alzheimer’s disease is the damage it does to your brain. That can cause permanent changes to your ability to think, to use your body and to your personality. As the condition progresses, you’re likely to experience complications, some of which can be fatal.
Advertisement
Complications can include:
An overall decline in physical health
Infections (like
pneumonia
or skin infections)
Seizures
Trouble breathing
Trouble swallowing
You may lose your ability to control your body. This can increase your risk of:
Bedsores
Dehydration
or
malnutrition
Falls,
bone fractures
and other traumatic injuries
Losing control of your pee (
urinary incontinence
) and poop (
bowel incontinence
)
Tooth decay,
cavities
and other dental issues
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Alzheimer’s disease diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose Alzheimer’s disease in a few ways. The first step is discussing your current health and medical history.
Your provider will talk to you and your loved ones. They’ll ask you questions to understand your health and daily routine. Tell your provider if you know you have any risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease.
Your provider will ask your loved ones if they’ve noticed any symptoms or changes you might not be able to see in yourself. They might ask about your:
Ability to do your usual activities
Changes in your mood, behavior and personality
Current medications
Medical history
Overall health
Your provider will also give you a complete
physical exam
and
neurological exam
. They’ll rule out other conditions that cause similar memory issues and other symptoms.
Advertisement
Your provider will also use a few tests, including:
Blood tests
Brain MRI
Cognitive tests
CT scan
PET scan
Psychiatric and mental health evaluations
Urine tests
These tests can help your provider look for signs of amyloid proteins and see if they have damaged your brain.
Your provider will work with you and your loved ones to develop a treatment plan that fits your unique needs. They’ll help you set realistic goals for your short-term health and long-term outlook.
Management and Treatment
What are Alzheimer’s disease treatments?
Your provider will suggest treatments to slow down how fast you develop dementia. There’s no cure for Alzheimer’s, but treatments may manage symptoms as they happen and slow down the condition’s progression.
Starting treatment as soon as possible is the best way to maintain your brain health throughout your life. But there currently isn’t a treatment available that stops or reverses Alzheimer’s disease.
There are many medications that can manage Alzheimer’s symptoms. Your provider will suggest a combination that fits your unique needs. You might need:
Cholinesterase inhibitors
These medications block an enzyme that can speed up how quickly Alzheimer’s damages your brain. They can improve some memory problems and reduce your risk of behavior changes. Your provider might prescribe:
Donepezil
Galantamine
Rivastigmine
Clinical trials
Scientists are always researching Alzheimer’s disease and possible treatments. Ask your provider if there are any clinical trials that could help you. Clinical trials are tests or research studies done using human volunteers who have a condition or issue. A trial might help you try new treatments that aren’t widely available yet.
There may be more opportunities to participate in clinical trials the sooner you’re diagnosed.
Lecanemab or donanemab
Lecanemab and donanemab are intravenous (IV) infusions. They’re two types of
monoclonal antibodies
. These are medications that can help your body’s
immune system
target and destroy amyloid proteins. They can slow down Alzheimer’s progression by getting rid of some of the amyloid before it damages your brain.
Lecanemab targets amyloid fibers before they stick together. Donanemab targets amyloid proteins that have already clumped together to form plaques.
Like all other treatments, these medications aren’t cures for Alzheimer’s disease. And they can’t reverse any damage that amyloid has already done.
NMDA antagonists
If you have Alzheimer’s, your body makes too much
glutamate
, which damages your brain’s cells. NMDA antagonists block or fill up the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors glutamate binds to in your brain. This can slow down how fast Alzheimer’s progresses.
Memantine
is a common NMDA antagonist. Your provider may suggest others depending on your health and which stage of Alzheimer’s disease you have.
Symptom-management medications
Your provider will suggest medications or other treatments to manage specific symptoms as they develop. You may need:
Antidepressants
. These drugs can treat
anxiety
, restlessness, mood swings and
depression
.
Antipsychotics (neuroleptics)
. These drugs can treat paranoia, hallucinations and
agitation
.
Antiseizure medications
. These medications can also sometimes treat mood changes.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Alzheimer's Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy?
Alzheimer’s disease affects everyone differently. Most people older than 65 with Alzheimer’s die within four to eight years of being diagnosed. But some people live for decades, especially if they were diagnosed before turning 65.
Talk to your provider about living with AD. They’ll help you set realistic goals and expectations. They can also help you and your loved ones decide when
hospice
care is a good option for you.
Talk to a mental health professional if you need support. It’s extremely common for people with AD and their loved ones to feel extra
stress
and anxiety, especially right after diagnosis. Those feelings are real and valid. A mental healthcare provider can help you process your thoughts and emotions.
Prevention
How can you prevent Alzheimer’s disease?
There are some Alzheimer’s risk factors you can’t change or control, like your age and genetics. But you may be able to manage other factors to help reduce your risk. Maintaining your overall health can help protect your brain from cognitive decline. You can try to:
Follow a healthy eating plan
. Eating a variety of nutritious foods can help maintain your brain and overall health. Your provider might suggest you follow a specific eating plan like the
Mediterranean
or
DASH
diet.
Get plenty of physical activity
. Exercise and physical activities increase blood flow and oxygen to your brain, which may improve your brain cell health. You don’t have to be a high-level athlete to stay active. Walking, gardening, riding a bike or any hobby that makes you move your body can be great ways to stay active.
Stay mentally active
. Play board games, read, do crossword puzzles, play a musical instrument or do other hobbies that challenge your brain to use and learn new skills.
Stay socially connected
. Regularly talk with your loved ones or people in your community. Joining group activities, such as religious services, exercise classes, book clubs or community volunteer work can all help keep your brain engaged.
Talk to your provider about
genetic testing
if you’re worried about Alzheimer’s running in your biological family. They can screen you for the
genes
or genetic changes that may increase your risk of AD.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if you or a loved one are experiencing issues with memory or thinking. They can determine if the issues are due to Alzheimer’s or another condition.
You’ll need regular check-ups with your healthcare provider after you’ve been diagnosed with AD. Your provider will monitor the condition’s progression and adjust your treatments as needed.
You might want to ask your provider a few questions, like:
What symptoms or changes should I and my loved ones watch out for?
Is there any way to estimate how quickly Alzheimer’s will progress?
Which treatments are best for me?
Am I a good candidate for a clinical trial?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) can be scary. It can feel like time has stopped or is moving too fast all at the same time. There’s no right or wrong way to live with a condition like Alzheimer’s disease.
Whether you have Alzheimer’s or are caring for a loved one living with AD, your healthcare providers are there for you. They’ll of course suggest treatments and clinical trials. But they can also answer your questions, connect you with resources and help make sure you understand what to expect.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Getting an Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis can be overwhelming. Cleveland Clinic offers the latest treatments, education and caring support for you and your family.
Alzheimer's Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment