Chronotropic Incompetence (CI): Symptoms & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Chronotropic Incompetence
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chronotropic Incompetence
Chronotropic incompetence (CI) is an inability to raise your heart rate during physical activity. With this issue, your heart can’t pump enough blood to meet your body’s demand for oxygen. Many people with heart and lung issues have this problem. It can lead to exercise intolerance (limited ability to exercise like others your age).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is chronotropic incompetence?
Chronotropic incompetence (CI) is being unable to increase your
heart rate
with physical activity. Your body needs more oxygen when you’re moving compared to when you’re not moving. Chronotropic incompetence means your
heart
can’t keep up with your body’s increased demand for oxygen. With CI, your heart can’t pump enough
blood
(which carries oxygen) to meet your needs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
CI can lead to
exercise intolerance
. This means you can’t do as much physical activity as someone your age. You may find it’s harder to walk as far as you once did without feeling like you need to catch your breath.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs of chronotropic incompetence?
Chronotropic incompetence symptoms include:
Fatigue
during physical activity
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
) from physical activity
What causes chronotropic incompetence?
Causes of chronotropic incompetence include:
Certain medications
, like
beta-blockers
Sinus node dysfunction
. This is a problem with the place where your heartbeat starts
Conduction
issues
(how heartbeat signals move through your heart)
Left ventricular dysfunction
. This is a problem with the
heart chamber
that pushes blood out of your heart so your body can use it
Ischemic heart disease
. This happens when blood flow to your heart is too low
Heart failure
. This inability of your heart to pump well leads to fluid buildup
Congenital heart disease
. This includes heart issues that are present at birth
What are the risk factors?
Risk factors for chronotropic incompetence include:
Heart failure
Obesity
Diabetes
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (
COPD
)
High blood pressure
HIV
Epstein-Barr virus
Long COVID
Diagnosis and Tests
How is it diagnosed?
Healthcare providers may make a chronotropic incompetence diagnosis if your heart rate can’t reach a certain level.
Advertisement
Some providers set the goal at 70% to 85% of your age-predicted maximal heart rate (APMHR) during peak physical activity. A common formula for APMHR is 220 minus your age. But providers don’t have a standard they agree on for making a diagnosis. They may use other formulas for diagnosis, like setting the cutoff at 80% of your
heart rate reserve
. If your heart rate can’t reach 80% of your heart rate reserve, you may have CI.
How do you test for chronotropic competence?
A provider may order a continuous
heart rhythm monitor
for you to wear so they can see what happens to your heart rate when you’re doing your usual activities. A provider may also perform an exercise
EKG
or a
metabolic exercise stress test
, which they also call a cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET). You’ll walk on a treadmill or pedal on a stationary bike. A provider will measure your heart rate to see if you’re able to increase it to the goal rate they set. For CPET, you’ll also wear a mask to measure the amount of oxygen your body uses when you exercise.
Management and Treatment
How do you treat chronotropic insufficiency?
Chronotropic incompetence treatment may include:
Physical activity
. This can improve your ability to move more
Pacemaker
. This can ensure your heart rate increases enough to meet your body’s needs when you exert yourself
Biventricular pacemaker
(for
cardiac resynchronization therapy
). This is a special pacemaker that makes sure your two lower heart chambers beat together. This type of pacemaker benefits specific heart conditions
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have chronotropic incompetence?
Adults with chronotropic incompetence may have more fatigue or breathlessness than expected during usual daily activities or physical activity. Rare cases may lead to fainting when your heart rate isn’t fast enough to supply enough blood to your brain.
Studies have shown that adults who have obesity and chronotropic incompetence have a higher risk of
heart attack
or heart failure. One study suggests that people with CI have a higher risk of developing atrial fibrillation (
Afib
). CI in people with heart failure is related to poorer overall survival. Studies have also shown an association between chronotropic incompetence and decreased longevity.
Prevention
Can chronotropic incompetence be prevented?
Some of the conditions that cause chronotropic incompetence are beyond your control. But you can reduce your risk of CI in several ways, like:
Getting treatment for any heart or
lung
condition you have
Staying at a weight that’s healthy for you
Managing conditions like diabetes and high blood pressure
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Living with chronotropic incompetence means your body is putting limits on what you can do. This is a time for patience. Talk to your provider about whether you need to change certain medications or whether a pacemaker is appropriate. If your provider inserted a device in your chest, make sure you understand how it works. Keep your follow-up appointments to ensure your device is working properly. If your provider gave you a plan to build up your physical activity, follow the instructions they gave you.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to consider asking your provider may include:
Do you know what caused my chronotropic incompetence?
What can I do to be at my best?
What can I expect from the pacemaker you put in?
Are there any programs that can help me do more physical activity?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be frustrating when you’re not able to do the things you could do in the past. Even walking while carrying a load of laundry can be hard. But you don’t have to deal with chronotropic incompetence alone. Your healthcare team is there to help in any way they can.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/01/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment