Frenulum Breve (Short Frenulum): Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Frenulum Breve (Short Frenulum)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Frenulum Breve (Short Frenulum)
Frenulum breve is when the fold of skin that connects the head of your penis to your foreskin is too short and tight. It can cause uncomfortable and even painful erections. Mild cases may go away with steroid creams and gentle stretching. But more severe cases may require surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Frenulum Breve?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Frenulum Breve?
Frenulum breve (pronounced “FREN-yuh-luhm brev-AY”) is when your
penis frenulum
is too short. The frenulum is the skin fold that connects the head of your penis (glans) to the underside of your
foreskin
. The purpose of the frenulum is to allow your foreskin to draw back over the head of your penis. If the frenulum is too short, it pulls on the foreskin and can cause pain or discomfort.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Another name for frenulum breve is short foreskin.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of frenulum breve
The most common signs and symptoms of frenulum breve are:
Discomfort or pain in your penis, especially when you have an
erection
Pain during
masturbation
or sexual intercourse (
dyspareunia
)
Tearing and bleeding underneath the head of your penis
Trouble pulling back your foreskin
For some, frenulum breve may also cause you to ejaculate before you want to
(premature ejaculation
).
Does it affect penis sensation?
No. Your frenulum is very sensitive. Even if it’s shorter than expected, it won’t affect sensation (feelings) in your penis. You actually may be more likely to ejaculate before you want to if you have frenulum breve.
Frenulum breve causes
Most
males
who have frenulum breve have it at birth (congenital). But sometimes, frenulum breve can happen because of other
penile disorders
. These include:
Infections or inflammation that cause the tissue in your frenulum to change
An injury to your frenulum that doesn’t heal as it should
A foreskin that’s too tight (
phimosis
), which may also cause a shorter frenulum
Are there other conditions associated with it?
Yes. Other conditions can cause an uncomfortable tightening of your frenulum. These include:
Balanitis
: This is when an infection or other skin condition causes inflammation in the head of your penis.
Balanoposthitis
: Inflammation affects your foreskin and the head of your penis.
Sexually transmitted infections
(STIs)
: Some STIs can cause balanitis, which may lead to frenulum breve.
Skin diseases
: Some skin diseases that affect your penis can cause inflammation and swelling, which can tighten your frenulum.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose frenulum breve
Frenulum breve symptoms are obvious. Many people notice discomfort, pain and even bleeding, especially during sexual activity. A healthcare provider can diagnose a short frenulum after reviewing your symptoms and examining your penis.
Management and Treatment
How is frenulum breve treated?
There are several treatments for a short frenulum. Home treatments may include gentle stretching exercises and steroid creams. If these don’t work, your healthcare provider may recommend surgically removing (excising) the frenulum.
The surgery is an outpatient procedure. “Outpatient” means you can go home the same day as the procedure. You’ll receive
anesthesia
so you won’t feel any pain.
Should the frenulum be removed?
It depends on how tight your frenulum is. You usually don’t need to remove your frenulum in mild cases. But severe cases may require surgery.
Recovery time
If you need surgery, you’ll likely have slight discomfort or pain in the incision area for two to three days after the procedure. Over-the-counter
pain relievers
can help. With proper
incision care
, the area should heal in about 10 days in younger children. It may take as long as four to six weeks for adults.
How do I loosen my frenulum?
In milder cases, a healthcare provider may suggest that you gently stretch your frenulum for a few minutes each day. A lubricant or hot shower can help loosen the skin before you stretch.
It’s very important that you only do frenulum stretches under the guidance of a healthcare provider. If you’re not careful, your frenulum can tear.
What if my frenulum tears?
Pulling a short frenulum sometimes causes tearing. When this happens, it can bleed and cause severe pain. If you think you tore your frenulum, you should:
Take over-the-counter pain relievers.
Wash the area with soap and water and apply a clean bandage.
Keep it clean and avoid having sexual intercourse until it heals.
See a healthcare provider if it doesn’t heal on its own or shows signs of infection, like discoloration or inflammation.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of frenulum breve. During your appointment, you may wish to ask:
What can I do at home to reduce my discomfort or pain?
What treatment do you recommend?
Are there any side effects to your recommended treatment?
If I need a surgical procedure, what should I expect?
How will I feel after frenulum breve treatment?
Will surgery improve premature ejaculation?
How often should I schedule check-ups?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have frenulum breve?
With a proper diagnosis and treatment, the outlook for frenulum breve is good. Surgical procedures are routine. They also have a high success rate.
When can I resume sexual intercourse?
After surgery, recovery may take four to six weeks. Avoid all sexual activity, including
masturbation
, during that time to allow the area to heal. This also helps prevent infections.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can frenulum breve be prevented?
You can’t prevent all causes of frenulum breve. But circumcision at birth prevents the risk.
Taking proper care of your penis can also help prevent an injury that can lead to it:
Clean your penis regularly, including washing under your foreskin and making sure it’s dry.
Practice
safe sex
to help reduce your risk of STIs.
Wear an athletic cup and jock strap during contact sports.
Additional Common Questions
Can I cut my frenulum at home?
No. Don’t attempt to cut your frenulum at home. It may not fix the problem. It can even make it worse. Any scar tissue that forms can keep the frenulum short and tight. If you have problems with your frenulum, talk to a healthcare provider.
What is the difference between frenulum breve and phimosis?
Frenulum breve and phimosis are both penis conditions that share common symptoms. Phimosis is when your foreskin is too tight to pull back. But it doesn’t involve a short frenulum.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Your frenulum helps pull your foreskin over the head of your penis. Sometimes, it’s too short and can cause discomfort or pain — usually when you have an erection. It can be a little awkward talking about your private areas. But don’t ignore the signs that something is wrong. Reach out to a healthcare provider for an official diagnosis and treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your urinary system, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment