Lactation Consultant: When You Need One & What To Expect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Lactation Consultant
Advertisement
Advertisement
Lactation Consultant
A lactation consultant helps you navigate the rewarding but often challenging breastfeeding journey. Wondering which breastfeeding position to use? Have nipple pain? Baby struggling to latch? Bring these concerns and more to your lactation consultant. They’ll help you find solutions so you can continue breastfeeding for as long as you choose.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
A lactation consultant can help your baby latch properly so they get the nourishment they need.
What is a lactation consultant?
A lactation consultant is a health professional who specializes in
breastfeeding
and in offering breast milk to infants. You can visit a lactation consultant while you’re pregnant, right after you give birth or several months into breastfeeding. You might need this support most urgently during the first few weeks of your baby’s life. This is when your baby is learning how to nurse, and both of you may need more support.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Breastfeeding offers many
benefits
to both you and your baby. But challenges like
nipple pain
or low milk supply make some women stop breastfeeding. Lactation consultants are trained to work with infants and their parents to address any feeding challenges. Getting lactation support can improve your chances of breastfeeding for as long as you choose.
Lactation consultants have extensive education and training. They must pass the International Board of Lactation Consultant Examiners (IBLCE) exam. This earns them the credential of International Board Certified Lactation Consultant (IBCLC®).
What do lactation consultants do?
Lactation consultants can educate you on how to:
Find comfortable
breastfeeding positions
for you and your baby
Help your baby
latch
Recognize and learn more about your baby’s hunger cues
Develop a
feeding
schedule
Increase, decrease or maintain your milk supply, depending on your individual needs
Check if your baby is gaining weight
Pump or express milk by hand or with a
breast pump
Wean your baby
Do
kangaroo care
(skin-to-skin contact)
Prepare for return to work
Lactation consultants can also help you manage lactation challenges related to latching and pumping.
What can I expect from my appointment with a lactation consultant?
In general, you can expect your lactation consultant to:
Advertisement
Visit you within the first few days of giving birth (if you’re staying in a hospital), as this time is important for establishing breastfeeding
Review your health history and your baby’s health record
Observe a feeding and provide coaching as you and your baby learn to breastfeed
Give pointers on positioning and how to become more comfortable breastfeeding
Help you with your breast pump and make sure it fits your
breasts
and
nipples
properly
Answer any questions you have and troubleshoot issues unique to you and your baby
Teach you how to know if your baby is getting enough breastmilk and gaining enough weight — these could be things like counting dirty and wet diapers or using a scale to weigh your baby before and after feedings
Lactation consultants work best when they can interact with you in person. Your consultant will ask if it’s OK to observe as you feed your child. They'll ask permission to assess you or your baby by touch if needed for guidance.
As with any healthcare professional, if you’re uncomfortable with care that involves touch, don’t hesitate to tell them. Their job is to respect your wishes and find ways to provide care in a way that is most comfortable for you.
While in-person consultations are the traditional way to get support, some people find success doing virtual consultations.
What are common questions to ask a lactation consultant?
It may help to prepare a list of questions before your visit with a lactation consultant. Some questions may be unique to you and your baby. However, common questions people ask lactation consultants include:
How do I ease nipple pain?
How can I get my baby to latch?
What breastfeeding positions do you recommend?
How do I obtain or keep an adequate
milk supply
?
How can I tell if my baby is hungry?
How do I know if my baby is eating enough?
How long should my baby nurse from each breast?
When do you recommend hand expression of milk or pumping?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
How do I find a lactation consultant?
Some hospitals have lactation consultants on staff, while others don’t. If you aren’t sure if your hospital sends a lactation consultant to your room after you give birth, talk to your nurse or healthcare provider.
How much does it cost to see a lactation consultant?
The cost varies depending on where you live, what services you need and what kind of insurance you have. Some hospitals include a visit from a lactation consultant as part of your care. Other times, families need support beyond what their insurance will pay.
Call your insurance company to learn if visiting a lactation consultant is covered under your plan.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Breastfeeding is a different journey for everyone. And whether it’s your first child or your fifth, each experience is new in its own way. Lactation consultants understand the joys and challenges of breastfeeding. And they have the knowledge to support you.
Advertisement
Don’t hesitate to reach out to your lactation consultant any time you have questions or concerns. They’ll offer expert guidance — and sometimes simply a listening ear — to help you navigate this time.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breastfeeding is natural and rewarding, but it’s not without challenges. Get the support you need at Cleveland Clinic.
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us