Pseudohypoparathyroidism: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a rare genetic condition in which your body doesn’t respond to parathyroid hormone (PTH), even though your glands make enough of it. It’s usually diagnosed in childhood. Symptoms may include numbness and seizures. Treatment is usually lifelong and involves taking supplements to maintain proper calcium levels.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Genetic Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Pseudohypoparathyroidism?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Pseudohypoparathyroidism?
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a rare
genetic disorder
where your body doesn’t process
parathyroid hormone
(PTH), even though your
parathyroid glands
produce normal amounts of it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Parathyroid hormone helps maintain calcium, phosphorus and vitamin D levels in your
blood
. PHP disrupts your body’s ability to use the hormones your parathyroid gland makes (parathyroid hormone resistance). As a result, the calcium levels in your blood drop and the phosphorus levels rise. This imbalance can lead to problems like
muscle cramps
, numbness,
seizures
and dental issues.
PHP is different from
hypoparathyroidism
. People with hypoparathyroidism don’t produce enough PTH to begin with.
Types of PHP
The different types are:
PHP-1
. This is the most common type. In addition to PTH resistance, PHP-1 causes skeletal abnormalities like a round face, short stature, short neck and shortened hand and foot bones. Healthcare providers call this set of symptoms
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO)
. People with PHP-1 inherit the
GNAS
gene variant (change) from one of their biological parents.
PPHP (pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism)
. This is a limited form of PHP-1. People with PPHP have physical symptoms of AHO but don’t have PTH resistance.
PHP-2
. People with PHP-2 have PTH resistance but lack the physical symptoms of AHO. Researchers don’t yet know which genetic abnormality causes PHP-2.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of pseudohypoparathyroidism
Pseudohypoparathyroidism symptoms vary from person to person and may include:
Muscle spasms
Muscle cramps
Numbness
or tingling in your hands or feet
Seizures
Teeth
that grow in later than expected
Weakened
tooth enamel
Low blood pressure
Brittle hair and nails
Anxiety
Brittle hair and nails
Depression
People with PHP-1 also have Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO). AHO and PHP features may include:
Round face
Short stature
Short neck
Shortened bones in your hands and feet
Obesity
Vision issues like cataracts,
blurred vision
or light sensitivity
Bony bumps under your skin
Developmental delays
Pseudohypoparathyroidism causes
Variations
(changes) in your
GNAS
gene cause the disease. Some people inherit it from a biological parent. Others develop it for no known reason. PHP usually develops during infancy or childhood. But adults can get it, too.
Complications of pseudohypoparathyroidism
If you have PHP, you’re more likely to develop other
endocrine system
disorders. These
hormonal issues
can cause symptoms like low energy and
low sex drive
.
Some people with PHP are also more likely to develop:
Parkinsonism
Difficulty with
fine motor skills
Carpal tunnel syndrome
(in people with PHP-1)
Spinal stenosis
Sleep apnea
(in children)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose pseudohypoparathyroidism
A healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
and review your family history. If they suspect the disease, they’ll likely run tests to confirm a diagnosis. These tests may include:
Blood tests
to measure hormone levels
Urine tests
(pee tests) to measure calcium and phosphorus levels
Genetic testing
for the
GNAS
gene
Electrocardiogram (EKG
)
to check for an abnormal heart rhythm
Hand X-rays
to check for shortened bones
CT (computed tomography) scan
to look for differences in your brain
Management and Treatment
How is pseudohypoparathyroidism treated?
Treatment aims to restore and maintain proper levels of calcium and phosphorus in your blood. Managing these levels can help reduce your symptoms.
There’s no cure for the disease, but you can manage it with ongoing, lifelong treatment. Treatments may include:
Calcium and vitamin D supplements
Calcitriol capsules
(a medication that increases calcium in your body)
Calcitriol injections
Growth
or
thyroid hormone
replacement
A high-calcium, low-phosphorus diet
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have PHP, see your healthcare provider regularly so they can monitor your calcium and phosphorus levels. Routine appointments can help things stay on track.
Call 911 or head to your nearest emergency room if you develop severe symptoms like difficulty breathing, painful muscle cramps or seizures.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Genetic Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have pseudohypoparathyroidism?
If you have pseudohypoparathyroidism, you’ll receive ongoing care with your
primary care physician
. Because PHP can affect several parts of your body, you may also need to see specialists who can help manage your specific symptoms. Your healthcare team could include:
Advertisement
Endocrinologists
Orthopaedic surgeons
Pediatricians
Neurologists
Physical therapists
Occupational therapists
Nutritionists
Dentists
Geneticists
Pain management
specialists
You’ll likely need to take supplements for the rest of your life.
Developmental and intellectual abilities vary significantly depending on the type and severity of the disease. In most cases, people with PHP have a normal life expectancy compared to people without PHP. Your healthcare provider can tell you what to expect.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Pseudohypoparathyroidism is a rare condition, so it can be difficult to find others going through the same thing. That can feel isolating at times. If you or your child receive a PHP diagnosis, talk to your healthcare provider about support groups and educational resources. These can help you find ways to improve your symptoms and overall quality of life.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Do certain health conditions seem to run in your family? Are you ready to find out if you’re at risk? Cleveland Clinic’s genetics team can help.
Schedule Genetic Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes