Retrograde Ejaculation: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Retrograde Ejaculation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Retrograde Ejaculation
Retrograde ejaculation is when semen pushes back toward your bladder instead of out through your penis. It doesn’t hurt. But it can cause infertility. Common causes include certain types of medications or surgery in the area. Treatment can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Male Infertility Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Retrograde Ejaculation?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Retrograde Ejaculation?
Retrograde ejaculation causes semen to enter your bladder instead of leaving through your penis during orgasm.
Retrograde
ejaculation
is when
semen
goes back into your
urinary bladder
instead of out of your body through your
urethra
and the tip of your penis during sexual climax (
orgasm
). During a typical ejaculation, your circular muscle (bladder sphincter or urethral sphincter) closes so semen leaves your body through your urethra. If you have retrograde ejaculation, your circular muscle stays open. It can be a cause of
male infertility
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Retrograde ejaculation is somewhat common. For instance, it occurs after most
transurethral resection of the prostate
(TURP) surgeries. Conditions like
diabetes
and medications that treat
high blood pressure
(hypertension) or
depression
can also cause it.
Other names for retrograde ejaculation include:
Retro ejaculation
Dry orgasm
Retrograde orgasm
Symptoms and Causes
Retrograde ejaculation symptoms
Retrograde ejaculation symptoms include:
Producing little or no semen when you orgasm
Cloudy pee
after you orgasm
Fertility issues
Can it cause sexual dysfunction?
Retrograde ejaculation won’t affect your ability to get an
erection
or have an orgasm. But it may cause
stress
or
anxiety
, which can affect the pleasure you get from sexual activity. Talk to a healthcare provider if retrograde ejaculation prevents you from enjoying sex.
Why have I stopped ejaculating?
Retrograde ejaculation occurs because of a problem with your circular muscle. Your circular muscle acts like a valve — it closes to let semen out of your body and keep pee in your body. When it doesn’t work as expected, it stays open instead of closing, allowing ejaculate to go into your bladder instead of through your urethra and out of your body.
Many conditions can prevent your circular muscle from closing properly. These include:
Surgery in the area
Medications that treat
benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH), high blood pressure or depression
Nerve
damage
Advertisement
How does it leave the body?
If you have retrograde ejaculation, semen leaves your body when you pee.
Who does it affect?
You’re more likely to have retrograde ejaculation if you have:
Had surgery on your
prostate
(TURP or
prostatectomy
)
Had surgery on your urethra (urethrectomy)
Diabetes or
multiple sclerosis
(MS)
A
spinal cord injury
Had pelvic or
rectal
surgery
Structural issues with your urethra
You may also be more likely to have retrograde ejaculation if you take certain types of medications, including some types of:
Prostate medications
Blood pressure medications
(antihypertensives)
Antidepressants
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose retrograde ejaculation
A healthcare provider will review your medical history, ask about your symptoms and perform a
physical exam
. If they suspect retrograde ejaculation, they may ask you to provide:
Semen samples
. If you produce low volumes of semen in at least two samples, you may have retrograde ejaculation.
A
urine sample
right after you orgasm
. Fruit sugar (fructose) is present in semen — it helps give your
sperm
the energy they need to swim. Fructose isn’t present in pee. So, if an analyst finds fructose in your pee sample, you likely have retrograde ejaculation. They’ll also analyze the number of sperm you have in your pee sample.
Management and Treatment
How do you fix retrograde ejaculation?
Retrograde ejaculation isn’t painful or harmful. If you don’t want biological children and don’t have any other symptoms, you may not need treatment.
If you decide to get treatment, some medications can help the circular muscle close tightly. A healthcare provider may recommend:
Imipramine
, which is an older antidepressant
Antihistamines
, including
pseudoephedrine
and
chlorpheniramine
Midodrine
, which typically helps treat
low blood pressure
If medications that you’re taking cause retrograde ejaculation, a provider may recommend switching to a different type of drug.
If medications don’t successfully treat retrograde ejaculation and you wish to have a biological child, providers may suggest assisted reproductive technology (ART). They can retrieve sperm through a pee sample or a procedure such as
microsurgical testicular sperm extraction
(microTESE).
What are the side effects of treatment?
A healthcare provider will monitor your
blood pressure
and heart rate if you take imipramine or pseudoephedrine to treat retrograde ejaculation. These drugs may increase both your blood pressure and
heart rate
.
Are there exercises that help?
Some people believe
Kegel exercises
, which help strengthen your
pelvic floor muscles
, may help promote ejaculation. Kegels help improve
urinary incontinence
and
fecal incontinence
(leaking pee or poop), and they can also give you greater control of when you ejaculate. But they won’t help force your ejaculate through your urethra and out of your penis.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you’re:
Trying to have biological children and haven’t been able to get pregnant
Uncomfortable with how you feel when you orgasm
Receiving treatment for retrograde ejaculation but it isn’t working
You may wish to ask the following questions during your appointment:
What’s causing retrograde ejaculation?
How likely am I to have retrograde ejaculation after surgery in the area?
What treatment do you recommend?
Should I be aware of any other signs or complications?
What’s the complete list of medications that cause retrograde ejaculation?
Should I see a
urologist
?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Male Infertility Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for retrograde ejaculation?
The outlook for retrograde ejaculation is good. Healthcare providers don’t believe that retrograde ejaculation is harmful or painful. If you don’t wish to have biological children, you may not even need treatment. But if you do, treatments are available for both retrograde ejaculation and infertility.
How long does it last?
It depends on the cause. If a medication causes retrograde ejaculation, it should go away shortly after a healthcare provider switches medications. But retrograde ejaculation may be long-lasting or even permanent if a severe condition, such as nerve damage, is the cause. A healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect according to your situation.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can retrograde ejaculation be prevented?
You can’t always prevent retrograde ejaculation. A healthcare provider will explain your risk if you have a condition or take medications that may cause retrograde ejaculation.
If you have benign prostatic hyperplasia, newer minimally invasive surgical approaches, such as a
prostatic urethral lift
and the
Rezūm procedure
, may reduce your chances of developing retrograde ejaculation. Talk to a healthcare provider about whether these approaches may be appropriate for you.
If you require surgery that increases your risk of retrograde ejaculation and are thinking of having biological children in the future, it’s a good idea to talk to a provider about
banking your sperm
.
Additional Common Questions
What does retrograde ejaculation feel like?
Retrograde ejaculation feels the same as when semen comes out of your urethra (antegrade ejaculation). But for some, the lack of visible semen during an orgasm can feel awkward or disappointing. Contact a healthcare provider if you’re uncomfortable for any reason about the lack of semen.
Can not ejaculating cause problems?
There isn’t any evidence that not ejaculating hurts you or causes any problems. Your body absorbs any sperm you don’t release.
Do you pee out retrograde ejaculation?
Yes, if you have retrograde ejaculation, semen leaves your body when you pee.
At what age do men stop ejaculating?
Many people see a reduction in their sex drive (libido) and sexual activity as they get older. But there’s no specific age at which ejaculation stops. Some people may have difficulty ejaculating in their 30s. But others continue to ejaculate into their 80s.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Retrograde ejaculation can be very alarming. When it occurs, it’s natural to worry about the sensitive areas of your body or think that something is broken. And that can be uncomfortable to talk to a partner about, let alone a healthcare provider. But in most cases, it’s usually harmless. Still, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare provider anytime something unexpected happens to your body. You may not want or need treatment. But if it causes fertility problems, treatment can help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infertility can change your plans. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can work with you to get to the bottom of male infertility and create a customized treatment plan.
Male Infertility Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment