Pinched Nerve: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pinched Nerve
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pinched Nerve
A pinched nerve is a nonmedical term for a compressed nerve. It can happen to any of the nerves outside of your spinal cord for a variety of reasons. You may feel tingling, numbness and pain. Mildly pinched nerves usually resolve with at-home care. But more severe cases may need medical treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a pinched nerve?
A pinched nerve is a broad term for a compressed
peripheral nerve
(the
nerves
outside of your
brain
and
spinal cord
). Tissues that surround your nerves — like bones,
ligaments
and
muscles
— can put pressure on them and “squeeze” them. This typically causes symptoms like
numbness
, tingling and pain.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
“Pinched nerve” isn’t a technical medical diagnosis. Healthcare providers diagnose more specific causes and consequences of pinched nerves, like
spinal stenosis
and
radiculopathy
, for example. Providers may also call pinched nerves “nerve entrapment.”
Symptoms of a pinched nerve can be temporary or long-lasting (chronic), depending on the cause and severity. Most cases are treatable with rest, over-the-counter (OTC) medication and physical therapy.
What are the types of pinched nerves?
There are several types of and reasons for pinched nerves based on the affected nerve. Nerves that travel through small openings (called tunnels or canals) in your
joints
are more at risk of becoming pinched. Tissue swelling or damage puts pressure on the nerve, causing symptoms.
Spine-related pinched nerves
When surrounding tissues press on peripheral nerve roots (where peripheral nerves “exit” your spinal cord), it can cause pain, numbness and tingling in different areas of your body. This is called radiculopathy.
There are several types of radiculopathies based on where the pinched nerve is along your
spine
:
Neck (
cervical radiculopathy
).
Middle to upper back (
thoracic
radiculopathy).
Low back (
lumbar
radiculopathy).
Other types of pinched nerves
Examples of pinched nerves elsewhere in your body include:
Advertisement
Median nerve
in your wrist:
Carpal tunnel syndrome
.
Radial nerve
in your elbow:
Radial tunnel syndrome
.
Nerves in your lower neck and upper chest:
Thoracic outlet syndrome
.
Ulnar nerve
in your elbow or wrist: Ulnar nerve entrapment.
Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve in your thigh:
Meralgia paresthetica
.
Peroneal nerve on the top of your foot: Fibular tunnel syndrome.
Pudendal nerve
in your pelvic area:
Pudendal neuralgia
.
Sciatic nerve
in your lower back, hips, butt or leg:
Sciatica
.
Tibial nerve
in your heel or sole of your foot:
Tarsal tunnel syndrome
.
These are all examples of
nerve compression syndromes
.
The experience of your limb “falling asleep” is also an example of a pinched nerve. This is the briefest form of a pinched nerve. Having poor positioning while you’re sitting or lying down can pinch a single nerve, which gives you that tingling or numb feeling. It goes away shortly after you move out of the position that caused it.
How common is a pinched nerve?
Pinched nerves are common, especially mild cases. It’s common for people to have a single pinched nerve when their feet or hands “fall asleep.”
Severely pinched nerves — like ones that cause radiculopathy — are rarer.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a pinched nerve?
A pinched nerve usually causes symptoms of
paresthesia
(abnormal sensation). This can feel like:
Tingling.
Burning.
Pricking or prickling.
Itching.
“Pins and needles”
Numbness.
A “falling asleep” sensation.
A pinched nerve can also cause pain. This may feel sharp or like a dull ache. Moderately to severely pinched nerves may result in muscle weakness.
Since a single nerve can supply sensation to more than one part of your body, these symptoms can spread to different areas. For example, having a pinched sciatic nerve in your lower back can cause symptoms in your hips, butt and/or leg.
What causes a pinched nerve?
Pinched nerves happen when surrounding tissues — like bones, ligaments and muscles — press against your nerves. Excess swelling and
inflammation
can also squeeze nerves. Specific conditions that can lead to abnormal pressure on your nerves include:
Rheumatoid arthritis
: This condition causes inflammation in your joints that may put pressure on nearby nerves.
Osteoarthritis
: This is the “wear and tear” condition that breaks down the
cartilage
in your joints. As your cartilage wears away, your bones begin to rub against each other. Your body responds by growing new bone.
Bone spurs
, or an overgrowth of bone, commonly form, which can press on nearby nerves.
Injury
: Injuries that affect your
bones
, joints, ligaments or muscles can potentially lead to a pinched nerve — either from the displaced or damaged tissue or the swelling that develops after the injury.
Advertisement
Specific spine conditions that can lead to a pinched nerve include:
Herniated disk
.
Spinal tumors
.
Spinal stenosis
.
Spinal fracture
.
What increases your risk of a pinched nerve?
Factors that increase your risk of experiencing a pinched nerve include:
Age
: People above age 50 are most likely to experience a pinched nerve — typically due to arthritis and age-related degeneration.
Obesity
: Excess weight can put pressure on your nerves.
Pregnancy
: The fetus takes up space in your body during pregnancy, pushing organs and other tissues to the side. This can lead to compressed nerves. The weight of the fetus and
placenta
can also squeeze nerves.
Repetitive motion tasks
: Repetitive joint movements can cause inflammation that leads to a pinched nerve. People who do certain jobs or activities with repetitive motions (like typing, assembly line work or certain sports) are more at risk.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a pinched nerve diagnosed?
You’ll want to visit a healthcare provider about your pinched nerve if it’s not responding to conservative treatment at home, like rest and over-the-counter pain relievers. To find the source of the pinched nerve, your provider will
physically examine
the affected area. They’ll look for muscle weakness, check for changes in reflexes and ask about the different sensations you’re feeling.
Advertisement
If necessary, your provider may recommend one or more of these tests to find the source of the problem:
X-ray
: An X-ray can show bone changes that may be affecting nerves, like narrowing of your spinal canal or fractures.
Ultrasound
: An ultrasound may show nerve compression or damage to the surrounding ligaments.
Computed tomography (CT) scan
: A CT scan shows 3D images and more detail of your bones and soft tissues (like ligaments) than an X-ray.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
: An MRI can show if damage to soft tissues is causing nerve compression.
Electromyography (EMG)
and
nerve conduction study
: These tests can help determine if a nerve is working as it should. This helps your provider see if symptoms are due to pressure on spinal nerve roots or if they’re the result of another condition and cause.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for a pinched nerve?
You likely won’t need surgery for a pinched nerve. Instead, your healthcare provider may recommend one or more of these treatments to help you feel better:
Time and rest
: For many people, time takes care of a pinched nerve, and it doesn’t need formal medical treatment. Your symptoms may go away in a few days or weeks.
Ice and heat
: Apply ice and heat as you would with any swollen area for temporary relief.
Over-the-counter
pain relievers
:
Acetaminophen
and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
may help your symptoms. NSAIDs include
ibuprofen
and
naproxen
. Be sure to follow the instructions on the package to safely take these medications.
Immobilization devices
: Depending on the affected area and the cause of the pinched nerve, your provider may recommend wearing a brace to immobilize that area of your body. This limits movement and your range of motion to allow your nerve time to heal. Examples include a
splint
for your wrist and a cervical collar for your neck.
Corticosteroids
: Your provider may prescribe anti-inflammatory medications like
prednisone
to relieve pain and inflammation. These may be oral medications (taken by mouth) or
injections
.
Physical therapy
: Stretches and light exercise can help ease pressure on your nerves and relieve minor pain. Talk to your provider or
physical therapist
about what types of exercises are best for the type of pinched nerve you’re experiencing.
Advertisement
Surgery is the last resort in treating a pinched nerve when nonsurgical treatment hasn’t helped. The type of surgery depends on the area and cause of the pinched nerve.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Do pinched nerves go away on their own?
Mildly pinched nerves often resolve on their own with at-home care, like rest. Moderately pinched nerves may need some medical care, like physical therapy or corticosteroids. Severely pinched nerves — including those that result from chronic conditions like spinal stenosis — may be long-lasting.
Your healthcare provider will be able to give you a better idea of what to expect.
What are the signs that my pinched nerve is healing?
Reduced symptom severity is a sign that your pinched nerve is healing. This may include:
Pain that’s not as severe.
Pain that affects fewer parts of your body than before.
Less intensity and/or frequency of abnormal sensations (like tingling or numbness).
Improved range of motion in your affected joint.
Improved muscle strength in the affected area.
Fewer “triggers” of your symptoms.
It can take time for nerves to heal. Know that a reduction in your symptoms — even if it’s small — is a good sign. If your symptoms haven’t improved after a couple of weeks, see your healthcare provider.
Prevention
How can I prevent getting a pinched nerve?
It’s not possible to prevent all types of pinched nerves. But taking certain actions can help lower your risk. For example:
Maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Do
stretching exercises
to keep your muscles strong and flexible.
Avoid sitting or lying in one position for too long or crossing your legs for an extended period.
Limit and take breaks from repetitive motions (such as typing).
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
If you’ve had symptoms of a pinched nerve for more than a week and they’re not getting better with at-home care, see your healthcare provider. They can determine the underlying cause and recommend treatment.
If you have intense pain or sudden muscle weakness, see a provider as soon as possible.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Pinched nerves are a common problem. Considering you have hundreds of branches of peripheral nerves in your body, it’s easy to see how just one of them can become compressed. But that doesn’t mean you have to live with lasting pain and abnormal sensations from this issue. If you think you might have a pinched nerve and your symptoms aren’t improving, talk to your healthcare provider. They’re available to help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/25/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment