Enzymes: What Are Enzymes, Pancreas, Digestion & Liver Function
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Enzymes
Advertisement
Advertisement
Enzymes
Enzymes are proteins that help speed up chemical reactions in our bodies. Enzymes are essential for digestion, liver function and much more. Too much or too little of a certain enzyme can cause health problems. Enzymes in our blood can also help healthcare providers check for injuries and diseases.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What are enzymes?
Enzymes are proteins that help speed up
metabolism
, or the chemical reactions in our bodies. They build some substances and break others down. All living things have enzymes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Our bodies naturally produce enzymes. But enzymes are also in manufactured products and food.
What do enzymes do?
One of the most important roles of enzymes is to aid in digestion. Digestion is the process of turning the food we eat into energy. For example, there are enzymes in our saliva, pancreas, intestines and stomach. They break down fats, proteins and carbohydrates. Enzymes use these nutrients for growth and cell repair.
Enzymes also help with:
Breathing.
Building muscle.
Nerve function.
Ridding our bodies of toxins.
What are the different types of enzymes?
There are thousands of individual enzymes in the body. Each type of enzyme only has one job. For example, the enzyme sucrase breaks down a sugar called sucrose. Lactase breaks down lactose, a kind of sugar found in milk products.
Some of the most common
digestive enzymes
are:
Carbohydrase
breaks down carbohydrates into sugars.
Lipase
breaks down fats into fatty acids.
Protease
breaks down protein into amino acids.
Parts of Enzymes
What are the parts of an enzyme?
Each enzyme has an “active site.” This area has a unique shape. The substance an enzyme works on is a substrate. The substrate also has a unique shape. The enzyme and the substrate must fit together to work.
How do temperature and pH affect enzymes?
Enzymes need the right conditions to work. If conditions aren’t right, enzymes can change shape. Then, they no longer fit with substrates, so they don’t work correctly.
Advertisement
Each enzyme has an ideal temperature and pH:
pH:
Enzymes are sensitive to acidity and alkalinity. They don’t work properly if an environment is too acidic or basic. For example, an enzyme in the stomach called pepsin breaks down proteins. If your stomach doesn’t have enough acid, pepsin can’t function optimally.
Temperature:
Enzymes work best when your body temperature is normal, about 98.6°F (37°C). As temperature increases, enzyme reactions increase. But if the temperature gets too high, the enzyme stops working. That’s why a high
fever
can disrupt bodily functions.
Common Conditions & Disorders
What health conditions can enzyme problems cause?
Metabolic disorders are often the result of not having enough of a certain enzyme. Parents can pass them to their children through genes (inherited). Some examples of inherited metabolic disorders include:
Fabry disease
prevents body from making enzymes (alpha-galactosidase A) that break down fat (lipids).
Krabbe disease
(globoid cell leukodystrophy) affects enzymes needed for the protective covering (myelin) on nerve cells (Central Nervous System).
Maple syrup urine disease
affects enzymes needed to break down certain branch chain amino acids.
Other health conditions related to enzyme imbalances include:
Crohn’s disease
an imbalance of the bacteria in your gut (gut microbiome) may influence an autoimmune response of the intestinal tract. This may play a role in presentation and severity of Crohn’s disease.
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI
)
is a condition where your pancreas doesn’t have enough digestive enzymes. You can’t break down food or absorb nutrients. Chronic
pancreatitis
,
pancreatic cancer
,
diabetes
or
cystic fibrosis
can lead to EPI.
Lactose intolerance
is a shortage of the enzyme needed to digest sugars in milk (lactose) and dairy.
How are enzyme tests used to diagnose health conditions?
Your healthcare provider can use a variety of enzyme and protein blood tests to check for certain health conditions. For example,
elevated liver enzymes
could be a sign of
liver disease
.
Caring for Your Enzymes
Do I need to take enzyme supplements?
People without chronic health conditions can usually get the enzymes they need from a healthy diet. But, if you have certain health conditions, your healthcare provider may recommend taking enzyme supplements. For instance, many people with EPI may take a digestive enzyme before they eat. This helps their bodies absorb nutrients from food. Talk to your healthcare provider before taking any type of enzyme supplement.
Can medications affect enzyme levels?
Some medications affect enzyme levels. For example,
antibiotics
can kill certain bacteria needed for some enzymes to work their best. This is the reason antibiotics may cause diarrhea. To kill the bacteria making you sick, they also wipe out important good bacteria that aid in digestion.
Statins
(medications that lower cholesterol) can raise liver enzymes and muscle enzymes. They may increase the risk of damage to the liver or muscles.
When to Call a Doctor
When should I contact my doctor about an enzyme problem?
You won’t know if you have an enzyme problem without a blood test. Contact your doctor if you experience any of the following problems:
Abdominal pain
.
Bloating
or
gas
.
Diarrhea
.
Fatigue
.
Nausea and vomiting
.
Unexplained weight loss
.
Low red blood counts (anemia)
.
Gastrointestinal bleeding
.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Enzymes help facilitate biochemical reactions in our bodies. They aid in everything from breathing to digestion. Having too little or too much of a certain enzyme can lead to health problems. Some people with chronic conditions may need to take enzyme supplements to help their bodies work as they should. Only take enzyme supplements under the supervision of your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/12/2021.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us