Alcohol-Related Dementia: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Alcohol-Related Dementia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Alcohol-Related Dementia
Alcohol-related dementia happens when years of heavy drinking cause damage in your brain. That damage destroys nerve cells that you need to control your thoughts and body movements. The best treatment is to stop using alcohol. Alcohol-related dementia isn’t progressive. That means it won’t get more severe over time if can you stop drinking.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is alcohol-related dementia?
Alcohol-related dementia is a type of
dementia
that happens when drinking too much alcohol damages your
brain
. People sometimes call it “alcohol-induced dementia” or “alcoholic dementia,” but these are more outdated names.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers can suggest treatments to manage the symptoms you experience. You might partially regain some of your ability to use your brain if you stop drinking.
Having an occasional drink or two won’t cause dementia. The damage that causes alcohol-related dementia happens after years of unsafe drinking.
Talk to a healthcare provider about how much alcohol you drink. Don’t be afraid or ashamed to ask for help if it’s hard for you to stop drinking.
Substance use disorder
is a health condition, not a sign you’re a bad person. Treatment is available.
What is alcohol-related brain damage?
Alcohol-related brain damage (ARBD) is any brain damage that comes from overusing alcohol. Alcohol-related dementia is a serious form of ARBD.
Alcohol may be safe in moderation. But the more (and more often) you drink, the higher your risk of ARBD.
Symptoms and Causes
Alcohol-related dementia shares symptoms with other dementias.
What are the symptoms of alcohol-related dementia?
Alcohol-related dementia shares symptoms with other dementias. At first, you might notice signs like
memory loss
, everyday tasks feeling harder than usual or trouble concentrating.
Alcohol-related dementia can affect your:
Memory
.
You might not remember facts, names or faces as well as you used to. This can affect your ability to recall recent events (
short-term memory
) or things that happened a long time ago (long-term memory).
Reasoning.
You might have a hard time processing information or deciding what to do next. It can be hard to handle complex tasks like following a recipe.
Language.
You might say or use the wrong word or communicate less than you used to.
Behavior and personality.
You may experience
mood swings
, including being more aggressive than usual. You might feel
agitation
,
paranoia
or have
hallucinations
.
Spatial understanding.
You may have a hard time understanding how close objects around you are from your body. This can make it hard to walk or make you feel less coordinated than usual. You may bump into furniture or struggle to do delicate hand motions like tying your shoes.
Advertisement
Symptoms usually develop slowly over time, but some people notice changes suddenly. You’ll probably notice issues with your memory before other signs. Which symptoms you experience will depend on which areas of your brain alcohol damages.
Stages of alcohol-related dementia
Dementia causes a cognitive decline — it reduces how well your brain works. Providers sometimes group alcohol-related dementia into four stages based on its severity:
Mild cognitive impairment
.
You’ll experience mild symptoms — a mild cognitive decline. It’s common to notice memory or reasoning issues in this stage. You’ll probably still be able to drive, get around familiar places and take care of yourself without issues.
Early-stage alcohol-related dementia.
The cognitive decline will cause more symptoms. You’ll experience noticeable memory loss. You might struggle to remember recent events, names or important information. The symptoms will impact your daily life, and you may require support from loved ones to do all of your usual activities.
Mid-stage alcohol-related dementia.
Cognitive decline will cause more noticeable symptoms. It may be harder to use language or move well. You might struggle to recognize places and people, even familiar loved ones and neighbors you see often.
Late-stage alcohol-related dementia.
A severe cognitive decline causes the most intense symptoms. You may not be able to talk, walk or take care of yourself. You’ll probably need constant care.
Alcohol-related dementia doesn’t cause a progressive cognitive decline like
Alzheimer’s disease
. This means the damage in your brain won’t automatically get worse over time if you stop drinking. But continuing to drink alcohol can cause additional brain damage and make you advance through the stages.
What causes alcohol-related dementia?
Drinking too much alcohol too often causes alcohol-related dementia.
The kind of drinking that causes alcohol-related dementia is different from an occasional cocktail, beer or glass of wine. The American Medical Association recommends that
males
have no more than two standard-sized drinks per day, and no more than 14 in a week. Females should have no more than one standard-sized drink a day, and seven or fewer drinks each week.
A standard-sized drink is:
Twelve ounces of beer with 5% alcohol by volume (ABV)
Five ounces of wine with 12% ABV
One-and-a-half ounces of liquor of around 40% ABV
Overusing alcohol can damage
nerves
and
blood vessels
in your brain. Over time, that damage can add up and destroy special nerve cells called neurons. Your brain needs neurons to control your thoughts and body. You can start to lose the functions that area of your brain controls if alcohol destroys those neurons.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Alcohol-related dementia usually affects people between the ages of 40 and 50 who have been drinking heavily for years. But you can develop alcohol-related dementia at any age if you’re drinking more alcohol than is safe. It’s most common among people who have
alcohol use disorder
.
The best way to prevent alcohol-related dementia is to avoid drinking too much alcohol. Talk to a healthcare provider or a loved one if you’re worried you’re drinking too much. You’re not weak for admitting you need help. The sooner you reduce how much alcohol you use, the better.
What are the complications of alcohol-related dementia?
The biggest complication of alcohol-related dementia is the damage in your brain. That can cause permanent changes to your personality and your ability to think and use your body. You may experience complications, some of which can be fatal.
Complications can include:
An overall decline in your physical health
Infections (like
pneumonia
or skin infections)
Other alcohol-related health conditions like
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
Seizures
Trouble breathing
Trouble swallowing
Over time, you may lose your ability to control your body and take care of yourself. This can increase your risk of:
Bedsores
Dehydration
or
malnutrition
Falls,
bone fractures
and other traumatic injuries
Losing control of your pee (
urinary incontinence
) and poop (
bowel incontinence
)
Tooth decay,
cavities
and other dental issues
Advertisement
You may also have a higher risk of
traumatic brain injuries
if you have alcohol-related dementia. Unsafe drinking increases your risk of falls, car accidents and other
head injuries
. These traumas may damage your brain and destroy neurons. This can make you progress through stages of alcohol-related dementia faster.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is alcohol-related dementia diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can diagnose alcohol-related dementia in a few ways. The first step is doing a complete
physical exam
and
neurological exam
. Your provider will rule out other conditions that cause similar memory issues and other symptoms.
Your provider will ask you questions to understand your health and daily routine. They may also talk to a loved one to learn if they’ve noticed any changes you might not be able to see in yourself. Your provider may ask about your:
Ability to do your usual activities
Alcohol consumption
Current medications
Medical history
Mood, behavior and personality and any changes you’ve noticed
Nutrition
Overall health
Be honest with your provider about how often you drink alcohol. They won’t judge you or make you feel badly. They want to help you understand what’s causing the symptoms you’re experiencing.
Your provider may use a few tests to diagnose alcohol-related dementia, including:
Advertisement
Blood tests
Brain MRI
Cognitive tests
CT scan
PET scan
Urine tests
They may use other tests to look for signs of alcohol-related conditions, including:
Alcohol-related cardiomyopathy
Alcohol-related hepatitis
Cirrhosis
Management and Treatment
What are alcohol-related dementia treatments?
Your provider will suggest treatments to help you manage the symptoms you’re experiencing. But there’s no way to reverse the brain damage from alcohol-related dementia.
The most important treatment is to stop drinking alcohol. Continuing to drink will increase the damage in your brain and can make you develop more severe symptoms.
Your provider will help you stop using alcohol safely. Quitting suddenly (cold turkey) can cause withdrawal and complications like
delirium tremens (DT)
. DT is a severe form of sudden alcohol withdrawal that’s a medical emergency.
You may need to stay in the hospital or a residential rehab center to make sure you’re safe while you adjust to living without alcohol.
Other treatments you may need include:
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT or talk therapy)
.
Talking to a mental health professional can help you process
stress
, anxiety and your feelings. It can also help you find coping strategies to avoid alcohol.
Medications.
There aren’t any specific drugs that treat alcohol-related dementia. But your provider may suggest some medications that treat other kinds of dementia. They might prescribe medicines to treat alcohol use disorder like
naltrexone
and
acamprosate
.
Nutrition support.
You’ll need supplemental nutrition if you have malnutrition or a vitamin deficiency.
Support groups.
Support groups are a way to connect with others who understand your situation. Your provider can suggest groups for you and your loved ones.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for alcohol-related dementia?
Alcohol-related dementia affects everyone differently. There isn’t currently a cure for any type of dementia. So, you should expect the changes in your ability to think and use your body to be permanent. But you’re still you, even if you have to adjust to new changes.
What is the life expectancy for someone with alcohol-related dementia?
Alcohol-related dementia can affect how long you’ll live (your
life expectancy
). But it’s hard for experts to estimate a set number or guidelines that apply to everyone.
What you can expect depends on a few factors, including:
If you stop drinking alcohol
The severity of the brain damage
Which areas of your brain are affected
Your age
Your overall health
You may have other alcohol-related health conditions that can affect your life expectancy, too. It’s hard to prove which condition affects your life expectancy the most. What’s most important is making sure you’re safe and that you have ways to manage the symptoms.
Your provider will help you set realistic expectations based on your health and unique situation.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if you’re experiencing issues with memory or thinking. They can determine if the issues are due to alcohol-related dementia or another condition. Don’t hide symptoms or how you feel from your provider. Remember, they’re not trying to get you in trouble or make you feel shame. But they need to know how you feel and what you’re experiencing to help you get the right diagnosis and treatments.
You’ll need regular check-ups with your healthcare provider They’ll monitor your brain for any changes and adjust your treatments as needed.
Which questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Ask your provider any questions you may have. You might want to ask them:
Can you suggest resources to help me quit using alcohol?
Are there any medications that can help? If so, how do I take them?
Can you recommend a therapist and/or support groups?
Which other symptoms or signs of complications should I watch out for?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A dementia diagnosis can be scary. But your providers will help you find treatments that manage the symptoms and help you stay safe, no matter what.
Alcohol-related dementia happens after years of drinking too much. But if you quit using alcohol, the damage won’t get worse. You’re not a failure or a lost cause because you have a health condition. Nobody is. Alcohol use disorder and dementia are both health conditions, not signs you’re weak or have made a mistake.
Talk to your loved ones, your provider, a support group or a mental health professional. They’ll all help you feel safe, seen and heard while you get used to any changes in your brain and body.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A substance use disorder can turn your life upside down. Cleveland Clinic has the hope and treatment you need.
Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment