What Is a Psychiatric Technician and Aide? What They Do
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Psychiatric Technician and Aide
Advertisement
Advertisement
Psychiatric Technician and Aide
Psychiatric technicians and psychiatric aides provide care to people with mental health disorders and developmental disabilities. Their duties range from listening to people and monitoring their behavior to helping people with activities of daily living, including feeding, bathing and dressing.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is a psychiatric technician?
A psychiatric technician is a healthcare provider who provides care for people with
mental health conditions
and developmental disabilities. These providers use their knowledge and training to provide direct care to those in need. Psychiatric technicians work in various settings as part of a healthcare team under the direction of
psychiatrists
and registered nurses. Other names for a psychiatric technician include:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Mental health technician.
Behavioral health technician.
What does a psychiatric technician do?
Psychiatric technicians provide care to people with mental health disorders or developmental disabilities. They primarily work in healthcare settings like hospitals, group homes and state mental hospitals. Psychiatric technician duties may include:
Listening to patient concerns, watching their behavior and recording their condition.
Reporting changes in patient behavior to medical staff.
Leading patients in recreational and therapeutic activities.
Providing treatments to patients, which may include prescription medications.
Helping with the admission and discharge of patients.
Monitoring
vital signs
, like temperature and
blood pressure
.
Helping with basic needs, like feeding, bathing and dressing.
Restraining patients who are physically violent.
Some psychiatric technicians provide care to people who have severe mental health conditions. Others work with people undergoing rehabilitation for
alcohol
and
substance use disorders
.
How do you become a psychiatric technician?
To become a psychiatric technician, you usually need to obtain an associate’s degree or a certificate in the occupation. Programs for these degrees or certificates are offered at community colleges and technical schools where students learn basic nursing skills. Courses you may have to take include:
Advertisement
Anatomy.
Psychology.
Pharmacology.
Social work.
You’ll also have supervised clinical work experience or on-the-job training. Some employers may prefer to hire people who have a bachelor’s degree. Others may prefer to hire candidates who have experience in a related field, like having worked with people with developmental disabilities before.
The American Association of Psychiatric Technicians provides the opportunity to become nationally certified. This psychiatric technician certification allows you to put the initials “NCPT” after your name. This stands for Nationally Certified Psychiatric Technician. Employers sometimes require national certification. NCPT often receives better pay and promotion opportunities.
The four levels of certification include:
Level 1:
Requires a high school diploma or GED.
Level 2:
Completion of at least 480 hours of college or university courses, plus work in the mental health or developmental disabilities field for at least one year.
Level 3:
Completion of at least 960 hours of college or university courses, plus work in the mental health or developmental disabilities field for at least two years.
Level 4:
A bachelor’s degree in the field, plus work in the mental health or developmental disabilities field for at least three years.
In addition to the above requirements, there’s an examination for each level of certification.
What is a psychiatric aide?
A psychiatric aide is a healthcare provider who directly cares for and supports people with mental health conditions and developmental disabilities. They work under the supervision of psychiatrists, registered nurses and other mental health providers in various treatment settings, including psychiatric hospitals, residential treatment facilities and community mental health centers. Other names for psychiatric aides include:
Mental health aide.
Behavioral health aide.
What does a psychiatric aide do?
Psychiatric aides play a vital role in maintaining a safe and therapeutic environment for patients. They help prevent crisis situations and de-escalate conflicts when necessary. Other psychiatric aide duties may include:
Monitoring patients’ location and behavior in a mental healthcare facility.
Escorting patients within a mental healthcare facility.
Helping patients with activities of daily living, like bathing and dressing.
Serving meals and helping patients eat.
Keeping mental health facilities clean by performing tasks like changing bed linens.
Accompanying patients and participating in group activities, like field trips and recreational sports.
Restraining patients who are physically violent.
Advertisement
How do you become a psychiatric aide?
To become a psychiatric aide, you generally need to have a high school diploma or GED. You’ll receive on-the-job training under the supervision of an experienced psychiatric technician or aide.
What is the difference between a psychiatric technician and an aide?
The terms “psychiatric technician” and “psychiatric aide” are sometimes used interchangeably. But they aren’t the same role. Though not the same, psychiatric technicians and psychiatric aides do have some overlapping duties. These may include monitoring and reporting on patient behavior and helping patients with daily living activities.
Unlike psychiatric technicians, psychiatric aides can’t administer any aspect of a patient’s treatment plan. That means they can’t administer medication or lead patients in therapeutic activities. Psychiatric aides handle tasks like:
Changing bed linens.
Transporting patients.
Helping patients with daily living activities, like feeding, bathing and grooming.
Psychiatric technicians and psychiatric aides have different training and academic requirements because of the difference in their responsibilities. Psychiatric aides don’t need to hold a college degree. Many enter the workforce after receiving a high school diploma or equivalent and then receive on-the-job training.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you or someone you love is experiencing a mental health issue, you may work with a psychiatric technician or psychiatric aide as part of your overall treatment plan. These compassionate healthcare providers use the training they’ve received to provide excellent care when you may need it most. Psychiatric technicians and aides work as part of a healthcare team under the direction of psychiatrists, registered nurses and other mental health professionals to give you the best possible care.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/02/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment