Urothelial Carcinoma (Transitional Cell Carcinoma)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Urothelial Carcinoma (Transitional Carcinoma)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Urothelial Carcinoma (Transitional Carcinoma)
Urothelial carcinoma (transitional cell carcinoma) is cancer that starts in your bladder, kidney or the tubes that connect your kidney to your bladder (ureters). These cancers have similar symptoms. They also have similar outlooks. Caught early, these cancers are easily treatable, but they often come back.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Urothelial Carcinoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Urothelial Carcinoma?
Healthcare providers classify urothelial cancer in your bladder based on where the tumors are in relation to your bladder wall. Tumors that are more advanced at diagnosis have grown into the muscle.
Urothelial carcinoma — also called transitional cell carcinoma — is cancer that starts in your urothelium. This is the tissue that lines parts of your
urinary system
. Urothelial cells line your bladder. They also line a part of your kidney called the renal pelvis, as well as your ureters. Ureters are tubes that carry pee from your kidney to your bladder.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Urothelial carcinoma accounts for about 90% of all cases of
bladder cancer
in the U.S. Only about 7% of
kidney cancers
(including cancers in your renal pelvis and ureters) are urothelial carcinoma.
Urothelial carcinoma in your bladder or kidney causes similar symptoms. They also have similar prognoses. Caught early, these cancers are easily treated. But they often come back.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of urothelial carcinoma
Symptoms may not show up right away.
Blood in your pee
(hematuria) is usually the first noticeable sign. You should contact a healthcare provider if you notice bloody pee or other symptoms, including:
A lump or mass in your kidney area (your side and back, between your ribs and hips)
Fatigue
Painful or frequent urination
Persistent low back pain
Unexplained weight loss
Urothelial carcinoma causes
Medical researchers aren’t sure exactly what causes urothelial carcinoma. But they do know that it involves changes in a specific type of cell.
Your bladder, ureters and renal pelvis (the part of your kidney that connects with your ureters) are lined with urothelial cells. They’re also called “transitional cells” because they can stretch when your bladder fills with pee and collapse when it’s empty.
With urothelial carcinoma, a healthy transitional cell changes (
mutates
) and becomes a cancer cell. The cancer cells can form tumors. Without treatment, the cancer can spread.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Researchers have identified some common risk factors:
Sex
: You’re four times more likely to get bladder cancer if you’re
male
. Males are also twice as likely to develop kidney cancers.
Age
: Most people diagnosed are over age 65.
Cigarette smoke
: Smoking cigarettes increases your risk of urothelial carcinoma.
Exposure to certain chemicals
: People who work with certain chemicals used in dyes, rubber, leather, paint, textiles and hairdressing supplies may have an increased risk.
Medical history
: You’re at an increased risk of transitional cell carcinoma of your renal pelvis and ureters if you’ve had bladder cancer.
You might reduce your risk of developing these cancers by not smoking and avoiding certain chemicals.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers may use the following tests to diagnose bladder and kidney cancer, including urothelial carcinoma. Tests include:
Urine (pee) tests
: Your provider will do a
urinalysis
on a urine sample. They may also do tests to check for cancer cells in your pee.
Imaging tests
: You may need a CT scan, MRI, PET scan or ultrasound so that your provider can see tumors inside your body. You may need an
intravenous pyelogram (IVP)
. An IVP uses a contrast dye that makes blockages in your kidneys, ureter and bladder stand out on an X-ray.
Scope tests:
Your provider may use a scope with a light and lens to see inside your bladder, kidneys or ureters. They may take tissue samples to test for cancer cells (
biopsy
).
Cancer staging
Healthcare providers use
cancer staging systems
to develop treatment plans. Staging helps them know how serious or aggressive the cancer is. There are slight differences between the stages for transitional cell carcinoma in your bladder and transitional cell carcinoma in your kidneys (renal pelvis) and ureters.
Bladder cancer stages
Bladder cancer can be early stage (confined to your bladder lining). Or it can be invasive (penetrating your bladder wall and possibly spreading to nearby organs or
lymph nodes
):
Stage I
: Cancer is in the lining of your bladder or the connective tissue just below the lining. It hasn’t invaded the main muscle wall of your bladder.
Stage II
: Cancer has spread to the muscle wall of your bladder.
Stage III
: Cancer has spread to the fatty tissue outside of your bladder muscle.
Stage IV
: Cancer has spread from your bladder to your lymph nodes or to other organs or bones.
Healthcare providers may also label bladder cancer as:
Noninvasive
: There may be tumors in a small section of tissue. Or the cancer cells may only be near the surface of your bladder.
Non-muscle-invasive
: This refers to bladder cancer that’s moved deeper into your bladder but hasn’t spread to muscle.
Muscle-invasive
: This bladder cancer has grown into your bladder wall muscle. It may have spread into the fatty layers or tissues on organs outside of your bladder.
Advertisement
Bladder cancer can be high grade or low grade. The higher the grade, the more abnormal the cancer cells look beneath a microscope. Usually, high-grade urothelial cancer is more aggressive.
High-grade urothelial carcinoma
may be life-threatening. It often comes back after treatment. It may spread into the muscle layer of your bladder, to other areas in your body and to your lymph nodes.
Low-grade urothelial carcinoma
may come back but rarely spreads into your bladder’s muscle layer or other body parts.
Renal pelvis and ureter cancer stages
The staging for your kidneys and ureters relates to how much the cancer has grown into tissue or spread. Early-stage transitional cell carcinoma is usually low grade. More advanced stages tend to be high grade.
Stage 0
: There are abnormal cells in tissue lining your renal pelvis or ureter. This cancer stage may be called papillary carcinoma or carcinoma in situ.
Stage 1
: Cancer has spread through the lining of your renal pelvis or ureter into a layer of connective tissue.
Stage II
: Cancer has spread through connective tissue to your renal pelvis or ureter’s layer of muscle.
Stage III
: Cancer has spread into the fatty layer beyond the muscle of your renal pelvis or ureter.
Stage IV
: Cancer has spread to nearby organs, one or more lymph nodes, the layer of fat around your kidney, or more distant organs.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is urothelial carcinoma treated?
Treatment varies depending on whether urothelial carcinoma is in your bladder, kidney or ureters.
Bladder cancer treatment
Treatments for bladder cancer include:
Surgery
: Surgeons either remove the tumor or use high-energy electricity to burn it away. This burning process is called
fulguration
.
Chemotherapy
: You may take a combination of chemotherapy drugs that treat cancer throughout your body. Sometimes, providers inject the drugs directly into your bladder.
Immunotherapy
: This treatment makes your immune system better at fighting cancer. Your provider may inject a drug called BCG directly into your bladder.
Radiation therapy
: You may need this treatment instead of surgery. Or you may get radiation in addition to other treatments.
Targeted therapy
: This treatment targets the gene changes that cause healthy transitional cells to become cancer cells.
Renal pelvis and ureter cancer treatment
The primary treatment is surgery. Healthcare providers are studying new treatments for transitional cell carcinoma in clinical trials. A
clinical trial
is a study that tests the safety and effectiveness of new treatments.
Current treatments being tested use heat from electricity or lasers to destroy tumors.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you have changes in your body that may mean urothelial cancer in your urinary system has come back. Ask them about signs to look out for.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy for urothelial carcinoma?
The same cancerous cell causes all of these cancers. But each type has a different prognosis or expected outcome. A lot depends on the stage and grade of urothelial carcinoma. As with many types of cancer, early detection and treatment increase your likelihood of living longer.
Data from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) show that nearly
98%
of people who received treatment for early-stage bladder cancer between 2015 and 2021 were alive five years after diagnosis. Overall, 79% of people with bladder cancer were alive five years later.
NCI data show that 93% of people treated for early-stage kidney cancer (including urothelial carcinoma) were alive five years after diagnosis. The overall five-year
survival rate
is nearly 77%.
It’s important to remember that these numbers reflect the outcomes of lots of people with situations different from yours. They can’t predict your outcomes. Ask your provider about how your diagnosis will impact your life expectancy.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
It may help to know that carcinoma caught early on responds well to treatment. Still, these types of cancer can come back. Talk to your provider so you know what signs to look out for that mean the cancer has recurred. Be sure not to skip follow-up appointments.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A urothelial carcinoma diagnosis can cause conflicting emotions. On the one hand, treatment usually gets rid of it. But it can come back. This can make each day you’re in remission feel like a waiting game.
Remember that your chances of both a cure and the cancer coming back depend on your diagnosis. The earlier the cancer stage, the greater your chance that treatment will get rid of the cancer for good. Ask your healthcare provider to explain what to expect so that you know how to prepare for the days ahead.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/01/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials