Tonsil Cancer: Symptoms, Signs & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tonsil Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tonsil Cancer
Tonsil cancer is a type of oropharyngeal cancer. Symptoms include persistent sore throat and swollen tonsils. The condition is commonly linked to human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, though heavy alcohol and tobacco use may also increase tonsil cancer risk. Tonsil cancer treatments include surgery, chemotherapy and radiation therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Tonsil cancer is the most common form of oropharyngeal cancer.
What is tonsil cancer?
Tonsil cancer is a
cancerous tumor
on your
tonsils
, which are in the back of your throat (
pharynx
). Tonsil cancer is the most common form of
oropharyngeal cancer
. A sore throat that doesn’t go away is a common early symptom. Often, healthcare providers can successfully treat tonsil cancer if they detect it before it spreads.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
How common is tonsil cancer?
It’s not common. The American Cancer Society (ACS) estimates that in 2024, more than 21,000 people in the U.S. will develop a type of oropharyngeal cancer, including tonsil cancer. For comparison, the ACS estimates more than 2 million people in the U.S. will develop some type of
cancer
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of tonsil cancer?
The most common symptom of tonsil cancer is a
sore throat
that won’t go away. Another symptom is when one tonsil is swollen and larger than the other tonsil. Other common symptoms are:
Bad breath (halitosis)
.
Blood in your saliva.
Difficulty swallowing
, speaking or chewing.
Ear pain
.
Mouth pain.
Sores in the back of your mouth that don’t heal.
Swollen lymph nodes in your neck (
cervical lymphadenopathy
).
Having these symptoms doesn’t mean you have tonsil cancer. But you should talk to a healthcare provider if your symptoms last longer than a few days.
What can be mistaken for tonsil cancer?
Tonsil cancer symptoms can look and feel like other less serious conditions. For example, viral and bacterial infections can cause
tonsillitis
. Tonsillitis symptoms include a sudden sore throat and tonsils that look swollen, red and/or have white spots.
What causes tonsil cancer?
Experts know that tonsil cancer develops when healthy cells
mutate
(change) and become cancerous cells. They don’t know exactly why this happens. But recent research shows that having the
human papillomavirus (HPV)
increases your risk of developing tonsil cancer. Other risk factors are:
Advertisement
Tobacco use
: This includes
smoking
tobacco and using e-cigarettes (
vaping
).
Alcohol
: Heavy use of beverages that have alcohol.
Weakened immune system
: People who have human immunodeficiency virus (
HIV
) or who take
immunosuppressants
for organ transplants have increased risk.
What are the complications of tonsil cancer?
Tonsil cancer can be aggressive, meaning it can spread (
metastasize
) very quickly from your tonsils to other areas of your body.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is tonsil cancer diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
, focusing on your throat and tonsils. They may do a
throat culture
to rule out infections as a possible cause. They’ll look for changes in your tonsils like sores that could be cancer.
If they suspect tonsil cancer, they’ll refer you to an
otolaryngologist
(an ear, nose and throat specialist or ENT). This is a healthcare provider who specializes in conditions that affect your ear, nose and throat. They may order tests, including biopsies and imaging tests.
Biopsy
Your provider may do a
biopsy
to obtain cells and tissue. A medical
pathologist
will examine the cells and tissue for signs of tonsil cancer. Possible types of biopsy are:
Incisional biopsy
: This test involves surgery to obtain a sample of tonsil tissue.
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA)
: If you have a suspicious lump on your neck, they may do a fine needle aspiration to obtain cells.
Imaging tests
If biopsy results show signs of tonsil cancer, your
oncologist
may order imaging tests to see if the cancer is spreading to other areas of your body. Tests may include:
Computed tomography (CT) scans
.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans
.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scans
.
Tonsil cancer staging
Your provider will use test results to set the tonsil cancer stage. Healthcare providers use
cancer staging systems
to develop treatment plans. They base tonsil cancer stages on factors like the tumor location and size, whether cancerous cells are in nearby
lymph nodes
and if the tumor in your tonsils is spreading to another part of your body.
For example, an early-stage tonsil cancer is one that’s only on your tonsils. Advanced or late-stage tonsil cancer means there’s tonsil cancer in lymph nodes and other areas of your body.
Management and Treatment
How is tonsil cancer treated?
There are a few different options. Treatment depends on the size and location of the
tumor
and whether it has spread to other parts of your body. Possible treatments for tonsil cancer include surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy.
Tonsil cancer surgery
Your otolaryngologist may do surgery to remove small tumors or affected lymph nodes, including:
Lymphadenectomy
: You may need this surgery if tonsil cancer is in your neck lymph nodes. In this case, a surgeon will remove lymph nodes from your neck. They may call this surgery cervical lymphadenectomy or neck dissection.
Transoral robotic surgery (TORS)
: This is a type of robotic surgery that surgeons use to treat hard-to-reach areas like the back of your throat. TORS is a treatment option for early-stage tonsil cancer.
Advertisement
Radiation therapy and chemotherapy
You may receive radiation therapy or chemotherapy as an alternative to surgery or after surgery for tonsil cancer. Your healthcare provider will base your treatment plan on factors like treatment response rate and treatment side effects.
For example, your provider may recommend
radiation therapy
as an alternative to surgery to
cure
tonsil cancer tumors, or after surgery to eliminate any potential remaining cancerous cells. Radiation may be given simultaneously with chemotherapy to enhance its effects, depending on the cancer stage.
They may recommend
chemotherapy
when surgery or radiation therapy isn’t an option for tonsil cancer. Chemotherapy can slow down tonsil cancer growth and ease its symptoms.
Side effects and complications of tonsil cancer treatment
Side effects and complications will be different depending on the treatment type. For example, TORS and lymphadenectomy surgery have different side effects. Radiation therapy and chemotherapy often cause similar side effects.
TORS may cause the following side effects or complications:
Abnormal bleeding (
hemorrhage
)
.
Aspiration
: Food or liquid gets into your lungs.
Respiratory compromise
: Your lungs can’t take in enough oxygen.
Dysphagia
: You have difficulty swallowing.
Difficulty breathing
: You can’t breathe using your airway, and you may need a
tracheostomy
.
Advertisement
Possible lymphadenectomy side effects are:
Abnormal bleeding.
Bruising
.
Infection at the surgery site.
Lymphedema
.
Nerve weakness.
Pain.
Common chemotherapy and radiation therapy
side effects
include:
Fatigue
.
Hair loss
.
Nausea
and
vomiting
.
Outlook / Prognosis
What are tonsil cancer survival rates?
Overall, 85% of people with tonsil cancer and HPV were alive five years after their diagnosis. Tonsil cancer survival rates may vary based on several factors, including whether the tonsil cancer is HPV-positive or negative or if the tumor is spreading.
When you think about
cancer survival rates
, it’s also important to remember:
These rates are estimates based on the experiences of other people who had tonsil cancers. What was true for them may not be true for you.
Experts update survival rates every five years, and it’s possible tonsil cancer survival rates are different.
A survival rate isn’t an estimate for how long you’ll live, or your life expectancy if you have tonsil cancer.
Survival rate data can be complicated and confusing. If you have tonsil cancer, ask your oncologist about survival rate estimates and how they apply to your situation.
Is cancer of the tonsils curable?
Statistically, tonsil cancer isn't likely to be fatal. As with most cancers, treatment is most successful when the condition is detected and treated in the early stages.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can tonsil cancer be prevented?
You may not be able to prevent tonsil cancer, but you can reduce your risk with these precautions:
Don’t
smoke
or use tobacco products of any kind.
Take steps to protect yourself from HPV. This includes getting tested, practicing safe sex and getting an
HPV vaccine
.
Undergo routine
oral cancer screenings
, which help detect tonsil cancer early on.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
It can be challenging to manage tonsil cancer symptoms and treatment. Here are some suggestions:
Consider
palliative care
: This is a supportive treatment that can help you manage cancer symptoms, cancer treatment side effects and other challenges that come with having a serious illness.
Eat well
: Tonsil cancer symptoms and treatment may affect your ability to eat during and after treatment. If you’re having difficulty eating, talk to a nutritionist. They’ll have recommendations on ways you can get the nutrition you need.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you had tonsil cancer surgery, contact your surgeon right away if:
Your surgery site is bleeding more than you expect or that you can’t control.
You have signs of infection like
fever
, pus or fluid oozing from the site or the site looks red or is warm to the touch.
If you didn’t have surgery, contact a provider if you have symptoms like:
New sore throat symptoms.
Blood in your saliva.
Your tonsils look different, like red, swollen or white spots.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Tonsil cancer isn’t common, but it can cause common symptoms like a painful sore throat or swollen lymph nodes in your neck. Caught early, healthcare providers can cure tonsil cancer. That’s why it’s important to keep an eye on your overall health and pay attention to everyday symptoms that don’t go away. In some cases, these symptoms are signs of serious illness, and that’s the case with tonsil cancer. Contact a healthcare provider if you notice changes in your throat that last for more than a few days.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/14/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials