Mental Health: What It Is & Why It’s Important
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Mental Health
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mental Health
Mental health shapes your emotions, thoughts and actions. It helps you connect with others, handle stress, make choices and find meaning. It can change over time. There are things you can do to improve your mental health, and support is available. A healthcare provider can help you take the next step.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
What Is Mental Health?
Mental health refers to your emotional well-being, which impacts how you feel, think and act.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It helps you:
Build relationships and social connections
Cope with stress
Find purpose and meaning
Make decisions and solve problems
Manage your emotions
Use your strengths
Mental health affects everyone at every age, but each person’s journey is different. Some people have a smooth path. Others may face bumps along the way, including emotional responses to life changes.
If these emotional responses become extremely distressing or interfere with your ability to complete your daily activities, they may turn into
mental health conditions
. Support and care are always available to help you feel better.
Why is mental health important?
Taking care of your mental health isn’t just good for your mood; it’s essential for your whole body. Your mind needs care just like your body does to stay healthy. But your mind and body don’t work in isolation. They’re part of the same system.
When your mental health is off, your physical health may also take a hit, and vice versa.
Stress
,
anxiety
and
depression
might cause headaches, stomach problems or fatigue. In some cases, you may be more at risk of conditions like
heart disease
and
stroke
if long-term mental health issues don’t get care. On the other hand, dealing with chronic health conditions (like chronic pain or diabetes) can lead to mental health struggles.
Advertisement
What can affect my mental health?
There are a lot of things that may affect your mental health, like:
Difficult life experiences (like poverty, stress, trauma or abuse)
Access to support or care when you need it
Family history of mental disorders (
genetics
)
Chemical
imbalance in your brain
Daily choices (like the foods and beverages you eat and drink, physical activities and smoking)
The coping skills you learned
Some of these factors are outside of your control. But there are some changes you can make in your daily routine to support your mental health when you need to.
Can my mental health change?
It’s normal for your mental health to change. Things like stress at work or school, moving,
grief
or a new diagnosis can all trigger mental health challenges. In the middle of tough times, it might feel like things won’t get better.
Fortunately, a healthcare provider can help you navigate what you’re going through. They may recommend taking medications to manage certain conditions or seeking care from a specialist (like a psychiatrist or a therapist).
Fortunately, many people with mental health struggles do feel better over time.
What should I do if I have a mental health issue?
If you think you have a mental health issue, start by reaching out to a
primary care physician
. They’re a great starting point. In some cases, they may be able to help you directly. In other cases, they may make a referral for you to see a specialist, like a psychiatrist or a therapist (like a psychologist or social worker).
If you’re in a tough spot with your mental health and not sure what to do, call or text
988
(U.S.). This is the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. Someone is available to help you 24/7, whether you’re having a mental health crisis or not. Another option for immediate mental health attention is to contact 911 or your local emergency services number.
How to improve mental health
Here are some things you can do to boost your mental health:
Build a support system.
Connect with people you trust and open up when you need help.
Care for your body.
Sleep
well, stay active, eat balanced meals and avoid harmful
substances
.
Practice healthy coping skills.
Try
yoga
, mindfulness or
meditation
to manage stress or refocus your thoughts. If you notice that your coping skills are less healthy (like using substances or avoiding an issue), you may be able to build healthier coping strategies by trying therapy.
Increase feelings of accomplishment.
Do small things each day that make you feel you’ve accomplished something.
Take a break.
If something becomes too overwhelming, consider stepping away from what you’re doing.
Try something new.
A new hobby or skill may refresh your mindset.
Focus on the positive.
Reflect on what you’re grateful for or keep a gratitude journal.
Know when to get help.
Learn the signs of mental health conditions and talk to a provider when needed.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Some days, it’s hard to explain why you feel off. You’re doing all the right things, but everything still feels heavier than usual. That doesn’t make you weak; it makes you human.
Mental health isn’t about having it all together. It’s about understanding yourself and knowing when to reach out. If things feel out of sync, start a conversation. It could be with a trusted friend or a healthcare provider. Support is out there, and it may help you feel better.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment