Child Development: Milestones & Stages
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Child Development
Advertisement
Advertisement
Child Development
As your child grows into a toddler and beyond, development milestones are an important tool to use. They help parents and healthcare providers alike look for areas where children need support. But if your child doesn’t hit all the milestones, don’t panic. Each child is different and will have their own strengths and areas that need improvement.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Child development is how your child grows and changes over time. While watching your child grow can be one of the most meaningful parts of your life, it can also make a difference in your child’s health and well-being.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Experts divide child growth and development into four areas:
Motor
. This area is all about control of body movement. Examples include using their hands and fingers, walking and moving themselves around.
Cognitive
. These skills revolve around your baby’s ability to think and solve problems.
Language and communication
. Your baby uses these skills to interact with you and others. They don’t just involve sounds and words. They can also include gestures and eye movements.
Social and emotional
. These abilities revolve around your baby’s feelings and emotions. They also involve how your baby reacts to emotions and behaviors from you and others.
Tracking your child’s development is a key part of detecting medical issues early. That’s one key reason that scheduled
well-checks
with your child’s
pediatrician
are so important.
What are developmental milestones?
Developmental milestones are behaviors that experts use as landmarks to track development. Children all develop at their own pace. Experts set landmarks based on what 3 out of 4 children can do at specific ages.
What are the developmental stages?
Healthcare providers typically divide child development stages into five periods:
Babies (birth to 12 months)
Toddlers (1 to 3 years)
Preschool (3 to 5 years)
Grade school (5 to 12 years)
Teen (12 to 18 years)
Advertisement
Abilities by age
Your child’s abilities grow as they do, especially after they reach 1 year old. And their growth builds on earlier
baby development milestones
. Some things your child should be able to do, by age, are listed below.
15 months old
Most infants can do the following by 15 months old:
Stand and take a few steps
Use their fingers to pick up food and feed themselves
Clap when excited
Show you objects they like
Hug a stuffed toy or show affection to you with cuddles, hugs and kisses
Copy other children during playtime
Try a word or two beyond “mama” and “dada” (they might not get the word exactly right, but they can try and get pretty close)
Understand names for things, like looking at a ball nearby after you say that word
Follow simple directions, like handing you something if you ask for something they have and hold out your hand expectantly
Ask for help, such as by pointing to or saying a word for something they need help with or want
Use items properly, like holding a cup or book correctly
18 months old
By 18 months old, most children can do the following:
Walk without holding on to anything or anyone for support
Participate in routine activities, like holding out their hands for you to clean or putting their arms into the sleeves of an offered jacket
Use a spoon, not just their fingers, to feed themselves, or try using a cup without a lid (with occasional spills)
Climb on and off of a couch or chair without help
Start to explore, moving away from you but still looking back every so often to make sure you’re nearby
Participate with you by reading a book long enough to see a few pages
Copy simple actions they see you do, like sweeping or mopping a floor
Use at least three words besides “mama” and “dada,” and follow simple directions using words only
2 years old
By 2 years old, most children can do the following:
Use both hands at once, like holding something in one hand and using the other to open or close it
Recognize emotions, like when someone else is hurt or upset
Look at your face to see how you react to something
Use two words together to express themselves
Correctly identify and point to body parts you name, or point to an object or something in a book when you ask where it is
Use more complex gestures (beyond simple pointing and waving), like shaking or nodding their heads or blowing a kiss
Use switches or buttons on toys, or play with multiple toys at once
Use utensils like a spoon to eat
Run, kick a ball and walk up stairs (using only their feet and not climbing with their hands, too)
30 months old
By 2 and a half years old, most children can:
Socialize and play with or alongside other children
Follow simple routines with a familiar instruction phrase, like brushing their teeth and changing into pajamas when told, “It’s bedtime”
Use an expanded vocabulary (around 50 words), put together simple sentences and identify at least one color
Play make-believe using objects, like pretending a toy block is food and “feeding” it to a doll
Use their hands to turn doorknobs, unscrew lids or turn pages in a book one at a time
Use problem-solving skills, like using a stool to reach something higher up
Jump off the ground with both feet
Remove a jacket without help
Advertisement
3 years old
By age 3, most children can:
Handle separation
, calming down within 10 minutes after drop-off with a sitter or at a childcare facility
Socialize, noticing other children and joining them to play
Talk with greater ability, have small conversations, ask questions, or use action words to describe something in a picture or book
Speak clearly enough for others to understand most of what they’re saying, and say their name when asked
Understand and heed warnings, like not touching a hot surface after you warn them not to
Use their hands to draw a shape like a circle when shown how, or thread objects onto a string (like beads)
Use a fork to feed themselves
Do more to dress themselves, like putting on loose pants or a jacket
4 years old
At 4 years old, your child is no longer a toddler. Most children this age can do the following:
Pretend to be someone else (or something else, like an animal) while playing
Comfort someone who’s hurt or sad
Behave differently in certain places (like a library or a playground) and understand how, when and why they should
Recognize and avoid danger, like not jumping from someplace higher up while playing
Ask or try to do things they think will help you, or take opportunities to help if you offer
Say sentences with four or more words, use lines from songs or stories, and talk about what they did earlier in the day
Answer simple questions like, “What are shoes for?”
Name a few different colors of objects they can currently see
Draw a person with a head, arms and legs (or more detailed)
Catch a large ball on most attempts
Unbutton buttons and hold a crayon or marker with their thumbs and fingers (not just their fists)
Advertisement
5 years old
At 5 years old, most children do the following:
Follow rules for games or wait to take their turn when playing
Simple chores like clearing the table at home or helping sort and match laundry
Have longer conversations or tell longer stories (like stories with multiple parts or events, or conversations with more than three back-and-forth exchanges)
Recognize or use rhyming words, count to 10, and use or understand words related to time — like yesterday, today or tomorrow
Focus attention on an activity for five to 10 minutes (not including screen time activities)
Know some letters when pointed to, or write some letters from their own name
Button (not just unbutton) buttons
Hop on one foot
What if my child can’t do some of the activities listed for their age?
It’s understandable to feel concerned if your child has difficulty with certain milestone tasks. But it’s important to remember that the milestones are just general guidelines. And all children are different. Your child might have very strong skills in one area but need more work in others.
If you have any questions about developmental milestones, your child’s pediatrician is the best person to talk to. They can check your child’s progress and then offer support. They can also refer you to physical, occupational or speech therapy. Or they can refer you to another specialist who can help or provide resources and support, if needed.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Child development can look very different from one child to the next. And it’s important to remember the milestones that you may be looking at are more like general landmarks than a checklist. And along the way, your child needs love and support no matter how their journey goes through those milestones.
If you have any questions about your child’s development, their pediatrician is there to help you. They can offer guidance and support, like suggesting ways to work on areas your child might need help in. They can also recommend experts and resources that might help your child in the areas they need.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us