Mycotoxins: Lifespan, Poisoning & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Mycotoxins
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mycotoxins
Mycotoxins are products of certain fungi and molds that can cause illness in animals and people. They’re resilient — they can withstand hot and cold temperatures, and they’re resistant to disinfectants. Exposure to mycotoxins might make you feel like you have the flu. But they can also cause serious complications, including death.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What are mycotoxins?
Mycotoxins (mahy-koh-TOK-sins) are toxic substances that some fungi and
molds
produce. They can cause sudden or long-term illness (mycotoxicosis) in people and animals.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Mycotoxins can enter your body by:
Absorbing them through your skin
Drinking or eating (ingesting) them
Inhaling them
The fungi and molds that produce mycotoxins need warm, humid conditions to grow.
What are the groups of mycotoxins?
There are hundreds of types of mycotoxins, and several groups of fungi may produce the same type. But the mycotoxin groups that most commonly affect animals and people include:
Aflatoxins
: Multiple species of the fungus
Aspergillus
produce aflatoxins. The fungi typically grow in soil and decaying vegetation. They can also grow on most crops or foods.
Fumonisins
: Many different types of fungi produce fumonisins. But the fungus
Fusarium
most commonly affects animals and people.
Trichothecenes
: Though lots of fungi produce trichothecenes, the fungus
Fusarium
commonly affects animals and people because it grows on barley, corn and wheat.
Zearalenone
: Multiple species of the fungus
Fusarium
produce zearalenone. It commonly affects cereal crops, including corn, oats, rice and wheat.
What do mycotoxins do to people?
It depends on how mycotoxins enter your body. Ingesting a lot of mycotoxins at the same time can cause sudden (acute) illness. Symptoms usually affect your gastrointestinal (GI) tract (
esophagus
,
stomach
,
small intestine
,
large intestine
and
rectum
). Symptoms may get worse if you drink alcohol, have
malnutrition
or have another health condition.
Advertisement
Ingesting smaller amounts of mycotoxins over a period of time can cause long-term (chronic) illness. Symptoms can affect your mental function (cognition) and increase your risk of developing
asthma
and
cancer
.
What animals are affected by mycotoxins?
Mycotoxins can affect all animals, including farm animals, exotic animals and pets. But they most commonly affect:
Baby bulls and cows (calves)
Baby pigs (piglets)
Dogs
Poultry, including baby ducks (ducklings) and baby turkeys (poults)
Pregnant pigs (sows)
Animals typically encounter mycotoxins from bedding (like hay or straw), in pastures or in animal feed (fodder). Outbreaks are more likely to occur during warm, wet seasons that create ideal environments for fungi and molds to grow.
Some mycotoxins, including toxins that the
Aspergillus
fungus produces, can live a long time in animal meats and organs. Human exposure can occur if people come into contact with infected animals or consume their contaminated meat or milk.
What are the symptoms of mycotoxin poisoning?
There are many different types of mycotoxins that may produce a variety of symptoms. But common mycotoxin poisoning symptoms include:
Abdominal pain
Blurred vision
Brain fog
Brain swelling (
cerebral edema
)
Diarrhea
Dizziness
Fever
Fluid buildup in your lungs (
pulmonary edema
)
Headache
Nausea and vomiting
Short-term
memory loss
Serious mycotoxin poisoning complications may include:
Cancer
Coma
Convulsions (uncontrollable movements)
Death
What foods are high in mycotoxins?
Molds that produce mycotoxins typically affect grains and nuts. But they can also affect produce. Common foods and drinks that mycotoxins may affect include:
Apples and apple juice
Celery
Cereals
Coffee beans
Corn
Dried fruit
Grapes and grape juice
Oats
Peanuts
Rice
Rye
Spices
Wheat
The
U.S. Department of Agriculture
estimates that mycotoxins affect about 25% of crops around the world.
Mycotoxicosis diagnosis
If you have symptoms of short- or long-term mycotoxin exposure, healthcare providers will review your health history, ask questions about your symptoms and order
blood tests
.
They may also refer you to a functional medicine specialist. A functional medicine specialist will ask additional questions about:
Whether you spend a lot of time around animals
Whether you spend a lot of time in damp buildings
What kinds of foods you eat
If they suspect mycotoxicosis, they may also recommend mycotoxin-specific testing to help confirm their diagnosis.
Mycotoxin lifespan
The fungi and molds that produce mycotoxins typically have a shorter life cycle than the mycotoxins themselves. Changes in temperature and precipitation (moisture) can kill fungi and molds.
Advertisement
Mycotoxins aren’t as vulnerable to environmental factors, like heat, cold or dryness. And unlike
bacteria
and
viruses
, mycotoxins are very difficult to kill because they’re resistant to most cleaners and disinfectants. They can also hang in the air for long periods and attach to surfaces in your home, including bedding, clothing, drywall and wood. It’s best to prevent fungi and mold growth to avoid mycotoxins.
How do you get rid of them?
Mycotoxins are very difficult to kill. So, it’s best to properly dispose of anything they contaminate. Contact professionals who specialize in fungi, mold and mycotoxin removal.
Can air filters help?
High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters can help remove mold spores from the air that may produce mycotoxins. But mycotoxins are too small for HEPA filters to remove from the air. Activated carbon filters may help remove mycotoxins.
How do you avoid them?
The best way to avoid mycotoxins is to properly store your food and beverages — especially grains and nuts — in clean, dry areas and containers. You should also:
Avoid eating or drinking foods or drinks that look moldy
Check the “best by” date on food packaging
Safely cover and store foods in a refrigerator (fridge)
Seal moldy foods in plastic bags or containers and throw them away outside
Throw away foods that have insect infestations
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Mycotoxins are poisonous fungi and mold products that can make people and animals sick. They can also be fatal. Even if you kill the fungi or molds, the mycotoxins usually remain. The most effective way to avoid mycotoxins is to prevent environments that are ideal for fungi or mold growth. If you have symptoms of mycotoxicosis, contact a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/01/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment