Opioid Overdose: Signs, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Opioid Overdose
Advertisement
Advertisement
Opioid Overdose
An opioid overdose happens when opioids disrupt your brain’s ability to regulate breathing. It can cause respiratory failure (stopped breathing). It may be fatal without quick treatment. Naloxone and immediate medical care may prevent life-threatening outcomes. Help is also available for opioid use disorder.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
What is an Opioid Overdose?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
What is an Opioid Overdose?
An opioid overdose happens when
opioids
overwhelm the part of your
brain
that controls breathing. This can slow or stop breathing. It may lead to death if not treated in time.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
An overdose can occur if you take too much of an opioid or mix it with other
addictive substances
. Any opioid, either prescription or nonprescription, can lead to an overdose. The amount that’s “too much” varies based on your tolerance and the strength of the opioid. That can make it hard to know what’s safe and what’s not. So, it’s important to follow prescribing instructions closely or avoid substances when you might not know what the dosage is.
An overdose is a medical emergency. While this is a frightening event, knowing what to do can save a life. An emergency opioid overdose reversal medication may treat the condition if given quickly. But medical care is still needed after emergency treatment to check for complications.
Symptoms and Causes
Contact emergency services right away if you notice any signs of an opioid overdose.
Signs of opioid overdose
Signs and symptoms of an opioid overdose include:
Weakness or limp limbs
Pale,
blue
or purple lips and fingernails
Cold and clammy skin
Slowed or stopped heartbeat and breathing
Snoring or gurgling sounds coming from the mouth
Tiny
pupils
(black center of eye)
Unresponsive (can’t wake up)
Vomiting
Act quickly if you notice these signs. If you carry an emergency opioid overdose reversal medication, administer it immediately. Then, contact 911 or your local emergency services number.
Advertisement
Opioid overdose causes
Taking opioids in a way your body isn’t used to can lead to an overdose. Common examples include:
Accidentally taking an opioid (like an extra dose)
Mixing substances that contain at least one opioid and another substance
Taking more than your body’s tolerance of an opioid
Using opioids that were prescribed to another person
Risk factors of opioid overdose
Anyone who uses opioids could potentially experience an overdose. An overdose can happen if this is your first time using an opioid or if you’ve taken one frequently.
Your risk increases if you:
Are over the age of 65
Have
opioid use disorder
Take opioids by injection
Take large doses of opioids
Return to opioid use after stopping for a period of time
Have certain medical conditions that may affect breathing or your body’s tolerance of opioids, like
sleep apnea
,
HIV
, lung disease or
liver disease
Use a combination of opioids and
sedatives
, like
benzodiazepines
Use a combination of opioids and stimulants, like
amphetamines
and
methamphetamine
Research
shows that if you had one overdose, you’re at an increased risk of having another in your lifetime.
It can be hard to know what you’re getting when using nonmedical opioids. Because they’re not regulated, their strength can vary. They might be mixed with other drugs like heroin,
fentanyl
or carfentanil (an extremely potent drug used to sedate large animals). These unknown ingredients increase your risk of overdose and death. Also, pills that are given to you or bought from a friend may look like a safer drug, but might contain lethal doses of nonmedical opioids, including fentanyl.
What happens to your body in an opioid overdose?
Opioids bind to receptors in your brain. These receptors are supposed to send signals to the rest of your body to tell it to keep breathing. Opioids interrupt these signals. This causes your breathing to slow and eventually stop (
respiratory failure
). Your body needs oxygen to survive. Within minutes of not receiving enough oxygen, your brain cells begin to die.
Treating an overdose as soon as possible prevents death and other serious complications like severe disability or brain damage.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose opioid overdose
First responders or healthcare providers look for signs of an overdose and rely on information from friends and loved ones. As you’re likely unconscious while experiencing an overdose, they’ll assess the scene and look for clues or substances near you.
If first responders suspect an overdose, they’ll administer naloxone. This is an emergency medication that treats opioid overdoses. If your symptoms improve with this medication, it confirms that you had an overdose.
In a hospital setting, providers may order
drug tests
to make a diagnosis. They’ll also perform other tests to assess your health and look for other signs, symptoms or medical conditions that may need treatment.
Management and Treatment
How is opioid overdose treated?
Naloxone
(Narcan®) and
nalmefene
are the primary emergency treatments for an overdose. These medications:
Advertisement
Rapidly reverse or block opioid effects
Restore normal breathing within two to five minutes
Come as a nasal spray or an
injection
Naloxone only works for about 30 to 90 minutes. But overdose effects can return once it wears off. You may need to give an additional dose of the emergency opioid overdose reversal medication as you wait for emergency services to arrive.
Nalmefene is only used in healthcare settings outside the U.S.
Once at the hospital, providers may also perform additional treatments, like intubation, to help you breathe.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Prevention
Can opioid overdose be prevented?
Here are some ways to lower the risk of overdose:
Avoid mixing opioids with other substances.
Carry naloxone if you or a loved one uses opioids.
Have someone with you, whenever possible, if you use opioids.
Store medications safely in your home, out of reach of children or others.
Teach family and friends how to respond to an overdose.
If you or a loved one is at risk of overdose, reach out for help. There are medical resources available so you can get the care you need.
What should I do if I think someone is experiencing an opioid overdose?
If you think someone is having an overdose:
Call 911 or your local emergency services number immediately.
Administer naloxone, if you have it.
Try to keep them awake and breathing by rubbing their chest with your knuckles (sternum rub).
Lay the person on their side to prevent choking.
Stay with them until help arrives.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Experiencing or witnessing an opioid overdose can be terrifying. You’re not alone — whether you need to talk to someone about what’s happened or you’re looking for treatment for opioid use disorder. Support groups and treatment programs can help you regain your health and support your future safety. If you have questions or concerns, reach out to a healthcare provider or someone you trust. They’re here to help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment