Shingles (Herpes Zoster): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Shingles
Advertisement
Advertisement
Shingles
Shingles is nerve pain and a rash caused by the varicella-zoster virus, the same virus that causes chickenpox. If you’ve had chickenpox in the past, you could get shingles. Early symptoms include burning pain, tingling and discoloration. You might get a headache or fever not long before the rash appears.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Shingles?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Shingles?
Shingles often causes a blistering rash and nerve pain. You might have early symptoms weeks or days before the rash appears.
Shingles is a viral infection that causes a painful
rash
and nerve damage. It’s also called herpes zoster.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Shingles is caused by the same virus that causes
chickenpox
. It stays inactive in your body and can reactivate in your nerves later in life. So, if you’ve had chickenpox before, you could get shingles.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of shingles
A painful, raised or
blistered
rash is the most common symptom of shingles. It might appear near your waist or on one side of your face, neck, chest, belly or back. Sometimes, it shows up on other parts of your body.
Other symptoms that can appear before or along with the rash include:
Deep, burning or shooting
nerve pain
Itching or tingling
Areas of reddish or
discolored skin
Fever
Chills
Headache
Generally feeling unwell (malaise)
Stomach upset
Some early symptoms, like nerve pain and discoloration, can appear weeks before the rash. Others might show up in the days leading up to it. The rash turns into blisters about three to four days after it appears. Within about 10 days, the blisters dry out and crust over into
scabs
. The scabs may take a few weeks to completely go away.
Some people don’t get a rash with shingles. See a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of shingles, even if you don’t have the rash.
Shingles causes
Varicella-zoster virus
(VZV) causes shingles. After having chickenpox, VZV stays in your body after your symptoms go away. It hides in your
nerve cells
, inactive (dormant). Sometimes, the
virus
reactivates later in life, causing shingles.
Advertisement
Experts aren’t always sure why the virus gets reactivated. But it tends to happen as you get older and your
immune system
naturally starts to weaken.
Is shingles contagious?
You can’t spread shingles to someone else, but you could give them chickenpox if you have shingles. Varicella-zoster virus can spread through direct skin-to-skin contact with fluid from the blisters or from breathing in particles from the blisters. Someone who hasn’t had chickenpox before can get infected with the virus.
Risk factors
Anyone who’s had chickenpox can develop shingles. But you’re at a higher risk if you:
Have a
weakened immune system
(due to
cancer
,
HIV
or
immunosuppressive medications
)
Are over the age of 50
Some experts think that
stress
plays a role in developing shingles, but this is hard to prove.
Complications of shingles
The most common complication of shingles is nerve pain that doesn’t go away when the rash does (
postherpetic neuralgia
). This can last for months or years and can be extremely painful.
Other complications include:
Bacterial infection
Vision loss (from an
eye infection
)
Facial paralysis
, or
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
Hearing loss
,
tinnitus
and other hearing issues
Brain inflammation (
encephalitis
)
Vertigo
Pneumonia
Rarely, shingles is fatal.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose shingles
Healthcare providers diagnose shingles by learning about your symptoms and looking at the rash. If the rash follows the line of
dermatomes
(areas of skin along a nerve) and doesn’t cross the midline of your body, that’s a clue that it’s shingles. Your provider may also send scrapings or a swab of the fluid from the blisters to a lab for diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
How is shingles treated?
There’s no cure for shingles. Your provider might recommend managing the symptoms with:
Antivirals, like
acyclovir
(Zovirax®),
famciclovir
(Famvir®) and
valacyclovir
(Valtrex®)
Over-the-counter pain relievers, like
acetaminophen
(Tylenol®) or
ibuprofen
(Motrin®, Advil®)
Corticosteroids
(if shingles affects your eyes or other parts of your face)
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have symptoms of shingles, see your healthcare provider right away. Starting antiviral medications as soon as possible can help you feel better faster.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of serious complications, including:
Severe headache
Vision changes
Eye pain
Sensitivity to light
Neck stiffness
Confusion
or other mental changes
Muscle weakness
or
paralysis
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does a shingles outbreak last?
It can take three to five weeks from the time your first symptoms start until the rash totally disappears. Your other symptoms might start getting better in seven to 10 days.
Advertisement
What should I expect if I have shingles?
Most people with shingles get better without any complications. Taking antivirals within three days of the start of your symptoms might help you feel better sooner. But some people get very sick and have to stay in the hospital to recover.
Up to 1 in 5 people
with shingles experience long-term nerve pain.
Prevention
Can you prevent shingles?
If you’ve had chickenpox, you can reduce your risk of shingles by getting a
shingles vaccine
(Shingrix®). It’s recommended even if you’ve already had shingles or if you’ve already gotten Zostavax®.
Until the rash has gone away completely, keep it covered and avoid being around people so you don’t spread the chickenpox virus.
Additional Common Questions
Can you get shingles more than once?
Yes, you can get shingles more than once. But it’s not common unless you have a weakened immune system. If you get shingles again, you usually don’t get the rash in the same place.
Can you get shingles if you haven’t had chickenpox?
No, you can’t get shingles if you haven’t had chickenpox. Rarely, people who got the
chickenpox vaccine
can get shingles years later.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Just when you thought chickenpox was a distant childhood memory, it comes back with a painful reminder. Not only is it unpleasant for you; it also risks spreading chickenpox to those who haven’t been exposed to the virus, like infants and young kids.
Advertisement
Most people get through shingles without long-term complications. But it’s important to keep an eye on your symptoms and know when to seek emergency medical care, especially if you have a weakened immune system. Talk to a healthcare provider as soon as your symptoms start. They might be able to help ease your symptoms while you get better.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/11/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment