Plantar Fibromatosis (Ledderhose Disease): What It Is
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Plantar Fibromatosis (Ledderhose Disease)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Plantar Fibromatosis (Ledderhose Disease)
Plantar fibromatosis (Ledderhose disease) is a rare condition that causes small, hard growths to develop on the bottom of your foot. These growths can be painful, and it may be difficult for you to walk. In rare cases, your toes may curl down. Treatment for plantar fibromatosis is almost always nonsurgical.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Foot Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Plantar Fibromatosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Plantar Fibromatosis?
In plantar fibromatosis (Ledderhose disease), growths called plantar fibromas develop on the plantar fascia in the arch of your foot.
Plantar fibromatosis (Ledderhose disease) is a rare condition that affects your plantar fascia, the thick layer of connective tissue that protects and supports the bottom of your foot. In plantar fibromatosis (pronounced “PLANT-ter fi-broh-muh-TOH-sis”), small, hard nodules (growths) called
plantar fibromas
develop on the arch of your foot. They may feel like peas stuck on the inside of your shoe. These nodules grow rapidly (aggressively) to be about 1 to 2 centimeters in size.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
While these growths are noncancerous (benign), they can become quite painful. They can affect your ability to stand or walk and may decrease your quality of life. If you develop any symptoms of Ledderhose disease, reach out to your healthcare provider. They can examine your foot and provide treatment options so you can find relief.
What are the stages of plantar fibromatosis?
There are three stages to plantar fibromatosis:
Proliferative phase
. There’s an increase in the number of fibroblasts (cells that create connective tissue) in the area and very little
collagen
.
Active phase
. Fibroblasts continue to grow, and there’s more collagen. Nodules begin to form.
Residual phase
. Fibroblast activity decreases, and collagen growth is rapid.
Scar tissue
forms and squeezes together (contracts).
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of plantar fibromatosis
Ledderhose disease causes a collection of bumps to form on the bottom of your foot. It can be uncomfortable and make it hard for you to perform your daily activities. Other plantar fibromatosis symptoms may include:
Foot pain
and swelling
Difficulty standing and/or walking
Toes curling down toward the bottom of your foot
Inability to straighten your toes
Ledderhose disease causes
Researchers don’t know what exactly causes plantar fibromatosis. It may be related to several factors, including:
Advertisement
Genetics
Related health conditions, like
Dupuytren contracture
,
Peyronie’s disease
and
knuckle pads
Trauma or
injury
to your feet
Risk factors of plantar fibromatosis
Ledderhose disease affects people of any age. But, it’s more common in people between the ages of 30 and 50. It’s also more common in people:
Of northwestern European descent
Who are
male
Who
smoke
In addition, plantar fibromatosis often affects people who have certain health conditions, including:
Alcohol use disorder
Diabetes
Dupuytren contracture
Epilepsy
Frozen shoulder
Knuckle pads
Peyronie’s disease
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Ledderhose disease
Before examining your foot, your healthcare provider may ask several questions, including:
Do you have a biological family history of plantar fibromatosis?
Have you ever been diagnosed with a similar condition, like Dupuytren contracture?
Do you have diabetes?
Do you have epilepsy?
Your healthcare provider will then examine your foot. They’ll:
Check for swelling, bruising, lumps, sores or deformities
Note any tender or painful areas along the bottom of your foot and heel
Look over your
Achilles tendon
and the muscles around the tendon
Check your foot’s range of motion
Ask you to walk a short distance and note how your feet and ankles move
Tests that are used to diagnose plantar fibromatosis
Your healthcare provider may conduct the following tests to diagnose plantar fibromatosis:
Ultrasound
.
After examining your signs, symptoms and medical history, your healthcare provider may perform an ultrasound to confirm their clinical diagnosis.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
. With advanced stages of Ledderhose disease, nodules may extend deeper into the bottom of your foot (although, this is extremely rare). An MRI shows how aggressive your case may be.
Biopsy
. Your healthcare provider may remove some tissue, cells or fluid from your foot (biopsy). A biopsy will confirm that a growth isn’t a cancerous
tumor
.
Management and Treatment
How is plantar fibromatosis treated?
In its earliest stages, plantar fibromatosis treatment may include:
Ice
. Apply an ice pack covered in a light towel to the bottom of your foot for up to 20 minutes, three to four times per day.
Medications
. Over-the-counter
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs)
— like aspirin, ibuprofen and naproxen — can reduce pain and
inflammation
.
Orthotics
. Over-the-counter (OTC) shoe inserts or custom orthotics provide relief. You can cut holes into your shoe inserts around the growths on your foot to prevent direct pressure.
Massage
. Gently massage the bottom of your foot. Avoid touching the growths because that may increase your pain.
Physical therapy
. Work with a
physical therapist
to stretch and strengthen the connective tissues in the bottom of your feet.
Advertisement
If your pain doesn’t decrease or stop after several months of conservative treatment, your healthcare provider may suggest:
Intralesional steroids
Verapamil
Radiation therapy
Extracorporeal shock wave therapy (ESWT)
Tamoxifen
Sorafenib
Collagenase injection
Surgery
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Schedule an appointment with your healthcare provider if you:
Notice growths or bumps near the middle of the bottom of your feet
Have difficulty standing or walking
Experience long-lasting pain in the bottom of your feet
Have trouble straightening your toes
Questions you may wish to ask your provider include:
What activities should I avoid? For how long?
What can I do to manage my pain?
What treatments do you recommend?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Foot Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have plantar fibromatosis?
Ledderhose disease can cause painful growths on the bottom of your feet that may continue to get worse without treatment. Fortunately, the disease doesn’t spread and isn’t life-threatening. But you should still see your provider to rule out any other conditions and seek appropriate treatment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Though plantar fibromatosis is rare, it can be a very painful and frustrating condition to live with. As the disease progresses, you may notice it’s getting harder and harder to walk or even stand without enduring pain. Luckily, the growths involved with Ledderhose disease aren’t cancerous, but they can still affect your life in a negative way. If you’re experiencing symptoms of the condition, talk to your healthcare provider. In its earliest stages, you can treat plantar fibromatosis conservatively. In later stages, your provider may refer you to a foot and ankle specialist.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
An aching foot or heel can bring your favorite activities to a halt. Cleveland Clinic’s foot pain experts are here to help you heal and get back on your feet.
Foot Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment