Inflammatory Breast Cancer: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Inflammatory Breast Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Inflammatory Breast Cancer
Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare, aggressive cancer. It affects the skin on your breast. It happens when cancerous cells block lymphatic vessels in your breast and cause inflammation. Inflammation may change your breast skin color and appearance. Treatment may be a combination of chemotherapy, targeted therapy and surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Inflammatory Breast Cancer?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Inflammatory Breast Cancer?
Inflammatory breast cancer symptoms include changes to your breast skin and nipple.
Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare, fast-growing type of
breast cancer
. It happens when cancerous cells block lymphatic vessels in one of your breasts. The blocked vessels cause inflammation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Inflammation
makes your breast look swollen or discolored. The disease may thicken your breast skin or make it look pitted like an orange peel.
IBC can spread rapidly. It moves from lymphatic vessels in your breast to nearby breast tissue and
lymph nodes
or other areas of your body. You’ll need treatment right away if tests show you have this type of breast cancer.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms
IBC doesn’t cause
breast lumps
like other types of breast cancer or
benign breast disease
. But it can cause these noticeable symptoms, which develop rapidly and don’t go away:
Breast dimpling
Bruising
or rash that spreads over one-third of your breast
Enlarged breast so that one breast looks bigger than the other
Inverted nipple
or retracted nipple (a nipple that points inward)
Pain
, swelling, itchiness, firmness or tenderness
Skin discoloration
that may look red or pink or purple, depending on your skin tone
Swollen lymph nodes
near your collarbone or under your arm
Warmth or burning sensation
Causes
Experts don’t know the exact cause of inflammatory breast cancer. They do know that having obesity may increase your risk. Having obesity means your
body mass index
(BMI) is 30 or higher. Researchers are studying other issues that may increase your risk.
Advertisement
Complications
Inflammatory breast cancer can spread (
metastasize
) very quickly. It may spread to other parts of your body, like your
brain
,
lungs
or
liver
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose inflammatory breast cancer
A healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
. They’ll ask about your symptoms, including when you first noticed changes in your breast.
They may do the following tests:
Mammogram
to look for IBC signs, like thickening breast skin or unusual amounts of calcium (calcification)
Breast ultrasound
that may detect changes in your breast tissue
Your provider may refer you to a surgical oncologist for a breast biopsy. They’ll remove a small piece of tissue from your breast. A medical pathologist will test the sample for cancerous cells. If they find cancerous cells, your pathologist will check for receptors. These are special proteins that help cancerous cells grow.
Biopsy results can help your cancer care team determine the
cancer stage
, like whether it has spread to other areas of your body, including your bones, liver or lungs. Often, the cancer is spreading by the time most
women
receive their diagnosis.
You may have other tests so your providers can check for signs that cancer has spread. Those tests may include:
Bone scan
to look for cancer in your bones
CT scan
to look for cancer in your soft tissues and bones.
MRI
to look for an abnormal mass, or large amounts of calcium or other changes in your breast tissue
PET scan
uses radioactive medicines (tracers) to create images of your organs and tissues
Management and Treatment
How is inflammatory breast cancer treated?
Healthcare providers may use surgery and anti-cancer medicines to treat regional IBC. This is cancer that hasn’t spread to other areas of your body. Your care team may use a step-by-step approach:
Neoadjuvant therapy
, to shrink cancerous cells before surgery. You may receive
chemotherapy
or other treatments. Chemotherapy kills cells that grow very fast, such as cancer cells. Your provider may use other medications, including ones that focus on certain proteins in cancer cells.
Mastectomy
, to remove the breast that IBC affects. Your surgical oncologist may also remove
lymph nodes in your armpit
and near your breast.
Adjuvant therapy
, to help keep cancer from coming back after treatment. Cancer may come back in the same area where it was before or it may spread to other areas of your body. Adjuvant therapy may include more chemotherapy or treatments like
endocrine therapy
. This treatment blocks the hormones that help cancer grow.
You may have other cancer treatments if IBC spreads to other areas of your body.
Your care team may also recommend that you take part in a
clinical trial
. A clinical trial is a study that evaluates the safety and effectiveness of new cancer treatments. Treatments that are successful in clinical trials often become the standard treatment approaches.
Advertisement
When should I seek care?
Inflammatory breast cancer can
come back
. Changes in the skin on your breast or swelling may mean you need additional treatment. Additionally, if you have any changes in your body that last two weeks or longer, you should let your doctor know.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the survival rate for inflammatory breast cancer?
The American Cancer Society lists two sets of IBC
survival rates
. One set is for regional IBC. The other set refers to distant IBC.
Regional IBC means the cancer has only metastasized (spread) to the breast and/or lymph nodes nearby. Distant IBC is breast cancer that has metastasized to other areas of your body, such as your bones, liver or lung. When it has spread to a distant part of your body, it is often stage 4.
According to the Cancer Society, 52% of women with IBC were alive five years after their diagnosis. That survival rate drops to 19% when cancer spreads to other areas of your body.
Cancer survival rates
are estimates. These estimates come from information about other people’s experiences with IBC. What’s true for them may not be true for you. Ask your care team to explain what survival rate data means in your case.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Inflammatory breast cancer treatment can be exhausting and affect your appetite.
Eating well
can help combat
cancer fatigue
by boosting your energy levels. Regular gentle activity like walking, stretching or
yoga
may also ease exhaustion.
Advertisement
You may benefit from receiving
palliative care
if you’re having issues with cancer symptoms or treatment side effects. Palliative care focuses on managing cancer symptoms and treatment side effects.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have breasts, you’re probably familiar with the way they can change. Some changes are common. Your breasts may feel tender and swollen during pregnancy or when you menstruate.
But the changes that inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) causes are very different. Your breast skin may look bruised or discolored. It may be dimpled.
Talk to a healthcare provider if one of your breasts looks and feels different. Inflammatory breast cancer is very aggressive. It can get worse and spread within a few months. Your symptoms may not mean you have IBC. But if they do, prompt treatment may keep cancer from spreading. Your cancer care team will explain your treatment options. They’ll understand that it’s scary to learn you have a rare, aggressive cancer. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and share your concerns. Your team will take as much time as you need to help you understand your situation.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A breast cancer diagnosis can turn your world upside down. At Cleveland Clinic, we offer expertise, compassion and personalized treatment plans.
Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials