APAP Machine: What It Is, How It Works & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
APAP Machine
Advertisement
Advertisement
APAP Machine
An automatic positive airway pressure (APAP) machine helps treat obstructive sleep apnea. While you’re sleeping, it helps keep your airways open by delivering a range of air pressure according to your different breathing patterns. APAP machines can help improve your sleep quality, but may cause congestion, runny nose and dry mouth.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is an APAP Machine?
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Details
What Is an APAP Machine?
An APAP (automatic positive airway pressure) machine is a type of medical device that most commonly helps treat obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). If you have OSA, you temporarily stop breathing while you’re sleeping. This affects your sleep quality and can affect your mental and physical health.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
An APAP machine takes in air from the surrounding environment and pressurizes it. It then blows a range of strong, direct air pressure either through your nose or through your mouth and nose (depending on the type of mask) to your airway. This pressurized air widens your throat and gently keeps the back part of the roof of your mouth (soft palate), tongue and uvula from collapsing. This allows you to breathe continuously while you sleep and improves your overall sleep quality.
An APAP uses an algorithm to self-regulate. The algorithm is like a set of instructions that helps the machine learn your breathing patterns so it can adjust its levels. For example, you may need higher pressure levels if you’re sleeping on your back or in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Sensors in the machine recognize changes to your breathing patterns, and the algorithm changes the air pressure according to your needs.
There are many different names for an APAP machine, including:
Auto-adjusting airway pressure therapy
Auto-adjusting
CPAP
Auto-CPAP
Automatic CPAP machine
Auto-titrating airway pressure machine
Auto-titrating CPAP
Automatic positive airway pressure
Treatment Details
What happens during APAP therapy?
A basic APAP machine includes a:
Filter to purify the air before it enters your airway
Mask that fits over your mouth and/or nose with straps that help secure the mask to your face and prevent air from leaking out
Tube or hose that connects the mask to the APAP
Advertisement
It’s important to find an appropriate space for your APAP. A good space should:
Be close to an electrical outlet
Be free from anything that makes it difficult to access or turn on the machine
Provide sturdy support for your machine, like a bedside table or nightstand
To set up your APAP, you’ll:
Insert the filter into the machine
Attach the hose
Connect the hose to the mask
Plug in the machine
Put the mask over your mouth and/or nose and adjust the straps to secure it in place
Turn on the machine
How do I get used to an APAP machine?
It can be difficult to get used to an APAP machine. These tips can help you adjust:
Practice breathing through your mask during the day before you attach it to the machine
Attach the mask to the machine and turn the device on while you do something relaxing, like reading a book or watching TV
Take a nap while using APAP
Go to bed a little earlier than usual to give yourself time to get comfortable
Help relax your mind by taking a warm bath or shower before bed, practicing
progressive muscle relaxation
or
guided imagery
, or playing white noise, pink noise or nature sounds
Use
mouth tape
or a chin strap to keep your mouth closed if your mask only covers your nose
Wash your face with warm water and soap or a facial cleanser so it’s easier for the mask to create a good seal
How long will I need to use an APAP machine?
It depends on how long you have
obstructive sleep apnea
. Some people need to use an APAP machine or another type of positive airway pressure device for the rest of their lives. A healthcare provider will let you know what to expect according to your unique situation.
What are the benefits of an APAP?
The main benefit of using an APAP machine is that it recognizes subtle changes in your breathing and adjusts the air pressure. This reduces breathing interruptions while sleeping and improves your overall sleep quality. The benefits of better sleep quality include:
Feeling more rested, which can help your ability to think (cognitive function)
Less daytime sleepiness (
hypersomnia
)
Improved mood
Snoring less than usual
APAP machines also work well to adjust to changes that may affect your sleep, like small weight changes, drinking alcohol or using
sedatives
.
What are the downsides of an APAP?
It can be difficult to adjust to sleeping with an APAP machine. Many people initially find it uncomfortable and confining, which can make falling asleep frustrating. You may also feel self-conscious about using it. APAP machines can also be relatively large — about the size of a shoebox. It can take up valuable room on your bedside table or in your luggage if you’re traveling.
Advertisement
APAP machine algorithms are also imperfect. It may receive incorrect data if you have a leak in your mask or hose. This can cause the machine to use the wrong pressure levels. It isn’t dangerous. But you may not see the same benefits.
APAP machines can also be expensive. Not all health insurance providers may cover an APAP machine.
What are the side effects of using an APAP?
Using an APAP may cause:
Bloody nose
Dry mouth
Nasal congestion
Runny nose
Skin discoloration (red, purple, brown) or chafing
You can help prevent some of these side effects by:
Using the heat and humidity settings on the machine, if available
Running a humidifier in your room
Using a mask that properly fits around your mouth and/or nose
Trying different types of mask liners
Who should not use APAP?
Healthcare providers may not recommend an APAP if you have:
A
body mass index
(BMI) greater than 30 (have
overweight
/
obesity
)
Central sleep apnea
(a problem with your brainstem that affects how you breathe when you sleep)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD)
Congestive heart failure
Opioid use disorder
A neuromuscular disorder
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
When should I call my healthcare provider?
It can take some time to adjust to using an APAP. Reach out to a healthcare provider if you’re having any problems. They can offer advice to help you adjust, suggest a different type of mask or even recommend a different type of positive airway pressure device.
Advertisement
Additional Details
What is the difference between APAP and CPAP?
APAP and CPAP machines are both types of positive airway pressure devices. But a CPAP machine provides a fixed level of pressure as you sleep. An APAP machine adjusts its pressure levels according to your breathing patterns.
Are there alternatives to an APAP machine?
Yes. Positive airway pressure devices are the most common sleep apnea treatment. But you may also be able to treat sleep apnea with one or more of the following:
Jaw surgery so soft tissue doesn’t press on your airways
Weight management to help reduce your risk of sleep apnea
Medications such as tirzepatide (Zepbound®, Mounjaro®) to help with weight loss
Neuromuscular
electrical stimulation
(NMES) to prevent your tongue and upper airway muscles from blocking your airways
Nose surgery (septoplasty) to straighten nasal tissues so it’s easier for air to travel
Oral appliance therapy
to move your jaw to a better position to open your airways
Positional therapy to help you sleep on your side or stomach, which may reduce apnea episodes
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have sleep apnea, it can feel like no amount of caffeine can help you feel alert (or even pleasant to be around). But an APAP machine is one of the first treatment options healthcare providers recommend to help improve the quality and quantity of your sleep. It can take some time to adjust, and you may feel a little self-conscious wearing a mask. But catching quality ZZZs should quickly put you at ease. Talk to a provider if you have any questions or difficulties with your APAP machine.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Obstructive sleep apnea can keep you from the getting the good night’s rest you need. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can create a treatment plan that helps.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment