Women and Stress: Symptoms, Effects on the Body & Relief
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Women and Stress
Advertisement
Advertisement
Women and Stress
Stress in women can affect your emotional and physical well-being. You probably recognize symptoms like anxiety, depression, anger, irritability, mood swings and frustration. But it can also affect your energy level, appetite, memory and focus. There are different management options to help you relieve stress.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Women's Behavioral Health Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is stress in women?
Stress
is a natural part of life. But for
women
, who may feel more pressure to tend to the needs of others, stress can be both motivating and overwhelming. It might heighten awareness and help you focus. Or it might lead to anxiety and exhaustion. Many women are so busy that they don’t even realize how much stress affects them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When stress becomes chronic (long-lasting), it can start to feel like the norm. Over time, it can take a serious toll on both your physical and mental health.
There are steps you can take to help manage stress at home. Or you can reach out to a healthcare provider for more help.
How does stress in women differ from stress in men?
While everyone experiences stress, it can affect women and men differently. For example, the
American Psychological Association
’s 2023 Stress in America study found the following:
Women reported a higher average level of stress than men.
Women were more likely than men to say that they could have used more emotional support.
Women felt more “disturbed” by financial worries than men.
Women were more likely than men to rank family responsibilities and relationships as major stressors in their lives.
Researchers believe that biological factors (like
hormones
) may affect how each sex experiences stress differently. Social influences (like support or abandonment) may influence stress as well.
What are the symptoms of stress in women?
There are many symptoms of stress. Everyone reacts to stress in unique ways. Common symptoms of stress in women include:
Physical
:
Headaches
, difficulty
sleeping
, muscle tension, pain (most commonly in the back and neck), overeating/undereating,
skin
issues,
drug and alcohol misuse
, lack of energy, upset stomach and/or bowels,
less interest in sex
or other things you used to enjoy
Emotional
: Anxiety,
depression
, anger, unhappiness, irritability, feelings of being out of control,
mood swings
, frustration
Mental
: Forgetfulness, worry, can’t make decisions, negative thinking, lack of focus, boredom, loss of interest in things that you usually enjoy, no motivation, loss of meaning, emptiness, unforgiving, doubt, guilt, despair
Occupational
: Work overload,
burnout
, long hours, tense relations, poor concentration
Social
: Less intimacy, isolation, family problems, loneliness
Advertisement
What causes stress in women?
Some of the most common causes of stress include:
Finances
Health
Relationships
School or work
Many women report that caregiving and family responsibilities, such as taking care of children, parents and household duties, increase stress and a lack of well-being. Often, women spend more time meeting the needs of others rather than caring for themselves.
It’s normal to want to perform well in all that you do. And sometimes, it can be difficult to say “no,” even when you know you don’t have the time or energy. This can cause symptoms of stress, too.
As a woman, how does stress affect my health?
When you feel stress for a long period of time, it’s known as chronic stress. It can cause health complications like:
Severe or frequent headaches (
tension headaches
and
migraines
)
Heart
conditions (
high blood pressure
,
heart disease
and
heart attack
)
Irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS)
Mental health conditions
(
panic disorder
,
generalized anxiety disorder
, major depression)
Muscle tension and pain
Obesity
(stress-related weight gain)
Stroke
Suppressed immune system
(difficult to recover after an illness)
Under a healthcare provider’s guidance, managing stress may help you prevent these complications.
How can women better manage stress?
Women can manage stress by prioritizing and practicing healthy self-care coping strategies. Here are some suggestions to get started:
Cognitive reframing (instead of saying “I need to do this,” say “I get to do this”)
Eat well-balanced meals (like the
Mediterranean diet
)
Enjoy nature (go for a walk and disconnect from the chaos for a bit)
Exercise or participate in a physical activity that gets your body moving
Get enough
sleep
(seven to nine hours/night)
Practice relaxation techniques (like
yoga
,
meditation
, deep breathing)
Practice gratitude
Schedule time for yourself
to do activities/hobbies you enjoy
Spend time socializing with friends and family
Start journaling
Next, you can follow some tips that focus on your mental wellbeing:
Identify the sources of your stress
. Write down how you feel and what you’re doing throughout the day. You may be able to create action plans to offload tasks or ask for help when you need it.
It’s important to be able to say “no”
politely but firmly and set boundaries for yourself.
Count to 10
. If you’re angry about a situation, try walking away and counting to 10. Take a few deep breaths and pause instead of reacting immediately.
Accept and care for yourself like you do for others
. You’re kind to others so be kind to yourself. Remember, you have to put on your own oxygen mask first before you help someone else.
Find social support
. It can be difficult to reach out in your time of need. Many women find it helpful to have someone to rely on for support when things get tough.
Do a digital/social media detox
.
Take a break from your screen
when you can.
Seek help
. It’s OK to talk to a healthcare provider when you need it. They may recommend different resources to help you
manage stress
like
therapy
.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Stress can feel like you’re carrying a weight on your shoulders. This is especially true for women, who often take on more than one person can handle. It’s OK to ask for help — your health depends on it. Stress impacts both your body and mind, so don’t hesitate to reach out to a healthcare provider. They can connect you with resources to help you manage stress and feel more at ease.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Life can come with many changes and challenges. Cleveland Clinic’s women’s behavioral health team can help with a care plan that’s specific to you.
Women's Behavioral Health Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment