Post-Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Post-Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Post-Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS)
Post-intensive care syndrome can affect anyone who receives care in the ICU. Symptoms may be mental, physical or emotional. It can also affect family and close friends who help provide care and support. Treatment depends on your collection of symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Post-Intensive Care Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Post-Intensive Care Syndrome?
Post-intensive care syndrome (PICS) is a collection of symptoms that linger when you go home after receiving treatment in the
intensive care unit
(ICU). These symptoms may be:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Emotional
Mental
Physical
Being in the ICU is serious. If you need ICU care, it’s because you have a life-threatening injury or illness. But because of advances in medicine over the last several decades, more people now survive critical conditions.
Healthcare providers used to focus more on the immediate short-term results of people who needed ICU care. That is, making sure they survived. More recently, providers have shifted their attention to the long-term outcomes. That means:
Making sure people who need ICU care can regain their physical abilities
Ensuring there’s nothing wrong with their mental abilities
Helping them have a good quality of life
Providers learned that, although more people survived stays in the ICU, they didn’t make a full recovery for a long time. Sometimes, it could take weeks, months or even years. As a result, they developed emotional, mental and physical symptoms that related to their critical condition and treatment in the ICU.
PICS is a common. About
5 to 8 out of every 10 people
who receive ICU treatment develop PICS.
What is PICS-F?
Family members or close friends who witness someone receiving ICU care can also develop the mental and emotional symptoms of PICS. This is post-intensive care syndrome-family (PICS-F).
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of post-ICU syndrome?
Post-intensive care syndrome causes new or worsening symptoms that can affect you emotionally, mentally and physically.
Emotional PICS symptoms may include:
Anxiety
Decreased motivation
Depression
Post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), including
nightmares
and unwanted memories
Mental (cognitive) PICS symptoms may include:
Confusion
and
delirium
Decreased
memory
, thinking problems
Difficulty talking
Forgetfulness
Poor concentration
Trouble organizing and solving problems
Physical PICS symptoms may include:
Feeling very tired (
fatigue
)
Muscle weakness
Problems falling asleep or staying asleep (
insomnia
)
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
)
Trouble moving around (decreased mobility)
Symptoms of post-intensive care syndrome-family may include:
Anxiety
Depression
Grief
Insomnia
PTSD
Stress
Post-intensive care syndrome causes
The ICU can be a very stressful environment. You may experience many different stressors that combine to cause PICS. These may include:
Medical conditions themselves, for example,
respiratory failure
or
sepsis
Medications that have mind-altering effects
The use of life-sustaining equipment, like tubes that go down your throat (endotracheal tubes) or
mechanical ventilators
Risk factors
Anyone who survives a critical condition that required ICU care may develop PICS. Family and loved ones who provide care and support to someone who required ICU care can develop PICS-family.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose PICS
Healthcare providers will review your medical history, ask about your symptoms and conduct a
physical exam
. They’ll also recommend different tests and questionnaires to help diagnose PICS. These may include:
Cognitive tests
to check your mental functioning
Screening questionnaires to assess anxiety disorders and depression
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
There are many PICS treatments. They may be different depending on why you needed ICU care and what symptoms you have. They may include:
Antidepressant
medications or anti-anxiety medications like
benzodiazepines
or
beta-blockers
Avoiding low blood sugar levels (
hypoglycemia
) and low oxygen levels (
hypoxemia
)
Getting you moving as soon as possible to reduce weakness and improve muscle function
Occupational therapy
to help perform daily tasks
Pain medications
(analgesics)
Pulmonary (lung) rehab
or
cardiac (heart) rehab
, if necessary
Sedatives
to help treat anxiety and insomnia
Talk therapy
(psychotherapy) with a
psychologist
or a
psychiatrist
In addition, getting lots of
sleep
and
eating healthy foods
can also help your body recover. And keeping a journal about your experiences can help you process your thoughts and feelings.
How can family members help their loved one with PICS?
Friends and family members can help decrease the effects of PICS in loved ones by:
Advertisement
Bringing in pictures or favorite items from home to their hospital room
Encouraging a balance between rest and activity
Participating in activities like card games or puzzles
Reading the news or stories aloud at their bedside
Talking about the current date and time and familiar people, places and current events
How can I help myself if I have PICS-F?
PICS-F treatment may include:
Participating in bedside care
Recording your thoughts and feelings in a journal
Seeking support from family or close friends
Talking to a counselor or therapist
Talking to your loved one’s healthcare team about their care plan
Trying to maintain your typical routine, including eating healthy foods, resting and physical activity
Most hospitals also offer
social workers
, case managers and religious or spiritual services to help provide support to those who need ICU care and their families.
How do you recover from post-ICU syndrome?
Your body is unique, and how it responds to a stay in the ICU may be different from others. Some people don’t have any PICS symptoms. Or they may have a combination of different mental, emotional and physical symptoms. Your
care team
may include many different specialists. A healthcare provider will give you an idea of what to expect during your recovery based on your specific symptoms.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
It’s important to schedule regular appointments with your healthcare team after a traumatic event. If you or a loved one experiences symptoms of post-intensive care syndrome, contact a provider for an evaluation.
During your appointment, you may wish to ask the following questions:
Which tests will you conduct to diagnose PICS?
Are there any other symptoms I should look out for?
What treatments do you recommend?
Are there any side effects to your recommended treatments?
How long do you expect my symptoms to last?
Can my symptoms come back later?
Are there any PICS or PICS-F resources or support groups you can recommend?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does post-intensive care syndrome last?
It depends. Some people don’t have any symptoms of PICS. But others may have symptoms for a long time. A healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect depending on your situation.
Prevention
How do you prevent post-ICU syndrome?
Healthcare providers will do their best to help prevent PICS during hospitalization. This may include things like:
Asking about PICS symptoms during follow-up appointments
Having you spend only the necessary amount of time on life support machines
Starting
physical therapy
, even during other treatments
Using light or minimal sedation
It’s also important for friends and family members to help with their loved one’s care and recovery.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What is post-ICU delirium?
Post-ICU delirium is a type of confusion that develops after receiving ICU care. It affects your ability to focus your attention and your awareness.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The intensive care unit provides lifesaving care to people with severe conditions. But sometimes, the stress of treatment can wear on you and your loved ones in unexpected ways. Coping after a traumatic event can be challenging. Fortunately, healthcare providers are more in tune with the long-term effects of ICU care on your mind, body and emotions.
They’ll provide you with the best possible care while actively trying to prevent PICS symptoms. And if you do experience PICS, they’ll recommend the best treatments to promote complete healing and well-being.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider