Mental Disorders: Types, Causes & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Mental Disorders
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mental Disorders
Mental disorders are conditions that affect your thoughts, emotions and behavior. There are more than 200 types, like depression, anxiety and schizophrenia. You may have mood swings, appetite changes, hallucinations or loss of interest. Treatment, like therapy and medications, may help you manage symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is a Mental Disorder?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is a Mental Disorder?
There are many different types of mental disorders, like anxiety, depression and schizophrenia.
A mental health disorder, also known as a mental illness or psychiatric disorder, is a condition that affects the way you think and behave. It also influences your emotions and how you regulate them. You may feel anxious or empty, have racing thoughts or have trouble eating or sleeping.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are several different types. They may impact your ability to function at home, work or school.
Mental disorders are common.
About
1 in every 8 people around the world lives with one of these disorders.
No matter what you’re feeling, help is available.
Types of mental disorders
There are more than 200 types of mental health disorders. Some of the most common types include:
Anxiety disorders
like
post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD),
obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD), social phobia and generalized anxiety disorders
Mood disorders
like depression and
bipolar disorder
(manic depression)
Neurodevelopmental disorders like
ADHD
and
autism
Disruptive behavior disorders like
oppositional defiant disorder
and
conduct disorder
Eating disorders like
anorexia nervosa
,
bulimia nervosa
and binge eating disorder
Personality disorders like
borderline
,
antisocial
, and
narcissistic
personality disorder
Psychotic disorders like
schizophrenia
Substance use disorders
,
addiction
and
alcohol use disorder
Symptoms and Causes
Mental disorder symptoms
Mental health conditions can lead to a broad range of symptoms. These vary based on the type, but may include:
Behavior that seems out of character
Changes in appetite,
sex drive
or daily functioning
Difficulty identifying reality (
hallucinations
or
delusions
)
Excessive worry, fear or unusual thoughts
Feeling
disconnected
from yourself or others
Heightened sensitivity to light, sound or smell
Loss of interest in usual activities
Mood swings
or exaggerated emotions
Performance issues at work or school, or relationship challenges
Self-harm
or
thoughts of suicide
Trouble sleeping
Advertisement
Mental disorders in children may affect how they think, feel and behave. You might notice that your child has:
Difficulty sitting still or paying attention
Excessive worry or fear, like not wanting to go to bed (
nightmares
)
Decreased interest in their favorite activities
Frequent
tantrums
, defiance or aggressive behavior
Problems at school or with friends
A person doesn’t have to have all of these symptoms to receive a diagnosis. But, experiencing a few may be a sign to talk to a healthcare provider.
Mental disorder causes
Many factors may contribute to the development of a psychiatric disorder. These could include:
Genetics
: You may inherit
genes
that increase your risk of certain mental health conditions. However, having these genes doesn’t guarantee you’ll develop the disorder.
Brain chemistry and function
: Your
brain
uses chemicals called
neurotransmitters
to help control your mood and behavior. Disruptions in how these chemicals work may lead to mental disorders.
Life experiences and environment
: Stressful experiences, especially early in life, may increase your risk. Also, factors like substance use, availability of social support and chronic medical conditions may play a role.
Risk factors
Anyone can develop a mental disorder. Your risk increases if you:
Experienced
abuse
or trauma
Experienced significant
stress
, like the loss of a loved one
Feel isolated or lonely
Had a
traumatic brain injury
Had exposure to
viruses
, toxic chemicals or substances (like
alcohol
) before birth
Have a biological family history of the condition
Have a chemical imbalance in your brain
Have a chronic or serious medical condition (like
pain
or
cancer
)
Use
addictive substances
Complications of mental disorders
Mental health disorders prevent you from feeling like yourself. These disorders may make you think about hurting yourself or others. You may also have thoughts about
suicide
.
If you’re ever in a difficult situation where these thoughts are flooding your mind, don’t hesitate to reach out for help. Call or text
988
(U.S.). This is the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline. Someone is available to speak with you 24/7. You don’t have to be in a crisis to talk.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose mental disorders
To diagnose a mental health condition, your provider will start with a
physical exam
and a review of your medical history. They’ll also do a psychological evaluation. A
psychologist
will ask you questions about your thoughts, feelings and behaviors to better understand your symptoms.
Be sure to tell your provider:
If there are any specific triggers that make your symptoms worse
If your symptoms are chronic (ongoing) or if they come and go
When you first noticed changes in your
mental health
Advertisement
It can be difficult to be open and honest with a provider. You may feel vulnerable sharing your personal feelings with someone else. This is normal. But understand that your provider wants to help you feel better. They won’t judge you for feeling the way that you do. Your honesty helps them make an accurate diagnosis and offer the best care possible.
Mental disorders test
There aren’t any medical tests that can diagnose mental disorders. But your provider may perform tests, like
blood work
or imaging tests, to rule out other conditions that may cause similar symptoms.
Who diagnoses mental disorders?
If you’re experiencing symptoms, a good first step is talking with a
primary care physician
. They may refer you to a psychologist or
psychiatrist
, depending on your needs. In some cases, a
social worker
can help. After a diagnosis, a mental health therapist or counselor is often the person you’ll see most regularly during therapy. There are different paths to an accurate diagnosis and effective treatment, and different providers can help you get there.
Management and Treatment
Treatment of mental disorders
Treatments for mental disorders may include:
Psychotherapy
: Talking to a mental health professional may help you better understand and manage your thoughts and behaviors. It may happen in an individual or group setting.
Medications
: Psychiatric medications — like
antidepressants
,
antipsychotics
or
mood stabilizers
— may help balance brain chemicals to ease symptoms.
Supportive services
: Programs that offer education, social support and care coordination can help you manage your condition and adapt as your needs change.
Alternate therapies
:
Yoga
,
meditation
or
acupuncture
may offer additional support alongside your regular treatment plan.
Brain stimulation
: For some disorders, advanced therapies that target brain activity may help when other treatments aren’t effective. Examples include
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
,
vagus nerve stimulation
(VNS) and
transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS)
Advertisement
If you’re in crisis or your safety is at risk, you may need care in a hospital or outpatient treatment center. These programs provide immediate support. Your care team may also coordinate follow-up treatment to ensure continued progress after you leave.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if symptoms are making it hard to get through your day. They’ll help you understand what’s going on and find ways to reduce the impact on your daily life.
If you have a mental health disorder and you notice changes to the symptoms you experience, let your provider know.
If you’re in a crisis or need immediate help, contact 911 or your local emergency services number.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a mental disorder?
Treatment may help you feel better and make it easier to get through your day. It often takes time, and you may not feel better right away. But progress is possible. Your care team will work with you to create a personalized treatment plan based on your goals. You’ll be able to set your own pace and adjust your goals as your needs change.
Some conditions may improve over time, but others require long-term management. A healthcare provider can guide you through that process and help you adapt your treatment as needed.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Mental health conditions are common and nothing to be ashamed of. You might have one yourself or know someone who does. These disorders aren’t character flaws or signs of weakness. They can have many causes and are often more complex than they seem.
Advertisement
A healthcare provider can help you understand what’s going on and create a treatment plan that fits your life. With the right care and support, you can take meaningful steps toward feeling better and staying well.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment