Hemicrania Continua: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hemicrania Continua
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hemicrania Continua
Hemicrania continua is a type of headache that causes constant pain on one side of your head. You might also feel other symptoms like nausea or sensitivity to light. Indomethacin, a type of NSAID (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug) medication, is the most common treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Headaches and Migraines Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is hemicrania continua?
Hemicrania continua is a type of
headache
that causes constant pain on only one side of your face and head.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The name “hemicrania continua” comes from Latin words that mean “one side of the head” and “continuous.” For this reason, a hemicrania headache is sometimes called a “side-locked continuous headache.”
It’s a primary headache disorder, which means that no other underlying conditions cause these headaches. A healthcare provider will help you manage symptoms.
What are the types of hemicrania continua?
There are two types of hemicrania continua headaches:
Chronic
: You experience constant daily headaches
Remitting
: Daily headaches continue for up to six months and then stop for a period of time (weeks to months)
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hemicrania continua?
The main symptom of hemicrania continua is a headache with the following features:
Head pain on only one side of your head and face (always on the same side)
Pain that lasts for at least three months
Pain that feels consistently dull
Headache attacks (periods of severe, stabbing pain that happen three to five times a day in between constant, dull pain)
You may also have one or more of the following symptoms:
Drooping eyelid
(Ptosis)
Nausea
and
vomiting
Nasal congestion
Red eyes
Runny nose
Sensitivity to light (photophobia)
or loud noises
Tearing
What makes a hemicrania continua headache worse?
If you have a hemicrania continua headache, the pain may feel worse when you:
Drink alcohol
Do intense physical activities
Advertisement
Unlike many types of headache disorders, environmental factors like
stress
or lack of
sleep
don’t trigger symptoms or make them worse.
What causes hemicrania continua?
Healthcare providers don’t know what causes hemicrania continua. It isn’t caused by an underlying medical condition.
Research suggests hemicrania continua may involve:
Inflammation
in your cavernous sinus (an area in your brain that protects certain blood vessels, nerves and your
pituitary gland
)
Widened
arteries
in your
brain
Trigeminal nerve
dysfunction
What are the risk factors for hemicrania continua?
Anyone can have hemicrania continua. But it’s most common in
females
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hemicrania continua diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose hemicrania continua after a
physical exam
and testing. Your provider will ask you questions about how you feel, where the pain in your head is and for how long you’ve had symptoms.
Your provider may ask you to keep a headache diary or notes about your symptoms. It’s a good idea to keep track of:
The date the headaches occur
Which part of your head hurts
When the pain gets worse
How long periods of severe pain last
If you have other symptoms, like nausea or a runny nose
Your provider will instruct you to take certain medications to see if they make you feel better. You may also have imaging tests, such as a
CT (computed tomography) scan
or an
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan
to take pictures of your brain and rule out other headache causes.
Management and Treatment
How is hemicrania continua treated?
Treatment for hemicrania continua is a medication called
indomethacin
. Indomethacin is a prescription
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
. It reduces inflammation and head pain.
A healthcare provider may prescribe a low dose of indomethacin three times daily. You should take this medication with meals. You should notice symptoms reduce or go away within a week of starting indomethacin. Some people feel symptom relief as soon as a day after starting treatment.
If headaches go away, your provider may lower your dose. Their goal is to prescribe the lowest dose possible that’s still effective at managing your symptoms.
Side effects of indomethacin
Common side effects of indomethacin include:
Constipation
Diarrhea
Dizziness
Ringing
in ears
Vomiting
Contact your healthcare provider right away if you experience any serious side effects like:
Fast heartbeat
Back pain
Difficulty breathing or
shortness of breath (dyspnea)
Fever
Pain while peeing (dysuria)
Skin rash
,
itchy skin
,
hives
and/or
blisters
Stomach pain
Swelling
Vision
changes
What treatments other than indomethacin are available for hemicrania continua?
Indomethacin works for most people, but if you can’t take it, your provider may recommend another medicine like:
Amitriptyline
Corticosteroids
COX-2 inhibitors
(
celecoxib
)
Gabapentin
Lamotrigine
Lithium
Melatonin
Naproxen
Topiramate
Valproate
Advertisement
Other types of treatment may include:
Injections of
botulinum toxin-A
Vagus nerve stimulation
Deep brain stimulation
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Headaches and Migraines Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for hemicrania continua?
Hemicrania continua is a treatable type of headache. A healthcare provider can help you manage symptoms and adjust the dosage of prescription medications as needed throughout your life. You might experience headache episodes (periods when headaches return) after months of being symptom-free. Many people report that they’re able to get back to their routine without restriction when managing headaches with indomethacin medication or an alternative medication.
Is hemicrania continua serious?
Hemicrania continua isn’t a dangerous or life-threatening condition. It isn’t a sign of an underlying condition or an indication that something more serious is causing head pain.
It can be alarming to experience hemicrania continua headaches if you don’t know what’s causing them. Your symptoms will feel very serious. A healthcare provider will diagnose what’s causing constant headaches to help you manage them.
Prevention
Can hemicrania continua be prevented?
There’s no way to prevent hemicrania continua. If you have this condition and want to reduce your risk of worsening symptoms, avoid drinking alcohol and overexerting yourself during physical activities.
Living With
What can I expect if I have hemicrania continua?
This headache is persistent. It can interfere with your ability to think clearly and feel like yourself. Living in pain can be frustrating, especially when you’re trying to make it through your routine. It can feel like you’re working twice as hard to do simple activities. This can have a serious impact on your mental health and emotional well-being.
Advertisement
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Let a healthcare provider know if you have headaches that feel like they never end.
If you have hemicrania continua, talk to your provider if you experience new or worsening symptoms or notice any side effects from the medication you take.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
Which medication side effects should I watch for?
Will I have to take medication for the rest of my life?
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between hemicrania continua and paroxysmal hemicrania?
Hemicrania continua and paroxysmal hemicrania both affect one side of your head. Hemicrania continua causes persistent headaches. Paroxysmal hemicrania causes repeated, sudden headaches.
What’s the difference between a hemicrania continua headache and a migraine?
A hemicrania continua headache and a
migraine
may cause similar symptoms. In most people, hemicrania continua affects only one side of your face and head. They’re also constant and happen daily. Migraine symptoms come and go. Migraines can affect any part of your face or head.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Persistent head pain can be a real … pain! You might not want to get out of bed, go to work or spend time with family and friends. Feeling constant pain can affect your mood and emotional health. You might even push through headache pain or try to ignore the dull throbbing feeling that seems like it’ll never go away.
Fortunately, a healthcare provider can help you manage these very treatable headaches. They’ll suggest medications or other options that will manage your symptoms and help you feel more like yourself again.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Do you have headaches that won’t go away? Or ones that come back regularly? Cleveland Clinic’s headache and migraine experts are here to help.
Headaches and Migraines Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/31/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment