Hypotropia: What It Is, Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hypotropia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hypotropia
Hypotropia is a type of eye misalignment (strabismus) where one eye points downward relative to the other. This impairs your binocular vision and depth perception. Injuries and disorders that affect your eye muscles or the nerves that control them can cause it. Treatment may include vision correction, vision therapy or surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
Hypotropia is a type of strabismus (eye misalignment) in which your eye turns downward involuntarily.
What is hypotropia?
Hypotropia is a form of eye misalignment (
strabismus
) in which your eye turns downward involuntarily. It’s the opposite of
hypertropia
(an upward eye turn). You may have hypotropia by itself, or your eye may drift downward and to one side. Hypotropia with
esotropia
(an inward turn) often occurs with a condition called heavy eye syndrome. Hypotropia can also occur with
exotropia
(an outward turn).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Types of hypotropia
Hypotropia can be:
Congenital or acquired
. It’s often related to a disorder that you’re born with, and it’s commonly diagnosed in childhood. But it can also occur later in life due to a new condition.
Unilateral or bilateral
. It usually affects one eye at a time, and usually the same eye. But in some cases, it affects different eyes at different times or, very rarely, both eyes at once.
Constant or intermittent
. Your eye may turn downward all the time, or only sometimes. With dissociated hypotropia, your eye drifts when your brain isn’t paying attention to it.
When you have hypotropia, you can’t control your wayward eye movements, and you may not even realize they’re happening. Children with this condition may be too young to understand how their eyes are different. This can be both socially and physically awkward. Whether you’re a child or the parent of that child, or even an adult developing hypotropia, it can bring a variety of challenges — not all of them visual.
Symptoms and Causes
What are hypotropia symptoms?
When your eyes won’t coordinate, it can cause
binocular vision dysfunction
, with symptoms including:
Blurry vision
Double vision
Eye strain
Headaches
Impaired
depth perception
Some people develop a head tilt in the effort to see better, which can cause
neck stiffness
and
pain
. Head tilts in children can affect how they grow. For example, they may develop asymmetrical faces.
Advertisement
Is hypotropia serious?
Hypotropia might affect you a little or a lot, depending on how often it happens and how severe it is. You might have difficulty or discomfort with tasks that require close
vision
, like reading or sewing. Eye misalignment in children can worsen over time. In some cases, it can lead to
amblyopia (lazy eye)
. This is more likely if the child is younger, which is why regular screenings from an early age are so important.
What causes hypotropia?
Hypotropia happens when something prevents the
muscles around your eye
from moving it up and down normally. Disorders or injuries that affect these muscles may weaken, pull or trap them. Sometimes the
nerves
that activate these muscles are unable to do so. Disorders or injuries that affect your
nervous system
can damage these nerve pathways. There are many possible causes, including:
Brain lesions
Brown syndrome
Extraocular muscle fibrosis
Moebius syndrome
Neuromuscular disorders
Oculomotor nerve palsy
Orbital fractures
Thyroid eye disease
Trochlear nerve palsy
Tumors
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose eye misalignment?
Eye care specialists
diagnose hypotropia with a thorough
eye exam
and specialized tests. These tests help them determine the degree of eye misalignment you have and how it’s affecting your vision.
Tests may include:
Bruckner test
. Your provider will shine a light and observe its reflection from your
retinas
.
Hirschberg test
. Your provider will shine a smaller light and observe its reflection on your
corneas
.
Krimsky test
. Your provider will place prisms in front of your eye during the Hirschberg test.
Cover/uncover test
. Your provider will briefly cover one eye and watch the other one adjust.
Prism cover test
. Your provider will place prisms in front of your eye during the cover test.
4 dot test
. You’ll look for colored dots, wearing different colored filters over your eyes.
Red filter test
. This test involves looking at a light with a red-colored filter over one eye.
Maddox rod test
. You’ll look through one lens that distorts light into a line instead of a point.
Double Maddox rod test
. The lenses will be placed over both eyes and you’ll compare the lines.
Bagolini striated lens test
. You’ll look at a light through striated lenses that produce two lines.
Titmus/randot test
. Wearing polarized glasses, you’ll look at a book with 3-D images.
You may need other tests, or to see another healthcare provider, to diagnose the underlying cause of your misalignment. This is important because the cause will determine the best treatment approach.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for hypotropia?
The treatment depends on the cause. In some cases, treating the cause will correct hypotropia. In other cases, it won’t. You might need to wear prescription lenses and prisms to correct your vision.
Can you fix hypotropia?
Depending on the cause, nonsurgical treatments can sometimes fix hypotropia. Your provider will try these options first. If they don’t work, they might recommend surgery to fix it.
Strabismus surgery
adjusts the muscles around your eye to correct the misalignment. It corrects the appearance of hypotropia and will often correct your vision. But some people may still need corrective lenses and prisms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis?
With early diagnosis and treatment, the prognosis (outlook) is good. Hypotropia that goes untreated too long may be harder to treat later. In children, untreated hypotropia can lead to loss of depth perception or amblyopia (lazy eye) and permanent vision loss in the affected eye. It’s daunting to send a young child into
eye surgery
. But children who have surgery when it’s recommended have excellent outcomes.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Whether your child is born with it, or whether you develop it later in life, hypotropia can be unsettling and disorienting. We expect and depend on our eyes to work together. When one goes astray, it disrupts our vision, our image and our orientation in space. The good news is that it’s treatable, and with timely treatment, it’s often curable. For the best outcome, see your eye care provider sooner than later.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Getting an annual eye exam at Cleveland Clinic can help you catch vision problems early and keep your eyes healthy for years to come.
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/18/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment