Multifocal Motor Neuropathy (MMN): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Multifocal Motor Neuropathy (MMN)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Multifocal Motor Neuropathy (MMN)
Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) is a rare autoimmune condition that causes slowly worsening muscle weakness. It typically starts in your hand and wrist, but can also begin in your leg. MMN is manageable with IVIG therapy, but it’s typically chronic (long-term).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Autoimmune Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Multifocal Motor Neuropathy (MMN)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Multifocal Motor Neuropathy (MMN)?
Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) is a rare condition that causes slowly worsening muscle weakness, usually in your arms or legs. MMN happens because your
immune system
attacks multiple motor (movement)
nerves
. But researchers don’t know why this happens.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
MMN is rare — it affects fewer than
1 per 100,000
people worldwide. Another name for the condition is multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block (MMNCB).
It’s natural to worry about how ongoing worsening muscle weakness could affect your life. The most important step is to see a healthcare provider. Finding the right diagnosis may take time, but your provider will listen, answer your questions and help guide you through the process.
Symptoms and Causes
Multifocal motor neuropathy symptoms
The main symptom of multifocal motor neuropathy is muscle weakness that slowly worsens over time. The weakness is asymmetrical, which means it affects different muscles on opposite sides of your body. For example, you may have left arm weakness and right leg weakness.
MMN most commonly affects one hand first. This may look like:
Difficulty extending or bending your wrist upward (wrist drop)
Difficulty doing
fine motor skills
with your hand, like turning a doorknob or fastening buttons
Dropping objects frequently
Finger weakness
Sometimes, muscle weakness can start in your legs. This may look like:
Reduced toe movement
Your foot drags when you walk (
foot drop
)
Other symptoms of MMN may include:
Muscle cramps
Muscle twitches
Low muscle tone or
atrophy
As the weakness gets worse, you may have severe fatigue in the affected muscles. This may impact your endurance and ability to do physical activities. Unlike other neurological conditions that affect your muscles, MMN doesn’t typically cause sensory issues, like pain,
numbness
or a pins and needles sensation (
paresthesia
). It also doesn’t typically affect the muscles that you need for breathing or swallowing.
Advertisement
Multifocal motor neuropathy causes
MMN is an
autoimmune condition
. It happens because your immune system attacks multiple motor (movement) nerves. These are the nerves that control your
muscles
with signals from your
brain
. More specifically, a conduction block affects how some of your motor nerves function. A conduction block happens when a nerve signal doesn’t travel all the way down the nerve to your muscle. Researchers don’t know why your immune system attacks your nerves in this way.
Many, but not all, people with MMN have specific autoantibodies: anti-GM1 antibodies. Autoantibodies are a malfunctioning type of
antibody
. Antibodies are proteins your immune system makes to identify and destroy invaders like
germs
, allergens or toxins in your blood. Autoantibodies attack your own bodily tissue instead of keeping it healthy.
Anti-GM1 antibodies attack GM1 gangliosides. This is a fatty material (
lipid
) in your
peripheral nerves
that helps keep them healthy. This is the main theory researchers have that explains what happens in MMN. But because not everyone with the condition has these antibodies, researchers have more to learn about MMN.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose multifocal motor neuropathy
Multifocal motor neuropathy is a rare condition that progresses slowly, so it may take time to get a diagnosis. To start, your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll likely do a physical exam and a
neurological exam
, too.
You’ll likely also need to see a neurologist to get a formal diagnosis. They may recommend a variety of tests to confirm MMN or rule out other conditions. Tests may include:
Nerve conduction study
and
electromyography (EMG)
: These tests can check for issues in the functioning of specific motor nerves. MMN most commonly affects your
median
and/or
ulnar nerves
. These tests can also determine if a conduction block is the reason for muscle weakness.
Laboratory tests
: Your provider may recommend various
blood
,
urine
(pee) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests. They’ll also test for anti-GM1 antibodies.
Nerve
ultrasound
and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
: These imaging tests can help check the health of your nerves.
Your neurologist will use specific criteria to confirm MMN and rule out conditions that cause similar symptoms, like:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP)
Lewis-Sumner syndrome
Progressive muscular atrophy (PMA)
Management and Treatment
Multifocal motor neuropathy treatment
The main treatment for MMN is an
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)
called Gammagard Liquid®.
IVIG is a product made up of antibodies from healthy donors that you receive through a vein with an IV. This treatment leads to improved muscle strength in most people with MMN. The improvement can range from minor to significant.
Advertisement
Unfortunately, the initial muscle strength improvement is typically short-term. Only about
20%
of people stay in remission after a single dose of IVIG. Most people need repeated IVIG infusions to maintain their muscle strength. These treatments are usually given every two to eight weeks.
IVIG isn’t a cure for MMN, but no other therapies work as well as it does.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Autoimmune Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Multifocal motor neuropathy prognosis
While it can be frustrating to live with muscle weakness in your limbs, MMN generally isn’t harmful to your physical health. Because of this, the prognosis (outlook) is usually good. About
80%
of people respond well to IVIG treatment and notice symptom improvements.
Even if IVIG doesn’t work for you, muscle weakness progresses slowly. Most people with MMN can do activities of daily living (like hygiene tasks, chores and preparing meals). MMN doesn’t typically affect life expectancy.
But
living with a chronic (long-term) condition
like MMN may affect your mental health. It’s important to see a mental health professional, like a psychologist, if MMN affects your emotional well-being.
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between MMN and ALS?
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a type of motor neuron disease that causes progressive muscle weakness throughout your body. Both ALS and MMN result in muscle weakness. But worsening muscle weakness happens more slowly in MMN than in ALS. Also, ALS typically affects muscles you need to breathe and swallow, whereas MMN usually doesn’t.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a diagnosis of a rare condition can be shocking and even isolating. But know that most people respond well to treatment for multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN), and you may be able to get some of your muscle strength back. Your healthcare team will be by your side throughout your diagnosis and treatment journey. Lean on them — and loved ones — for support.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic provides accurate diagnoses and personalized treatments for all types of autoimmune disorders, including lupus, MS and rheumatoid arthritis.
Autoimmune Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment