ATTR-CM (Transthyretin Amyloid Cardiomyopathy)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
ATTR-CM (Transthyretin Amyloid Cardiomyopathy)
Advertisement
Advertisement
ATTR-CM (Transthyretin Amyloid Cardiomyopathy)
ATTR-CM (transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy) is a rare progressive condition that can cause heart failure. It happens when abnormal proteins build up in your heart muscle. ATTR-CM can be hereditary or develop as you age. Newer treatments can help slow or stop the protein buildups. But they can’t reverse existing heart damage.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Amyloidosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is ATTR-CM?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is ATTR-CM?
ATTR-CM, or transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy, happens when clumps of irregular proteins build up in your
heart
muscle. They replace healthy heart cells. These protein deposits (
amyloid
fibrils) stiffen your whole heart, making it harder for your heart to pump
blood
throughout your body. ATTR-CM can lead to life-threatening complications like
heart failure
and arrhythmias.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
ATTR-CM is a complication of
transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR)
. ATTR can affect several other parts of your body — not just your heart — like your limb
nerves
, ligaments and tendons.
Types
There are two types of ATTR-CM:
Hereditary ATTR-CM (hATTR-CM)
: A
genetic change
causes this type. It can run in biological families. Symptoms can start as early as your 30s. But they often show up in your 50s or later.
Wild-type ATTR-CM (wATTR-CM)
: This type doesn’t run in families. It develops due to aging-related changes. It most commonly affects
males
over the age of 65. This is the most common type of ATTR-CM.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of ATTR-CM
Symptoms are similar to those of heart failure, which include
shortness of breath
, especially when
lying down
, and swelling in your legs, ankles and feet (
edema
). Other symptoms include:
Bloated stomach
Confusion
or difficulty thinking
Dizziness
or
passing out
Coughing
or
wheezing
, especially when lying down
Fatigue
Heart palpitations
Irregular or fast
heart rate
(
arrhythmia
), especially
atrial fibrillation
ATTR-CM develops from transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR). So, you may have other symptoms of ATTR, like
carpal tunnel syndrome
or lumbar
spinal stenosis
(chronic lower back pain).
Advertisement
ATTR-CM causes
ATTR-CM happens when transthyretin (TTR) proteins build up in your heart muscle. The proteins break apart and fold up on themselves. They then form clumps of amyloid fibrils. Your blood carries these fibril clumps throughout your body. When the clumps build up in your heart muscle, they cause damage (
cardiomyopathy
).
A change to the
TTR
gene causes hereditary ATTR-CM. Your body makes faulty TTR proteins.
Wild-type ATTR-CM is an aging-related disease. Normal TTR proteins become structurally unstable and build up in your heart.
Who is at risk for developing this condition?
Hereditary ATTR-CM is most likely to affect Black males in the United States. The most common gene variant in the U.S. that causes it occurs in
3% to 4%
of all Black people. It’s also more common in parts of Portugal, Brazil, Sweden and Japan.
Wild-type ATTR-CM is most likely to affect males over the age of 65.
What are the complications?
Without treatment, ATTR-CM can cause worsening complications, like:
Heart failure
Arrhythmias
Conduction system
diseases, like
heart block
These conditions can cause
sudden cardiac death
or a stroke.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Tests to help diagnose ATTR-CM include:
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Heart imaging like
echocardiograms
and
cardiac MRIs
A
cardiac PYP scan
to check for TTR amyloid deposits in your heart
Heart biopsy
Genetic testing
ATTR-CM can be challenging to diagnose correctly. The hereditary type can mimic
heart disease
caused by chronic
high blood pressure
or
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
. You may get an incorrect diagnosis at first.
The wild type doesn’t always cause symptoms. That version of the condition can go undetected until severe problems like heart failure occur.
Management and Treatment
How is ATTR-CM treated?
There isn’t a cure for ATTR-CM. Treatment for it may involve:
Medications to slow or stop the production or buildup of amyloid deposits
Managing complications like heart failure and arrhythmias
Organ transplantation
Medications for ATTR-CM
A medication called
tafamidis
(Vyndamax® and Vyndaqel®) can slow or stop the buildup of amyloid deposits in hereditary ATTR-CM. These medications have the most benefit if you’re able to start them early in the development of the condition.
Another medication, acroamidis (Atrruby
TM
), is a TTR stabilizer that can help with both types of ATTR-CM.
The latest medication approved for the treatment of ATTR-CM is vutrisiran (Amvuttra®). It can also treat hereditary TTR polyneuropathy. Vutrisiran is a shot you get every three months. It can decrease the production of TTR proteins altogether, decreasing buildups in your heart.
Researchers are currently studying other medications that target the underlying cause of this condition. Ask your healthcare provider if you can join a
clinical trial
.
Advertisement
Managing complications
Therapies that may help manage heart failure and arrhythmias related to ATTR-CM include:
Anticoagulants
Antiarrhythmic
medications like
amiodarone
Cardiac ablation
Compression therapy
Diuretics
Limiting salt in your diet
Pacemaker
Organ transplantation
In cases of advanced heart failure, a
heart transplant
may be an option. Your
liver
makes the abnormal transthyretin protein in ATTR-CM. So, some people may get both a heart and
liver transplant
. Healthcare providers haven’t recommended this option as much in recent years because of the newer therapies available.
Overall, organ transplantation is a rare treatment for ATTR-CM. But it’s highly effective when needed.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
ATTR-CM is a progressive disease, which means it gets worse over time. You’ll need to see your
cardiologist
regularly to make sure your treatment is working. It may help to ask your provider the following questions:
What type of ATTR-CM do I have?
What treatments do you suggest?
What are the benefits and risks of my treatment options?
Should I look out for signs of complications?
Should my family members get testing for the condition?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Amyloidosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for someone with ATTR-CM?
ATTR-CM is a progressive disease that eventually causes serious complications. Early diagnosis and treatment are key to a better outlook (
prognosis
).
Living with ATTR-CM
is easier than it used to be thanks to advancements in diagnostic tests and medications (like tafamidis, acoramidis and vutrisiran).
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out that there’s something wrong with your heart can cause a whirlwind of emotions. When it’s a rare condition like transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM), you may have a lot of questions. Know that your healthcare provider will be by your side to explain the condition and suggest treatments. Lean on them for support and guidance.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your body’s proteins clump together and affect your organs, Cleveland Clinic is here to help. We diagnose and treat all types of amyloidosis.
Amyloidosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment