Pulmonary (Lung) Nodules: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pulmonary Nodules
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pulmonary Nodules
Pulmonary nodules are areas of abnormal growth on your lungs. They usually don’t cause symptoms. Providers see them on imaging like X-rays or CT scans. Infections, autoimmune diseases and cancer can cause them. They’re usually noncancerous but your provider may have you get a biopsy or follow-up imaging.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lung Nodule Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Infections, autoimmune diseases, scarring and cancer can all cause pulmonary nodules. Most nodules aren’t cancerous.
What is a pulmonary nodule?
A pulmonary nodule is a spot on your
lung
. On
chest X-rays
or a
CT scan
these nodules look different from the surrounding (normal) lung tissue.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It can be worrisome to hear that your imaging shows a nodule. But most lung nodules are benign (not cancerous).
What does ground glass opacity mean in a lung nodule?
You might see providers describe pulmonary nodules by how solid they look on an image. Ground glass opacity means the area is hazy and the provider can still see structures underneath it. Nodules can also be solid (they block the structures underneath them from view) or a mix of both solid and ground-glass opacity.
How common are pulmonary nodules?
Pulmonary nodules are common. Radiologists see pulmonary nodules in
nearly 1 out of every 3 chest CT scans
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of lung nodules?
Small lung nodules rarely cause symptoms. If the growth presses against your airway or is cancerous, you might experience:
Chest pain
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
or
wheezing
Chronic cough
or
coughing up blood
Fatigue
Hoarseness
Loss of appetite and
unexplained weight loss
Recurring respiratory infections like
bronchitis
or
pneumonia
What causes pulmonary nodules?
Infections, inhaled particles, inflammatory conditions, scarring and cancer can all cause pulmonary nodules. Some types of pulmonary nodules and their causes include:
Infectious granulomas
. These clusters of immune cells (
granulomas
) are the most common kind of benign nodules.
Fungal lung infections
or other lung infections like
tuberculosis
can cause them.
Noninfectious granulomas
. Autoimmune diseases like
rheumatoid arthritis
and
sarcoidosis
can cause noninfectious granulomas.
Benign tumors
. These include
hamartomas
,
lipomas
and
adenomas
.
Cancerous tumors
. The most common kinds of cancer that cause pulmonary nodules include non-small cell lung cancer, small cell lung cancer and
carcinoid tumors
.
Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia
. This is a condition that can lead to cancer.
Scarring (fibrosis)
. Smoking, breathing in lung irritants and chemicals, and other causes can lead to lung scarring.
Advertisement
What are the complications of pulmonary nodules?
There’s a small possibility that a pulmonary nodule could be cancerous. Rarely, a noncancerous lung nodule may press against or block an
airway
. You may need surgery to remove the nodule to make breathing easier.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a pulmonary nodule diagnosed?
Most people find out they have a lung nodule after getting a screening test or an imaging test for an unrelated reason. If the nodule is suspicious for cancer or you have certain risk factors, your provider might recommend:
Additional imaging, like a
PET scan
or CT scan
Additional tests, such as
blood tests
or sputum tests, that look for infections or other causes of pulmonary nodules
Getting a tissue sample (
biopsy
)
Removing the entire nodule
Can a CT scan tell if a lung nodule is cancerous?
No, a provider can’t tell by looking at a CT scan whether a lung nodule is cancerous — only a biopsy can diagnose cancer. But certain features help you provider determine whether you need a biopsy, or if a pulmonary nodule looks benign. For instance, small nodules (smaller than 0.6 centimeters) and those with smooth edges are usually less likely to be cancerous.
When do you need a biopsy for a pulmonary nodule?
Your provider is likely to recommend a biopsy if a nodule is larger than 9 millimeters, or you have certain risk factors for lung cancer. Risk factors include:
You smoke or used to
smoke
You’re older than 65
You have a family history or personal history of
cancer
You’ve received
radiation therapy
to your chest
You’ve had exposure to
asbestos
,
radon
or
secondhand smoke
How do providers biopsy a pulmonary nodule?
Procedures your provider might perform to get a biopsy or surgically remove the entire nodule include:
Bronchoscopy
Thoracoscopy
Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS)
Needle biopsy
Management and Treatment
How are pulmonary nodules treated?
Small, noncancerous lung nodules don’t usually require treatment. If you have pulmonary nodules caused by an infection, you might need medications to treat the infection. These could include
antibiotics
or
antifungal medications
.
Depending on your health history and the size of the nodule, your provider may recommend active surveillance. You’ll get additional imaging in six to 12 months. Nodules that stay the same size during a two-year surveillance period aren’t likely to be cancer.
If the nodule grows or causes symptoms, you may need surgery.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lung Nodule Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my provider finds a lung nodule?
If you have a pulmonary nodule, you might need to follow up with your provider for additional tests or surveillance. Benign nodules will usually stay the same size or even go away on their own. They usually don’t cause symptoms.
Can pulmonary nodules turn into lung cancer?
Sometimes, a nodule that looks benign can begin to grow. That’s why your provider might recommend monitoring it for changes.
What is the survival rate for pulmonary nodules?
Since most pulmonary nodules aren’t harmful, they don’t affect your survival. If you have a cancerous nodule, the survival rate depends on many factors, including the type of cancer and the stage.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can pulmonary nodules be prevented?
There isn’t much you can do to prevent benign lung nodules. But if you smoke,
quitting
is the best thing you can do to keep your lungs healthy.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you have questions about a finding on an imaging report, like a pulmonary nodule. You may need follow-up testing. Let your provider know if you start experiencing symptoms of a lung condition, like shortness of breath or a chronic cough.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room or call 911 if you experience:
Chest pain
Difficulty breathing
Coughing up blood
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It might be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:
What might have caused this nodule?
Do I need follow-up testing?
Are there any symptoms I should look out for?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out you have a pulmonary nodule can be an unwelcome surprise — especially if you’re not having any symptoms. It can be difficult not to worry. But small nodules in people who don’t have risk factors for lung cancer are almost always noncancerous. And for nodules that need treatment, it’s best to catch them before they start causing symptoms. Ask your provider if you have any concerns about pulmonary nodules or any other findings on imaging scans.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lung nodules are often benign and can be treated or managed. Cleveland Clinic offers personalized lung nodules diagnosis and treatment.
Lung Nodule Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/13/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment