Bed Rest During Pregnancy: Types, Reasons & Positions
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Pregnancy Bed Rest
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pregnancy Bed Rest
Pregnancy bed rest is limiting physical activity during pregnancy. It’s generally not something pregnancy care providers recommend because there isn’t conclusive evidence that it’s effective in preventing preterm labor or premature birth. A more common term is “activity restriction.”
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
What is bed rest during pregnancy?
Bed rest means limiting your physical activity during
pregnancy
. In the past, pregnancy care providers would recommend bed rest when they were concerned about a health condition that could cause
pregnancy complications
. The thought was that staying in bed and resting would lower your risk of developing
preterm labor
, premature birth or
preeclampsia
. But this hasn’t been proven to help improve pregnancy or birth outcomes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In fact, some
studies
point out that it can have risks like
blood clots
and
loss of muscle
and bone strength. For this reason, most pregnancy care providers don’t recommend bed rest as a routine treatment. Instead, they recommend reducing your usual activities instead of stopping your activities entirely.
There are some circumstances where bed rest is necessary, though. Your provider will let you know if they believe bed rest is appropriate for your situation.
Different types of pregnancy bed rest
While bed rest used to mean staying in bed for several hours a day (only getting up if necessary), the more favorable term now is “activity restriction” or reducing your typical activity level. If your pregnancy care provider recommends activity restriction, it’s OK to ask them to define it so you’re both on the same page.
Some forms of bed rest are:
Strict or complete bed rest.
This is the most extreme form of bed rest and involves staying in bed most of the day (either in the hospital or at home). This type is rare, and many providers believe the risk is greater than the benefit.
Activity restriction.
This means reducing your typical activities and avoiding standing or walking for long periods of time. It may involve restrictions on lifting objects or using stairs. The term is vague and can have many interpretations. Ask your provider what specific things you should avoid doing.
Advertisement
What are reasons for bed rest during pregnancy?
Pregnancy care providers recommend activity restriction (or bed rest) during pregnancy on a case-by-case basis. This means they consider the risks and benefits of their recommendation based on current research. Some reasons your provider may still recommend it are:
Preeclampsia
Premature labor
Incompetent cervix
Problems with the
placenta
Remember, you can ask your healthcare provider for their reasons for prescribing bed rest and ask them to explain their recommendation.
How does bed rest help during pregnancy?
There’s no solid research that shows it helps. Some healthcare providers believe it’s worth trying if it could increase the chances of a successful pregnancy. For providers that support bed rest, they believe it:
Helps decrease
stress
Reduces pressure on your
cervix
Helps reduce
blood pressure
But other providers believe bed rest causes more harm without leading to better pregnancy outcomes.
What are the risks of being on bed rest during pregnancy?
Some studies show bed rest can be unsafe. Some of the negative side effects of bed rest are:
Bone density loss
Blood clots
Muscle atrophy
Depression
and
anxiety
What am I allowed and not allowed to do if I am on bed rest during pregnancy?
Your healthcare provider will give you specific information about your activity level. This will depend on the reasons they recommend resting.
Examples of activities that are usually allowed are:
Walking for up to 30 minutes at a time
Exercising in a way that’s healthy for your condition
Standing for up to 30 minutes at a time
Climbing stairs
Examples of activities that may not be allowed or may need to be modified on a case-by-case basis are:
Activity that lasts more than 30 minutes standing or walking at a time
Lifting anything heavier than 20 pounds
Exercising strenuously
Placing anything in
your vagina
or having sex
Flying in an airplane, especially long distances
Working a job that requires being on your feet for most of the day
Everyone is different. It’s best to talk to your provider about what your specific activity level should be.
What can I do while on bed rest during pregnancy?
Activity restriction can be challenging, so it’s important to establish a new daily routine or find different or exciting things to do. For example, if you usually lift weights, your provider may recommend brisk walking for exercise instead. If you’re on your feet all day, your provider may recommend relaxing in the evening instead of continuing to be on your feet. They may suggest compression stockings or talking to your employer about taking breaks to sit. When it becomes hard to sit still, remind yourself that getting rest and relaxation is good for you.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Being put on activity restriction during pregnancy can make you feel frustrated, bored or maybe even relieved. Check with your healthcare provider about what activities you’re allowed and not allowed to do. They’ll have instructions based on your specific situation. As the medical community isn’t entirely certain that bed rest is effective (some believe it’s harmful), ask your provider why they recommend reducing your activities. It’s important to discuss concerns about your pregnancy with them.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Trying to choose where to give birth? Learn why Cleveland Clinic is the best choice to help you through each step of the labor and delivery process.
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment