Vascular Rings: Symptoms, Types & Repair
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vascular Rings
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vascular Rings
A vascular ring is a congenital condition involving the aorta — the biggest artery in your body. The aorta or an artery that branches from it wraps around your trachea (windpipe), esophagus (food pipe) or both. The condition can cause breathing or eating problems.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular Rings Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Vascular Ring?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Vascular Ring?
A vascular ring happens when blood vessels surround your trachea and esophagus, forming a ring. It can press on your trachea, esophagus or both.
A vascular ring happens when
blood vessels
surround your
trachea
(airway) and
esophagus
(food pipe), forming a ring. The ring can press on your trachea, esophagus or both. This can cause problems with breathing and/or eating.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It’s a rare birth defect (congenital condition) that can occur when the
aorta
(the largest artery) forms differently during
fetal development
. Symptoms of vascular rings may appear during infancy, later in life or not at all. It depends on the underlying cause and severity. The condition can be life-threatening, but surgery is often successful.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of vascular rings
If the vascular ring affects your trachea (airway), symptoms may include:
Cough
Frequent
upper respiratory infections
, which can lead to
pneumonia
Nasal flaring (nostrils widen during breathing)
Noisy breathing (wheezing or
stridor
)
Respiratory cyanosis (bluish skin)
If the vascular ring affects your esophagus (food pipe), symptoms may include:
Acid reflux
Feeling like something is stuck in your throat
Growth faltering
in infants
Trouble eating or frequent choking when eating
Trouble swallowing (dysphagia), especially solid foods
Vomiting
If you have a vascular ring, you may have other
congenital heart diseases
. They could cause symptoms like
heart murmur
and
heart palpitations
.
Vascular ring causes
Vascular rings form due to aortic arch anomalies (differences). These differences come about during fetal development for unknown reasons. Often, parts of the aorta that should disappear during fetal development don’t go away. Healthcare providers call these remnants.
Advertisement
The two most common anomalies that lead to vascular rings are double aortic arch and right aortic arch:
Double aortic arch (DAA)
: Your baby’s aorta starts typically, but then divides into two arches (instead of one). They surround your baby’s trachea and esophagus. The arches come back together as one blood vessel on the other side.
Right aortic arch (RAA)
: Your baby’s aorta starts to the right of their trachea instead of the left. It gives off a blood vessel that arises abnormally and passes behind their esophagus. This branch then gives rise to another artery. A remnant of a blood vessel completes the ring.
Complications of this condition
Some vascular rings exist into adulthood without detection or complications. In other cases, vascular rings may cause problems like:
Repeated laryngeal nerve injury and
vocal cord paralysis
Thoracic duct injury and
chyle leak
Tracheomalacia (collapsed airway)
Vascular complications, like narrowing (stenosis), bleeding and blood clots (thrombosis)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers may detect vascular rings during a
pregnancy ultrasound
or fetal echocardiogram. At any point after birth, your provider may recommend some of the following imaging tests to help diagnose a vascular ring:
Chest X-ray
CT scan
Echocardiogram
The gold standard for looking at vascular rings is a
CT chest angiogram
. It shows how your blood flows through your heart and blood vessels. This allows your provider to see your vascular anatomy in detail.
You may need other tests to further evaluate how the vascular ring is affecting your trachea or esophagus, like:
Barium swallow (esophagogram)
: X-rays show how barium (a liquid) moves through your esophagus. It can identify an indentation caused by a vascular ring.
Bronchoscopy
: A provider places a lighted tube through your mouth or nose and into your lungs so they can see inside your airways.
Upper endoscopy
: A provider places a lighted tube through your mouth and into your throat to see inside your esophagus.
Management and Treatment
How are vascular rings treated?
The only treatment for vascular rings is surgery. Most healthcare providers only recommend surgery if you have symptoms.
The surgery is often an open procedure (
thoracotomy
). This means you’ll need an incision in your chest wall. But in some cases, you may be able to get a less invasive type of surgery. These include endoscopic robotic-assisted surgery and
video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS)
.
The type of surgery depends on the aortic arch anomaly and how much it’s squeezing your trachea and/or esophagus. In general, vascular ring surgery usually involves:
Advertisement
Dividing part of the vascular ring to reduce pressure
Removing a piece of your aorta or another artery
Your healthcare team will go over the procedure in detail. This includes its steps, risks and recovery.
What should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you or your child has a vascular ring, consider asking your provider the following questions:
What type of vascular ring is it?
Is it wrapped around my trachea, esophagus or both?
Do you recommend surgery?
If so, will the surgery be open or minimally invasive?
How long will it take to recover?
Will my symptoms go away after surgery?
Should I see any other specialists?
Do I have any other heart abnormalities?
If so, can they be treated surgically at the same time?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular Rings Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Surgery to correct a vascular ring is safe overall and often successful. You may have symptoms for a few months afterward. But most people are symptom-free within a year of surgery.
After treatment, you may need to follow up with specialists for many years, including a:
Cardiologist (heart specialist)
Gastroenterologist (digestive specialist)
Pulmonologist (respiratory specialist)
What is the life expectancy of someone with a vascular ring?
According to
studies
, most people who get vascular ring surgery have a typical life expectancy. Without treatment, some cases of vascular rings can be fatal. They can damage your trachea, making it very difficult to breathe.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that a ring of blood vessels is squeezing your airway or food pipe can be alarming. It’s even scarier if this happens to your child. But there’s good news. Surgery is very effective at treating vascular rings. And some vascular rings don’t even need treatment because they don’t cause problems.
Talk with your provider or your child’s provider to learn more about the next steps. When possible, seek the advice and care of a congenital heart disease specialist at a high-volume hospital. These providers can manage your individual needs with the most advanced treatment options.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic Children’s providers treat vascular rings in babies and children with compassionate support and excellent results.
Vascular Rings Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment