What Are Over-The-Counter Medicines?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Over-The-Counter Medicine
Advertisement
Advertisement
Over-The-Counter Medicine
Over-the-counter medicines are easily available. You can find them at pharmacies, grocery stores and many other places. But while they’re easy to find, it’s still important to use them cautiously. Make sure you follow the directions on the label and talk to a healthcare provider or pharmacist if you have any questions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What are over-the-counter medicines?
Over-the-counter (OTC) medicines are medicines you can get without a prescription. They’re for conditions you can recognize and manage yourself, or conditions a healthcare provider diagnosed. You can buy them in pharmacies, grocery stores, convenience stores or even online.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
OTC medicines are generally safe if you do two things:
Use them with direction from a healthcare provider
Follow the instructions on their labels
It’s also important to remember that OTC medicines are for minor ailments only, and you shouldn’t take them regularly. If you feel you need to take them regularly, you should see a healthcare provider. A trained, qualified expert can tell you if something more serious is happening.
What do over-the-counter medicines treat?
OTC medicines treat hundreds of issues, if not more. Some examples of what they treat include:
Allergies, including seasonal
environmental allergies
or skin reactions
Eye and ear issues, including dry eyes, eye irritation or ear pain
Feet issues like corns and calluses, or ingrown toenails
Fevers and inflammation
Hygiene needs, including hair, odor and oral health concerns
Skin infections, including bacterial, fungal and parasitic infections, and first aid items to prevent infections in cuts and scrapes
Trouble sleeping
Lower digestive system issues like bloating or farting, constipation or diarrhea
Pain, including headaches, muscle aches, ovulation pain, menstrual cramps and more
Breathing issues, like symptoms from upper respiratory infections
Skin conditions, including acne or warts, or scalp conditions like dandruff or head lice
Smoking and vaping quitting support
Upper digestive system issues like nausea and vomiting
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What are some examples of over-the-counter medicines?
Some examples of OTC medicine types include:
Acid reflux medications
, like antacids, H2 blockers and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
Allergy medications
, ranging from fast-acting drugs to once-a-day oral and
nasal
medications for seasonal allergies
Antiemetic medications
, which usually focus on reducing or stopping nausea
Cough, cold and flu medicines, including cough suppressants,
decongestants
and
expectorants
Eye drops or ear drops for a wide range of issues
Infection treatments, like ointments for bacterial, fungal and parasitic infections
Laxatives and antidiarrhea medications
Nicotine replacement products
Opioid overdose rescue medications
Pain relievers, fever reducers and anti-inflammation medicines, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Sleeping pills and similar products
Common OTC medications
Some examples of specific OTC medicines include:
Acid reflux
or heartburn medications
Cimetidine (Tagamet®)
Esomeprazole (Nexium®)
Famotidine (Pepcid® and higher-dose forms of Zantac®)
Lansoprazole (Prevacid®)
Nizatidine (Axid®)
Omeprazole (Prilosec® and Zegerid®)
Ranitidine (lower-dose forms of Zantac)
Allergy medications
Budesonide (Rhinocort®)
Cetirizine (Zyrtec®)
Desloratadine (Clarinex®)
Diphenhydramine (Benadryl®)
Fexofenadine (Allegra®)
Fluticasone (Flonase®, Flovent®)
Loratadine (Claritin®)
Triamcinolone (Nasacort®)
Antiemetic
(antinausea) medications
Dimenhydrinate (Dramamine®)
Meclizine (Antivert® or Bonine®)
Scopolamine (Transderm Scop®)
Cough, cold and flu medicines
Pseudoephedrine (Sudafed®)
Guaifenesin (Mucinex®)
Dextromethorphan (Delsym®)
Nicotine replacement products
Gum or lozenges (NICOrelief® or Nicorette®)
Patches (Habitrol®, Nicoderm CQ®, Nicotrol®)
Opioid overdose
rescue medications
Naloxone (Narcan®)
Pain relievers
, fever reducers and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Acetaminophen (Tylenol® or Panadol®)*
Aspirin
Ibuprofen (Advil® or Motrin®)
Naproxen (Aleve® or Naprosyn®)
*
Acetaminophen isn’t an NSAID
, but has some similar properties to them
Sleep aids
Diphenhydramine (in the PM versions of Advil, Aleve and Tylenol)
Doxylamine (Unisom®)
What are the top five over-the-counter medications?
The top five types of OTC medicines, ranked by annual dollars spent in 2022, are:
Digestive tract medications
Cough, cold and flu medicines
Pain relievers
Allergy medicines
Topical skin medications
Who decides what medicines are available over-the-counter?
In the U.S., the Food and Drug Administration regulates OTC medicines. They regulate these medicines and require that drugmakers follow rules and meet standards when making them.
Many OTC medications started out as prescription-only. They became available over the counter after experts decided they were safe enough for use without a prescription (when taken as instructed). But many other medications go straight to OTC use.
Advertisement
How do I take over-the-counter medicines safely?
All OTC medicines have an instructions label, and following that label is key to using these medicines safely. Pay close attention to these sections on any OTC medicine label:
Active ingredient(s)
: These are the main ingredients. Knowing them helps you avoid taking the wrong medicine or too much of the same ingredient in multiple products.
Purpose(s)
: This tells you what a medicine does or what drug class it belongs to.
Use(s)
: You should only take a medicine for the reasons listed.
Warning(s)
: Don’t take the medicine if any of the warnings listed here apply to you.
Inactive ingredients
: These are other substances that are included in the medicine. Examples include flavorings or dyes, or what the capsules are made of. Read these closely, too. This is very important if you have any allergies.
Directions
. This tells you the dose and how to take it. Follow these exactly.
You should read the label to find info on how to store OTC medicines properly. And be sure to check the label so you don’t take expired medicines.
If you have any questions about a medicine label or taking an OTC medicine, ask your healthcare provider or pharmacist. They can answer your questions and help you stay safe.
Advertisement
What are some key tips for finding and using over-the-counter medicines safely?
Many OTC products contain acetaminophen. Be careful not to take
too much acetaminophen
if you’re using multiple products. And avoid drinking alcohol when taking acetaminophen.
Many places limit pseudoephedrine access. In the U.S., it’s a “behind-the-counter” product. You can get it without a prescription, so it’s technically an OTC medicine. But you have to go through extra steps, like an ID check. In some countries, it needs a prescription.
Decongestants can be dangerous for some people. Don’t take them if you have high blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, thyroid disease, glaucoma or benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).
Don’t take heartburn/GERD products for more than 14 days without talking to a healthcare provider.
Avoid NSAIDs if you have digestive tract, kidney or cardiovascular conditions. Only take them if your healthcare provider says it’s okay. And don’t take any NSAIDs if you’re 20 weeks pregnant or more.
Phenylephrine is a common ingredient in many decongestants. But it’s under scrutiny because newer research raises questions about whether it’s effective.
Avoid drug interactions. Many OTC medicines can interact with antidepressants (especially
MAOIs
) and cause deadly conditions like
serotonin syndrome
. Talk to a healthcare provider before taking decongestants or dextromethorphan if you already take an antidepressant.
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider or pharmacist can tell you more about interactions or other potential concerns with any prescription or OTC medicines you take.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe you’ve got a headache, a cold or some other minor ailment. You can probably tough it out, but it would be nice if something helped you feel better. That’s where over-the-counter medicines come in. They can help with minor issues that crop up in everyday life.
But it’s important to remember that OTC medicines aren’t automatically 100% safe. You still need to read the label and follow the directions. And when in doubt, talk to a healthcare provider or pharmacist first. They can help you make sure you take these medications the right way. Doing that can help you feel better and get back to life as usual.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider