Cardiophobia: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cardiophobia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cardiophobia
Cardiophobia is a kind of anxiety disorder that manifests as an intense fear of having a heart attack and dying. You may experience symptoms like chest pain that you believe are from a heart-related problem but in reality are the result of your anxiety. The more you worry about your symptoms, the worse they can get, causing a type of fear loop.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is cardiophobia?
Cardiophobia is a specific
phobia
in which you have an intense fear of heart problems, particularly
heart attacks
. You may experience
chest pains
,
heart palpitations
and other physical sensations and misinterpret them as being signs of
heart disease
, when in reality, they’re symptoms of
anxiety
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Fear is a part of life. But a phobia is an intense and often overwhelming fear of a specific object or situation. The level of fear with a phobia doesn’t match the actual danger presented.
If you have cardiophobia, you focus your attention on your
heart
when experiencing
stress
. The focus is so intense that you feel like you’re experiencing a real heart problem despite medical tests that state you aren’t. You may seek continuous reassurance, visit your healthcare provider’s office often and avoid activities that you think will trigger your symptoms.
The effects of cardiophobia can have a significant impact on your quality of life and lead to persistent anxiety about your heart health.
How common is cardiophobia?
Researchers don’t know the exact number of people who have cardiophobia. But one study found that about 30% of people who saw a
cardiologist
for a new visit had symptoms of
noncardiac chest pain
due to anxiety, depression or another psychiatric condition. In the same study, cardiophobia accounted for 2% to 5% of all emergency department visits.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of cardiophobia?
The
DSM-5
, what providers use to diagnose psychiatric illnesses, classifies cardiophobia as a specific phobia. Specific phobias can cause
panic attacks
— sudden episodes of anxiety with intense physical symptoms, and cardiophobia shares the same types of symptoms as someone having a panic attack.
Advertisement
Cardiophobia symptoms may include:
Chest pain or tightness.
Dizziness
.
Excessive sweating
.
Feeling faint/
fainting
.
Heart palpitations.
Numbness
.
Rapid heartbeat (
tachycardia
).
Shaking and trembling.
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
).
How do you know if you’re having a heart attack vs. a panic attack?
The only way to tell if you’re having a
heart attack or a panic attack
is with medical testing. If you think you may be experiencing a heart attack, it’s important to seek medical attention right away. But if you have a history of worrying about your heart, and medical testing has ruled out heart problems, you may want to talk to your healthcare provider about the likelihood that you have cardiophobia.
What causes cardiophobia?
Phobias occur when your
brain
takes fear and anxiety to an extreme level. Often, anxiety can be helpful and even protect you — it tells you that something’s wrong or dangerous. This is your “fight or flight” response. But sometimes, this response occurs when it shouldn’t, or occurs in an unnecessarily intense way, leading to the development of a phobia. Researchers don’t know exactly why this happens in certain people. But several factors may contribute to cardiophobia. These include:
Traumatic experiences:
If you or someone you know has experienced a real heart-related problem like a heart attack, you may be more likely to develop cardiophobia.
Genetics:
Cardiophobia is more likely to happen in people who’ve had a relative with the condition.
Informational transmission:
You can develop cardiophobia because you see or hear about it repeatedly.
Learned fears:
If you learn about cardiophobia from others, you may develop the condition as a result.
What are the complications of cardiophobia?
Cardiophobia can have long-term effects on your physical and mental health, especially when you encounter triggers often. Physical health conditions that frequently occur alongside cardiophobia or may get worse because of your symptoms include:
Balance
problems/dizziness.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
.
Degenerative brain disorders, like
frontotemporal dementia
.
Heart disease.
Parkinson’s disease
.
People with cardiophobia are also at a higher risk of developing certain
mental health conditions
, including:
Bipolar disorder
.
Depressive disorders
.
Other anxiety disorders.
Personality disorders
.
Substance use disorders
(SUD).
Diagnosis and Tests
How do I know if I have cardiophobia?
It can be difficult to diagnose cardiophobia at first because your primary care provider (PCP) may refer you to cardiologist for heart testing. But frequent visits to your provider for heart-related symptoms in the absence of any medical issues may signal that you have a condition like cardiophobia. Your primary care provider may refer you to a mental health provider, like a
psychologist
or
psychiatrist
, for further evaluation.
The psychologist or psychiatrist will ask you about your symptoms. They may have you fill out a questionnaire to better understand what you’re experiencing. The answers to these questions can help them determine if you fit the criteria for a cardiophobia diagnosis. According to the DSM-5, these criteria include:
Advertisement
Strong fear or anxiety that you’re going to have a heart attack.
Avoidance of certain situations or triggers.
Intense fear or anxiety when you don’t avoid situations and triggers.
The fear or anxiety is much more severe than the situation or trigger should cause.
The fear or anxiety due to certain situations or triggers lasts for at least six months.
The fear or anxiety disrupts or impacts other areas of your life, including work or school.
Your symptoms can’t be better explained by another condition (like a real heart condition).
Management and Treatment
How do I get rid of cardiophobia?
Cardiophobia treatment involves the use of the same strategies and techniques as other phobia treatments. Your healthcare provider may recommend
psychotherapy
, medications or a combination of both. Your recommended treatment will depend on how severe your symptoms are, your lifestyle and your preferences.
Psychotherapy
Mental health therapy (psychotherapy) can help you adjust the way you think and the behaviors surrounding your fear.
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
is one of the most common kinds of therapy. With time, CBT (or other types of therapy) can help you cope with your fear and anxiety.
Exposure therapy
There are two main kinds of
exposure therapy
:
Systematic desensitization (graded exposure):
This type of exposure therapy gradually exposes you to parts of triggers over time. Your healthcare provider will help you slowly work through parts of your fears from the least to the most troubling. This also helps adjust your thinking and behaviors.
Flooding:
Flooding is similar, but the technique exposes you to your triggers all at once, not slowly over time. This can help you adjust to your triggers and learn to manage your anxiety.
Advertisement
Medication
Sometimes, medication is the best way to help you manage your phobia symptoms. Your healthcare provider may recommend
antidepressants
or anxiety medications. Many different types of medications can help with phobia symptoms, and your provider can help explain your options to you. They’ll also explain any possible side effects and complications that you may experience
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have cardiophobia?
Cardiophobia can have a major impact on your mental health and well-being. Over time, untreated cardiophobia can cause you to severely limit your life if you’re constantly avoiding your triggers. The condition can also affect many different aspects of your physical health.
Outlook for cardiophobia
The outlook for cardiophobia is best when you receive prompt treatment. Without treatment, your condition could have a large impact on your physical and mental health. Cardiophobia affects the way you live your life. Treatment for your condition can make a big difference.
Prevention
Can cardiophobia be prevented?
There’s no way to prevent cardiophobia from occurring. That’s because fear is something that we all experience differently. What affects one person won’t affect another in the same way. There’s no known way to reduce your risk of developing cardiophobia.
Living With
How do I take care of myself if I have cardiophobia?
If you think you may have cardiophobia, there are ways you can help take care of yourself:
Advertisement
Get help:
As soon as you notice cardiophobia symptoms disrupting your life, reach out to your healthcare provider. The sooner you seek help, the sooner you can be on the road to recovery.
Listen to your healthcare provider:
Follow your provider’s treatment recommendations, whether that be therapy, medication or a combination of the two.
Lifestyle changes:
Many factors affect your mental health. It may help to do some physical activity every day, eat nutritious foods, get enough
sleep
and avoid alcohol and recreational drugs.
When should I go to the ER?
Cardiophobia can increase your risk of mental health conditions like depression. If you’re having any thoughts about harming yourself or suicide, you should seek immediate help. In the United States, you can
call or text 988 to reach the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
. This service provides confidential, 24-hour support to anyone experiencing a suicidal crisis.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
While it’s typical to have fears and anxiety, phobias like cardiophobia take those fears to the extreme. Cardiophobia can make your day-to-day living challenging because you’re constantly worried about your fear. It can have an immense impact on your health and well-being. If you think you may be experiencing the symptoms of a heart attack, it’s important to get medical help right away. But if you’ve been told you don’t have a heart problem and you have a persistent fear that you do, you may want to speak to your healthcare provider about cardiophobia.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/15/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment