Angelman Syndrome: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Angelman Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Angelman Syndrome
Angelman syndrome is a rare condition that affects your child’s speech, development and movement. Seizures are common. Children are usually very expressive — they may smile and laugh often or get excited easily. While this condition doesn’t have a cure, treatment options can help your child manage symptoms throughout their life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is Angelman syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What is Angelman syndrome?
Angelman syndrome causes distinct facial characteristics in addition to other symptoms.
Angelman syndrome is a rare
genetic condition
that affects your child’s development, speech, balance and movement. In some cases, it may cause seizures.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If your child has this condition, you’ll notice that they’re typically in a good mood more often than usual. They might smile frequently and laugh a lot. When they’re excited, they may make hand-flapping motions. Seeing your child happy and laughing might make you happy, too. It could feel strange to think that your child’s good mood could be a sign of a health condition.
Other signs and symptoms may appear as your child gets older. You may pick up on developmental delays, like not saying their first word before their first year. Also, seizures could start between their second and third birthdays.
This condition isn’t life-threatening and shouldn’t affect your child’s life expectancy, but it can be alarming for new parents. Your child will have some challenges with movement, speech and their development as they get older. But treatment options are available to help them manage these symptoms throughout their life.
How common is Angelman syndrome?
Angelman syndrome is rare. It affects
approximately
1 in 12,000 to 20,000 people.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Angelman syndrome
Common symptoms of Angelman syndrome may include:
Developmental delay
Intellectual disability
Speech challenges, ranging from not speaking at all (nonverbal) to only using a few words
Walking difficulties, such as clumsiness and a wide-based walk (
gait
)
Ataxia
(
difficulty with balance
or coordination)
Increased muscle tone
(arms and legs) or
decreased muscle tone
(trunk)
Seizures
Advertisement
Other symptoms may include:
Difficulty feeding or sucking (infants)
Sleep disturbances
Spine curvature (
scoliosis
)
Gastrointestinal issues like
constipation
or
gastroesophageal reflux disorder
(GERD)
Eye
issues, like involuntary eye movements (
nystagmus
), crossed eyes (
strabismus
) or sensitivity to light (
photophobia
)
Skin discoloration (
hypopigmentation
)
These symptoms, or characteristics, vary from person to person and with age.
Facial features of Angelman syndrome
Common facial features of Angelman syndrome may include:
A short and broad skull (brachycephaly)
A large tongue (
macroglossia
)
A small head (
microcephaly
)
A big lower jaw (mandibular prognathia)
Wide mouth
Widely spaced teeth
These features may be more pronounced in adults with Angelman syndrome.
Angelman syndrome causes
A
genetic variant
of the
UBE3A
gene causes Angelman syndrome. This
gene
provides instructions to make an enzyme called ubiquitin protein ligase E3A, which regulates how your
nervous system
works. Any loss or damage to this gene causes symptoms of Angelman syndrome.
You inherit one copy of the
UBE3A
gene from each biological parent. Both copies of this gene are “turned on” (active) in many of your body’s tissues. But in certain areas of your
brain
, only the copy inherited from your birthing parent (maternal copy) is active. If the maternal copy of the
UBE3A
gene is lost or damaged for any reason, you’ll have no active copies of the gene in some parts of your brain. This can affect how your nervous system functions.
Some cases of Angelman syndrome are the result of a yet-to-be-identified genetic variant that isn’t the
UBE3A
gene.
Most cases aren’t inherited and happen randomly, without any history of the condition in your biological family.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Angelman syndrome
The characteristic symptoms of Angelman syndrome aren't usually apparent at birth. Healthcare providers typically diagnose it in children between one and four years of age. But providers can sometimes identify the condition during pregnancy.
Noninvasive prenatal screening
(NIPS) may diagnose Angelman syndrome before birth. NIPS is a method of determining the risk that your baby will be born with certain genetic conditions. This testing analyzes small fragments of DNA that are circulating in a pregnant person’s
blood
.
Your provider will usually diagnose Angelman syndrome if your child misses developmental milestones for their age. Examples of missed developmental milestones include not saying their first words or not taking their first steps as expected. Your child’s provider will also look for common symptoms or characteristics of the condition.
Testing confirms a diagnosis. Your child’s provider may offer
genetic testing
that identifies changes to the
UBE3A
gene. Other types of tests may be necessary to rule out conditions with similar symptoms.
Advertisement
Can Angelman syndrome be misdiagnosed?
In some cases, a misdiagnosis is possible because Angelman syndrome symptoms closely resemble those of other conditions like:
Autism spectrum disorder
Cerebral palsy
Christianson syndrome
Mowat-Wilson syndrome
Phelan-McDermid syndrome
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome
Prader-Willi syndrome
Genetic testing and other types of testing are very important to make an accurate diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
How is Angelman syndrome treated?
There’s currently no cure for Angelman syndrome. But treatment is available to help your child manage symptoms. This may include:
Antiseizure medications
Communication aids and
speech therapy
, such as learning sign language, gesturing and using special communication devices
Early intervention and educational resources to help your child meet developmental milestones and reach academic goals
Physical therapy
to help with balance, coordination and walking difficulties
Occupational therapy
to help your child gain independence and perform everyday tasks
Using back, ankle or foot braces for support
Modified feeding methods for infants, like using special nipples
Following good
sleep
hygiene and setting a regular bedtime routine
Taking medications to help food move through your child’s
gastrointestinal tract
Your child’s provider will recommend treatment options specific to your child’s symptoms and needs. Treatment is individualized for each person.
Advertisement
How can I take care of my child with Angelman syndrome?
To help take care of your child with Angelman syndrome, follow their healthcare provider’s instructions. This should include:
Giving any medications as prescribed
Getting developmental assessments as recommended
Participating in physical, occupational and speech therapies
Going to all follow-up medical visits
Children with Angelman syndrome will likely need help with daily tasks throughout their lives. Your child’s care team can answer questions and offer support. They also might be able to recommend a local or online support group.
When should I take my child to see a healthcare provider?
If your child has Angelman syndrome, they’ll need to see their healthcare team regularly. This is to make sure their treatment and therapies are working. Let their provider know if you notice new or worsening symptoms. Visit the emergency room if your child has a seizure for the first time.
What questions should I ask my child’s healthcare provider?
If your child has Angelman syndrome, it may be helpful to ask their healthcare provider the following questions:
Which treatments will be best for managing my child’s symptoms?
How can I help my child communicate better?
Should I have genetic testing or genetic counseling if I plan on having more biological children?
How can I best plan for the support my child will need in the future?
Can you recommend a support group?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy of someone with Angelman syndrome?
Many people diagnosed with Angelman syndrome have a typical life expectancy. This means that having Angelman syndrome doesn’t mean someone will die sooner than someone without it. The severity of symptoms varies for each person. Complications from severe seizures and injuries after falls may be life-threatening. Your child’s care team will offer treatments to keep your child safe to prevent these outcomes.
What’s the outlook for Angelman syndrome?
There are many factors that your child’s healthcare provider will consider when evaluating your child’s outlook. You can expect that your child will have some mobility, speech and developmental delays as they grow. But your child will still be able to participate in activities, play and learn with other kids their age.
Some adults can live partly on their own, with helpers coming to their home when needed. Others may need more support in assisted living or full-time care facilities.
Prevention
Can Angelman syndrome be prevented?
Angelman syndrome can’t be prevented because it happens due to random genetic changes during fetal development. In most cases, this happens without a known cause.
It’s rare, but some people inherit this condition. If you plan on having a biological child, talk with your healthcare provider about
genetic counseling
to understand your risk of having a child with a genetic condition or a condition that can be caused by an inherited genetic variant.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might feel stressed or overwhelmed to learn that your child’s frequent smile and laughter are actually characteristics of an underlying genetic condition. But your little bundle of joy will still be smiling and giggling after an Angelman syndrome diagnosis. It’s important to follow up with their providers regularly to make sure your child is on track to meet developmental milestones for their age at a pace that’s right for their needs. Your child’s care team will be with you every step of the way. Don’t hesitate to ask questions to learn more about the condition and what you can expect for their future.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your child has a neurological condition, you want them to have the best care. At Cleveland Clinic Children’s, we offer compassionate, personalized treatment.
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment