Thumb (Basal Joint) Arthritis: Pain, Tests & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Thumb Arthritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Thumb Arthritis
Thumb arthritis is osteoarthritis in the basal joint at the base of your thumb. Healthcare providers may call this your thumb carpometacarpal (CMC) joint. Thumb arthritis symptoms include pain, swelling and loss of strength and motion in your thumb. Treatments include placing ice or heating pads on your thumb, medication, splints and surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Osteoarthritis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Thumb Arthritis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Thumb Arthritis?
Arthritis in your thumb occurs when the protective cartilage cushioning your thumb joints starts to wear out and deteriorate.
Arthritis in your thumb happens when the protective cartilage that cushions your thumb joints starts to wear out and deteriorate
(osteoarthritis
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Osteoarthritis in your thumb usually develops in the carpometacarpal (CMC or basal) joint. This is the joint near your wrist at the fleshy part of your thumb. It helps your thumb move around in different directions so you can grip things in your hand. Healthcare providers may use the term CMC arthritis for arthritis in your thumb.
Thumb arthritis is the second-most common kind of
arthritis that affects your hand
, after arthritis in the last joint in your fingers.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of thumb arthritis
CMC arthritis symptoms may include:
Aching or discomfort after using your hand for a long time
Bone spur
at the base of your thumb
Enlarged thumb joint
Loss of strength and motion in your thumb
Pain in your thumb when grasping, gripping or pinching
Swelling
, stiffness or tenderness at the base of your thumb
Thumb arthritis causes
Arthritis in your thumb happens when the
cartilage
that cushions your thumb joints breaks down (degenerate). Cartilage helps your bones to glide easily in your joints. Age and use can make cartilage break down. That can cause your bones to rub against each other, which causes friction and damage.
Arthritis in thumb risk factors
Thumb arthritis risk factors include:
Being
female
Being age 40 and older
Having a genetic predisposition for osteoarthritis
Injuring or
breaking your thumb
Having health conditions like
lupus
and
rheumatoid arthritis
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose thumb arthritis
A healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms. They may ask if your thumb hurts all the time or if certain activities cause pain. They’ll ask if you’ve ever injured your thumb.
They’ll examine your hand and thumb. They may see what happens when you move your thumb. They do that by holding your thumb joint while moving your thumb. They may suspect thumb arthritis if:
It hurts when they move your thumb
You experience a “gritty” feeling
They hear a grinding noise (crepitus)
Your provider may also request an
X-ray
to confirm the diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
Thumb arthritis treatment
Thumb arthritis treatment varies based on the severity of your symptoms. If you have mild symptoms, a healthcare provider may recommend at-home treatments like:
Applying
ice
and/or placing a heating pad on your thumb joint for five to 15 minutes a few times a day (try both options to see what works best for you)
Taking pain medication
like nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (
NSAIDs
) like ibuprofen (Advil®) or aspirin or acetaminophen (Tylenol®) — you might alternate between the two different pain medications
Wearing a splint
to protect your thumb joint and let it rest (you can wear a splint from time to time during the day or overnight)
Your provider may recommend
steroid
injections if your symptoms are severe or get worse. They’ll inject a steroid solution into your thumb joint. This typically provides pain relief for several months. But injections become less effective over time. At that point, your provider may recommend surgery.
Thumb arthritis surgery
Options for surgery include:
Arthroplasty (joint replacement)
. Arthroplasty involves removing all or part of your thumb joint and replacing it with an artificial implant.
Denervation
. This procedure doesn’t directly change the joint. It removes pain signals coming from the nerve ending, which relays back to your brain.
Fusion (arthrodesis)
. Arthrodesis fuses the bones of your thumb joint together. This procedure could reduce pain and increase strength, but it may limit movement.
Ligament reconstruction and tendon interposition (LRTI)
. LRTI involves removing all or part of your thumb joint and suspending the rest of your thumb using a tendon from your wrist. This procedure may reduce pain while allowing continued movement.
Trapeziectomy with suspensionplasty
. This procedure removes part of your thumb joint and suspends your thumb using nearby tendons or sutures. It may reduce pain while allowing motion.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Osteoarthritis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have arthritis in my thumb?
Thumb arthritis is a very treatable condition. Nonsurgical treatments often ease symptoms. But surgery is an option when other treatments don’t relieve symptoms. Your healthcare provider may recommend
physical therapy
or
occupational therapy
. For example, a certified hand therapist can help you regain strength and movement in your hand and thumb.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
We rely on our thumbs for everyday tasks — turning keys, holding books, swiping on a tablet and more. But when thumb arthritis sets in, even the simplest motions can become painful. It's more common than you think, and it can seriously affect your daily life. If you notice pain, swelling or stiffness in your thumb joint, talk to a healthcare provider. They can help you find relief and learn how to make everyday tasks easier.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stiff, painful joints can make daily life challenging. Cleveland Clinic orthopaedic specialists can help you find relief from osteoarthritis and get you moving again.
Osteoarthritis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/12/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment