Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is a rare condition that causes tumors called gastrinomas to grow in your pancreas or intestine. Gastrinomas release the hormone gastrin, which triggers your stomach to produce gastric acid. Too much stomach acid leads to ulcers and other complications. Some gastrinomas are also cancerous.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stomach Ulcer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is Zollinger-Ellison syndrome?
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES) causes severe
peptic ulcer disease
and
chronic diarrhea
. It affects people who have gastrinomas. These are a type of
neuroendocrine tumors
in your
pancreas
and
duodenum
(the top part of your small intestine).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Gastrinoma tumors affect the cells that release
gastrin
. This hormone makes your stomach release gastric acid. Too much gastric acid in your stomach causes ulcers, acid reflux and other issues. About 60% of gastrinomas are cancerous. Your healthcare provider may call ZES pancreatic ulcerogenic tumor syndrome.
Treatment can ease Zollinger-Ellison symptoms. Surgery to remove gastrinoma tumors can cure it. But the tumors that cause it can come back.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome?
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome may not cause symptoms. When it does, symptoms may include:
Blood in your vomit
or poop from gastrointestinal bleeding
Burning or gnawing
stomach pain
from acid reflux
Fatigue
and weakness from anemia that gastrointestinal bleeding may cause
Greasy,
fatty poops
Heartburn
Indigestion
, especially after you eat fatty foods
Loss of appetite
Nausea
and
vomiting
Unexplained weight loss
Your symptoms depend on the tumor size and how many tumors you have. Large gastrinoma tumors release more gastrin, so your stomach produces more gastric acid. Large amounts of gastric acid in your stomach can lead to more severe peptic ulcer disease symptoms.
Tumors that spread (
metastasize
) to your liver may cause
liver cancer
. Liver cancer symptoms include itchy skin (
pruritus
) and yellowish skin from
jaundice
. Jaundice can also make the whites of your eyes (sclera) and mucous membranes turn yellow.
Advertisement
What causes Zollinger-Ellison syndrome?
Most cases of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome happen sporadically (for no known reason). About 25% of people with this condition have MEN Type 1. MEN stands for
multiple endocrine neoplasia
. MEN is a rare inherited disorder that affects glands in your
endocrine system
.
What are the complications of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome?
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome can be life-threatening. For example, a gastrinoma tumor that blocks your duodenum can make it
rupture
. The tumor can spread to your liver. Large amounts of gastric acid may lead to severe
gastrointestinal bleeding
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose Zollinger-Ellison syndrome?
A healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
. They’ll ask about your symptoms and your health history. They may order the following tests:
Blood tests
. A blood test may detect high gastrin levels in your blood (
hypergastrinemia)
.
Imaging tests
. A provider may order
CT scans
or
MRI scans
to look for gastrinoma tumors in your pancreas or duodenum.
Stomach acid test
. In this test, a provider inserts a tube through your nose or throat into your stomach to get gastric acid samples.
If preliminary tests detect tumors, your provider may order more tests, including:
Endoscopy
. They may order an
upper endoscopy
to examine your upper GI tract, pancreas and duodenum.
Endoscopic ultrasound
. This test combines ultrasound and endoscopy to provide more detailed images.
ERCP
. Providers use this imaging test to look inside your
bile ducts
and pancreatic ducts.
Fine-needle aspiration
. They may do this to get a sample of tumor tissue for a medical
pathologist
to examine.
Management and Treatment
What are the treatment options for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome?
Your treatment will depend on your symptoms and whether the gastrinomas are cancerous or noncancerous. Treatment options include medication, surgery and cancer therapy.
Medication
Proton pump inhibitors (
PPIs
) are the most common medication for Zoller-Ellison syndrome. Proton pump inhibitors reduce the amount of gastric acid your stomach produces.
Surgery
Your provider may recommend surgery to remove the tumor. Surgeries to remove gastrinoma tumors include:
Duodenectomy
. Your surgeon makes a small incision in your duodenum to remove the tumor.
Gastrectomy
. This surgery removes all or part of your stomach.
Liver surgery
. Your surgeon removes tumors in your liver.
Pancreatectomy
. This surgery removes all or part of your pancreas.
Tumor enucleation
. You may have this surgery if there are tumors in the head of your pancreas.
Cancer therapy
Your provider may recommend
chemotherapy
. This treatment may ease symptoms and slow down how quickly the gastrinomas spread.
Can treatment cure Zoller-Ellison syndrome?
Surgery to remove cancerous gastrinomas may
cure
the condition. But a cure depends on removing all cancerous cells in your body. If surgery is successful, you’ll need to take medication to manage gastric acid for the rest of your life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stomach Ulcer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Zollinger-Ellison syndrome?
Your
prognosis
, or what you can expect after treatment, depends on the tumor type. Noncancerous gastrinoma tumors aren’t life-threatening. You may need ongoing treatment to manage stomach acid levels.
Advertisement
The situation changes if you have cancerous tumors. In that case, you may need surgery and follow-up cancer treatment.
What are survival rates for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome?
Zollinger-Ellison survival rates vary.
Experts estimate
more than 90% of people will live between five and 10 years after surgery removes all gastrinoma tumors. The five-year survival rate estimate drops to 43% in cases where surgery doesn’t remove all tumors. It’s important to remember that
cancer survival rates
are estimates. If you have ZES, ask your healthcare provider what you can expect.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
That depends on your situation. Most people will always need medication to reduce gastric acid. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome happens because you have gastrinoma tumors. Most of these tumors are cancerous. If you have cancerous tumors, you’ll need follow-up care to confirm the tumors haven’t come back.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should contact your provider if Zollinger-Ellison symptoms get worse after treatment or come back.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may be surprised and worried if tests show you have Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. This rare disease may not cause symptoms, but it can cause serious complications. You’ll probably have a lot of questions about what a ZES diagnosis means for you. Those answers may vary widely depending on your situation.
Advertisement
You may need surgery to remove noncancerous tumors. You may also need medication to manage symptoms. Or you may learn you need surgery to remove cancerous tumors and cancer therapy. That’s a lot of information to digest. Take some time to learn how ZES may affect you. Your healthcare team will understand. They’ll be glad to explain test results and answer questions about treatment plans.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have a stomach ulcer, it can feel like your body is attacking itself. Cleveland Clinic’s digestive experts can help with a custom treatment plan.
Stomach Ulcer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us