What Is an Internist (Doctor of Internal Medicine)?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Internist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Internist
An internist, or a doctor of internal medicine, is a physician who specializes in the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of health conditions in adults of all ages. Internists are specially trained on all the internal organs and body systems. They can provide basic preventive care, but they also treat complex medical conditions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is An Internist?
Additional Common Questions
What Is An Internist?
An internist is a medical doctor who focuses on the
primary care
of adults (age 18 and over). Internists diagnose and treat injuries and diseases that affect your internal organs. They also focus on disease prevention and health promotion.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Internists manage long-term (chronic) illnesses and medical conditions. They commonly see people with:
Arthritis
Heart disease
High blood pressure
COPD
Diabetes
Kidney disease
Obesity
Internists are frequently called “the doctor’s doctor.” That’s because other doctors ask for their help when trying to solve complicated medical problems. They’re good at:
Connecting the dots
Uncovering the cause of puzzling medical conditions
Finding the solution
Other names for internists include:
Internal medicine physicians
General internists
Doctors of internal medicine
Internists aren’t the same thing as interns. Interns are doctors in their first year of residency.
What does an internist do?
Internists have a wide range of duties. As your doctor, they may:
Perform routine checkups
Order tests
Prescribe medications
Their tasks may vary, but most internists:
Diagnose and treat health conditions
Manage long-term diseases
Provide preventive care
Refer you to specialists
Maintain patient records
Work with other providers
Additional Common Questions
Where do internists work?
You may see doctors of internal medicine working in a variety of settings. This includes outpatient offices and clinics, hospitals and private practices.
Outpatient offices and clinics
Many internists provide care in outpatient offices and clinics that are connected to a hospital system. You’ll go to them in their office for routine and complex care. They may also provide care for you in the hospital if you need hospitalization.
Advertisement
Hospitals
Internists who work in hospitals are called hospitalists. They work with other healthcare providers to provide the best possible medical care, like other doctors, nurses and physician assistants.
Private practices
Internists who work in private practices have their own patient base. They manage their own schedule and provide routine primary care. They can also help you manage complex health conditions.
How do you become an internist?
To become an internist, you need to get a bachelor’s degree. Then, you go on to a four-year medical school. After medical school, you need to complete a residency in internal medicine. This is also called categorical training. This residency usually takes three years.
After residency, you may choose to become board-certified in internal medicine. Or you may go on to practice general internal medicine. About 50% of internal medicine residents choose this path. They serve as primary care doctors or hospitalists.
Other residents pursue extra training in a special area that interests them. This extra training is called a fellowship. A fellowship usually takes two to three years. Specialties that you may choose include areas that are exclusively certified by the American Board of Internal Medicine. These include:
Cardiology
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology
Hematology
Infectious diseases
Nephrology
Oncology
Pulmonary
Rheumatology
After you complete this training, you may choose to get board-certified in another area. The following are specialties that are certified by the American Board of Internal Medicine, along with another specialty board:
Adolescent medicine
Allergy and immunology
Critical care medicine
Geriatric medicine
Hospice
and
palliative medicine
Neurocritical care
Sleep medicine
Sports medicine
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’re looking for a primary care provider, an internist may be a good option. An internist, or a doctor of internal medicine, is a healthcare provider who can help you prevent and manage a wide range of health issues.
An internist can screen you for common diseases and prescribe medication. They can refer you to specialists when needed. They can also guide you if you’re trying to lead a healthier lifestyle. It’s important to have a good relationship with your internist. So, make sure you find one who fits your needs.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider