Nail-Patella Syndrome: Symptoms & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nail-Patella Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nail-Patella Syndrome
Nail-patella syndrome affects how your child’s nails and bones form. It typically affects the size and shape of their fingernails, kneecaps and/or elbows. Some people with this syndrome develop glaucoma or kidney disease. Providers can treat symptoms to help your child move around more comfortably and lower their risk of complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is nail-patella syndrome?
Nail-patella syndrome is a
genetic condition
that affects your child’s nails,
bones
,
eyes
and
kidneys
. It changes how these parts look and/or function. Children with this condition commonly have underdeveloped fingernails and kneecaps (“patella” is the medical name for kneecap). These are the most obvious signs you can notice. But nail-patella syndrome can also cause changes that aren’t so easy to notice — like
raised pressure
in your child’s eyes or problems with kidney function.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Learning your child has a genetic condition may make you scared or anxious. This is normal, and it’s OK to express your concerns to your child’s healthcare providers. But take some comfort in knowing that providers can do a lot to treat symptoms and lower your child’s risk of complications. And most kids (and adults) with this syndrome have a normal
lifespan
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs and symptoms of nail-patella syndrome?
Nail-patella syndrome can cause certain parts of your child’s body to look and/or function differently than expected. Here’s a breakdown of the most common signs and symptoms in different areas:
Nails
. Your child’s nails may be small or missing. They may have
ridges
, pits or discoloration. Fingernails are affected more often than toenails. Thumbs and index fingers usually have the most severe changes.
Kneecap (patella)
. Your child’s kneecaps may be small, differently shaped or missing. They may be located higher up and farther to the side than usual. Your child’s knees might
hurt
, feel unstable or have a limited range of motion (how far they can move them).
Patella dislocations
are common.
Elbow
. Bones in your child’s arms may not develop as fully as expected. Your child may also have extra skin, called webbing, that extends across their elbow area. These changes might limit how well they can twist and extend their arms or flex their elbows.
Pelvis
. Your child may have tiny bony structures that extend from their pelvic bone. Providers call these iliac horns. There’s typically one on each side of your child’s pelvis. You may be able to feel them through your child’s skin, but they usually don’t cause issues.
Eyes
. Your child may develop increased pressure in their eyes (ocular hypertension), which can progress to
glaucoma
. There often aren’t any symptoms, but your child may notice mild headaches, “
halos
” around lights or
blurry vision
.
Kidneys
. About 4 in 10 people with nail-patella syndrome develop
kidney disease
either as a child or adult. It can range from mild to life-threatening. Mild kidney disease may gradually or suddenly become more severe.
Advertisement
Some people with nail-patella syndrome have other signs and symptoms, like:
A tight
Achilles tendon
that leads to
toe-walking
Decreased
muscle
mass in their arms and legs
Constipation
and/or
irritable bowel syndrome
Decreased bone mineral density
Tingling, burning or numbness
in their hands and feet that occurs randomly
Weak or crumbling teeth or
thin enamel
Abnormal curvature of their spine (
scoliosis
)
Researchers are working to better understand how common these issues are among people with nail-patella syndrome.
What causes nail-patella syndrome?
Changes to your child’s genes (
gene variants
) cause nail-patella syndrome. Most people with this syndrome have changes to their
LMX1B
gene. This
gene
tells your child’s body how to make a specific protein (LMX1B protein). This protein helps your child’s arms, legs, eyes and kidneys take shape during fetal development.
Gene variants cause the LMX1B protein to work differently than expected. As a result, various parts of your child’s body don’t form in typical ways, leading to the features of nail-patella syndrome.
Some people have the signs and symptoms of nail-patella syndrome without changes to their
LMX1B
gene. But this is rare. Researchers believe other genes might play a role, and they continue to look for more clues.
How is nail-patella syndrome inherited?
Nail-patella syndrome passes from one generation to the next in an
autosomal dominant
pattern. This means it takes just one copy of a gene variant — passed down from either biological parent — to cause the syndrome in a child.
If you have nail-patella syndrome, there’s a 50% chance that your biological children will be born with the condition. This risk stays the same for each pregnancy. It’s also the same no matter your
sex
.
About 9 in 10 people with nail-patella syndrome have a biological parent with the condition. But about 1 in 10 people appear to have no family history of it. This means some children are the first in their family to have this syndrome.
What are the possible complications?
Nail-patella syndrome may lead to:
Osteoarthritis
in your child’s kneecaps and/or elbows at an earlier age than expected
Vision loss
(if glaucoma isn’t treated)
Kidney failure
Some people with nail-patella syndrome develop kidney failure that needs
dialysis
or
transplantation
.
Having nail-patella syndrome raises your risk of developing
preeclampsia
while pregnant. Providers monitor and adjust medications during
pregnancy
to help lower this risk.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is nail-patella syndrome diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose this condition by doing some or all of the following:
Advertisement
A
physical exam
to look for features like nail changes and bone changes
Imaging tests, like
X-rays
,
CT scans
and
MRIs
, to examine bones more closely
Blood
and/or pee (
urine
) tests to check kidney function
A
kidney biopsy
to look for tissue changes typical of nail-patella syndrome
Genetic testing
to look for gene variants
Providers will talk to you to learn more about your child’s biological family history. For example, they’ll want to know if anyone has nail-patella syndrome or another genetic disorder. This information can help them reach a diagnosis. They may recommend genetic testing for you or other family members.
The features of nail-patella syndrome often appear early in life. But some people go years without a diagnosis due to mild symptoms or subtle signs. Providers diagnose this condition in children and adults of all ages.
Which providers will diagnose and treat my child?
Your child may need a team of several providers who are specialists in the areas of the body that nail-patella syndrome affects. For example:
An
orthopaedist
will help with bone issues.
A kidney doctor (
nephrologist
) will monitor your child’s kidney function.
An
eye care specialist
will take care of your child’s eyes.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for nail-patella syndrome?
Nail-patella syndrome is something a person has for life. There’s no cure. But treatments can help manage symptoms and lower the risk of complications.
Advertisement
There are a wide range of options, and your child may need more than one treatment based on how the syndrome affects them. Your child’s providers will tailor treatments to their needs. What they might need can change over time, too. Possible treatments include:
Physical therapy
to help with movement
Medications to manage
musculoskeletal pain
,
blood pressure
or pressure in their eyes
Surgery to manage bone abnormalities, glaucoma or severe kidney disease (including
kidney transplantation
)
Your child’s providers will explain the benefits and risks of each treatment. Managing a complex genetic syndrome in your child might feel overwhelming. Don’t hesitate to ask questions or share concerns so you can feel confident in your child’s treatment plan.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Does nail-patella syndrome affect life expectancy?
Nail-patella syndrome usually doesn’t affect a person’s life expectancy. The exception is if severe kidney disease develops. This complication can affect prognosis and how long a person lives. Some people need kidney transplantation.
Genetic disorders like nail-patella syndrome affect each child a little differently. And it’s hard to say exactly which features of this condition your child will have or how severe they’ll be. Your child’s healthcare providers can tell you more about what to expect.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can nail-patella syndrome be prevented?
There’s no known way to prevent this genetic disorder. If you or your partner have nail-patella syndrome and are thinking about having a baby, you may wish to speak with a
genetic counselor
. They can help you understand the chances of your baby inheriting this syndrome.
Living With
When should my child see a healthcare provider?
Your child will likely need routine follow-ups with several different healthcare providers. Your child’s care team will tell you exactly which appointments are necessary and how often.
In general, your child may need routine:
Blood pressure checks
Pee (urine) tests, including those that measure
albumin-creatinine levels
Glaucoma screenings
Bone density tests
Providers can help you explain the importance of these tests to your child.
It’s also important to pay attention to your child’s mental health — and to yours. Your child might feel self-conscious about their appearance or need help building up their confidence. You might wonder how best to be there for your child.
Talk to your child’s providers about connecting with support groups, therapists and
social workers
. Having a team of experienced parents and healthcare professionals supporting your family can make a huge difference from day to day.
Additional Common Questions
How rare is nail-patella syndrome?
Researchers estimate that nail-patella syndrome affects 1 in every 50,000 people. But it might be more common because people with mild features go undiagnosed.
What is Fong’s disease?
Fong’s disease is another name for nail-patella syndrome. Providers mostly used it in the past. Today, most people use the term nail-patella syndrome.
Another name for this same condition is hereditary onycho-osteodysplasia. Here’s what each part of this name means:
Hereditary means it can run in families.
Onycho refers to nails.
Osteo refers to bones.
Dysplasia means a body part has abnormal growth or development.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When your child has a lifelong genetic disorder like nail-patella syndrome, things can get pretty stressful. You might worry about their well-being or their future. You might wonder what your child needs from you to grow, thrive and enjoy life. This is a lot to carry, but you don’t have to carry it alone. Talk to your child’s care team about ways to support your child’s needs — and your own.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider