Renovascular Hypertension: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Renovascular Hypertension
Advertisement
Advertisement
Renovascular Hypertension
Renovascular hypertension is a type of high blood pressure. It occurs when your kidneys aren’t receiving enough blood, and they react by making hormones that raise your blood pressure. Medications are often enough to treat this condition. In some cases, you may need a procedure to improve blood flow to your kidneys.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Renovascular Hypertension?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Renovascular Hypertension?
Renovascular hypertension (also called renal hypertension) is
high blood pressure
that’s related to problems in your
kidneys
. It occurs when the arteries that carry blood to your kidneys become narrow.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
As your renal arteries narrow, less
blood
can flow through. This means your kidneys receive less blood than they should. In response, they activate a system of hormones and other substances called the
RAAS
. The RAAS raises blood pressure throughout your body.
Renovascular hypertension is a common form of
secondary hypertension
. It’s also a frequent cause of
resistant hypertension
. Knowing your high blood pressure is related to your kidneys can help your provider treat it more effectively.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of renovascular hypertension
Renal hypertension usually won’t cause you symptoms. Instead, healthcare providers look for details in your medical record that suggest you might have this condition.
Here are some possible signs of renal hypertension:
High blood pressure that starts before age 30 or after age 50
Blood pressure that was well managed for a while but suddenly goes up
Blood pressure that’s not going down even though you’re taking multiple medicines for it
Several episodes of a
hypertensive crisis
Episodes of “flash” (sudden)
pulmonary edema
A history of plaque buildup in other arteries, like those in your
heart
,
neck
or
legs
Chest pain
without any significant plaque buildup in your coronary arteries
Kidney failure
for no known reason
A whooshing sound (bruit) that your provider hears when
listening to blood flow
in your belly
Advertisement
Renovascular hypertension causes
Renal artery stenosis
is the main cause of renovascular hypertension. This is a narrowing of the arteries that carry blood to your kidneys. It can happen due to plaque (
atherosclerosis
) or abnormal cell growth in the artery walls (
fibromuscular dysplasia
).
Less common causes of renovascular hypertension include:
Vasculitis
Renal artery aneurysm
A
tumor
pressing on your kidney or renal artery
Scarring (fibrosis) from
radiation therapy
Complications of renovascular hypertension
Any form of hypertension — including renovascular — can lead to
hypertensive heart disease
. This is when high blood pressure that lasts a long time damages your heart. Untreated high blood pressure can also lead to other complications, like
kidney disease
or
retinal disease
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers diagnose renovascular hypertension by putting together lots of clues. They get these clues from:
Doing a
physical exam
Reviewing your medical history
Running tests
Tests you may need include:
Blood tests
Urine tests
Kidney ultrasound
and possibly other imaging tests that show blood flow in your renal arteries
Imaging tests that show blood flow in other parts of your body, like
your carotid arteries
Management and Treatment
How is renovascular hypertension treated?
Treatment usually involves medications to lower your blood pressure and support blood flow. Usually, treatment with medicine is enough. But sometimes, providers recommend a procedure or surgery to improve blood flow to your kidneys.
Medications
The goal is to lower your blood pressure. With renal hypertension, two specific types of medications may work better:
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
These medications act on your RAAS to keep it from raising your blood pressure.
In addition to an ACE inhibitor or ARB, you may need other medications, too, like
statins
,
calcium channel blockers
or diuretics. Your provider will explain exactly which medications you need and why.
Procedures
Providers treat renal hypertension with renal artery
angioplasty
(sometimes with
stenting
) in certain situations. These include:
You have renal hypertension due to fibromuscular dysplasia
Medications aren’t enough to lower your blood pressure
You develop
congestive heart failure
or pulmonary edema without a known cause.
A newer treatment that’s been approved to treat certain types of hypertension is called renal denervation. In this procedure, heat or ultrasound energy can be used to reduce the activity of the nerve endings in your renal arteries. This may help to lower your blood pressure.
For any procedure, your provider will explain the benefits, risks and recovery so that you understand exactly what’s involved.
Advertisement
Surgery
Rarely, providers recommend surgery for renal hypertension. This is called surgical renal revascularization, or renal bypass surgery.
Your surgeon uses part of another blood vessel or a synthetic tube to connect your
aorta
to your kidney. This creates a new path for blood to flow directly to your kidney. Blood can avoid (bypass) your narrowed renal artery.
Surgery is riskier than angioplasty and stenting. So, providers only use it in certain situations, like:
You have complex renal artery anatomy that doesn’t allow a stent
Minimally invasive methods didn’t work
You need
surgery on your aorta
near your renal arteries
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you how often to come in for follow-up appointments. These give your provider a chance to:
Check your blood pressure to see how well treatment is working
Check your kidney function
Adjust your treatment plan as needed
These appointments also give you a chance to ask your provider questions and share any concerns.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can renal hypertension be cured?
Renovascular hypertension is a treatable form of high blood pressure. This means medicines and other treatments may lower your blood pressure to a healthy range. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about what you might expect in your situation.
Advertisement
In general, it’s important to:
Take all your medicines exactly as your provider prescribes them
Follow your provider’s guidance for foods to eat or avoid (they may recommend the
DASH diet
)
Talk to your provider about the amount of physical activity you should aim for
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A renovascular hypertension diagnosis can explain many “clues” that’ve been popping up recently. Maybe your blood pressure was fine for years then suddenly went up. Or maybe the medicines you usually take to manage it aren’t working anymore.
Whatever your situation, learning the role your kidneys play helps your provider plan treatment. If you have questions about your medicines or how to manage your condition, make sure to ask your provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment