Tummy Tuck Scar: Healing, Treatment & Revision
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Tummy Tuck Scar
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tummy Tuck Scar
After a tummy tuck (abdominoplasty), it’s normal to have one or more scars on your belly. Certain treatments, ranging from skin ointments to scar revision surgery, can reduce the appearance of a tummy tuck scar.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Treatment for Scars
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
A purple tummy tuck scar runs from hip bone to hip bone.
What is a tummy tuck scar?
A tummy tuck scar forms in the areas where your skin heals after tummy tuck surgery. A
tummy tuck (abdominoplasty)
removes excess skin and fat from your belly. The scar is usually thin. It may be raised, recessed, slightly pink or lighter than the surrounding skin.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Are there different types of tummy tuck scars?
The size and location of tummy tuck
scars
vary depending on what type of tummy tuck you have. Your surgeon will likely use special glue, tape or bandages on your incision. These surgical dressings can reduce scarring by holding the skin of the incision together and keeping it moist.
The different types of tummy tuck scars may include:
Full tummy tuck:
The scar for a standard tummy tuck usually spans your abdomen, from hip bone to hip bone, just above your pubic area. You may also have a scar around your belly button.
Mini tummy tuck:
A mini tummy tuck is for people who have a small amount of excess fat and tissue beneath their belly button. The scar is shorter than a full tummy tuck scar. It’s about the length of a
C-section
scar (between 3 inches and 6 inches).
Fleur-de-lis tummy tuck:
This scar spans your abdomen. A second vertical scar runs from your lower breastbone to your pubic bone. A fleur-de-lis tummy tuck is usually for people with a large amount of excess skin due to major weight loss or multiple pregnancies.
Can you prevent a tummy tuck scar?
You can’t completely prevent a tummy tuck scar. But you can take steps to help the incision heal after surgery, which may reduce the appearance of the scar:
Avoid corticosteroids:
If you take
corticosteroids
, talk to your healthcare provider about stopping the medication before surgery. Some corticosteroids can slow wound healing.
Manage chronic diseases:
Some conditions, such as
diabetes
, can complicate wound healing. Talk to your healthcare provider before your tummy tuck about how to manage health conditions before, during and after the procedure.
Stop smoking:
Quitting smoking
several months before your procedure can help your surgical wound heal.
Take vitamin A:
Your provider may recommend
vitamin A
supplements in the weeks and months leading up to surgery. Vitamin A can help speed wound healing. Please check with your surgeon prior to starting vitamin A as it may interfere with a medication you’re currently taking.
Advertisement
How to reduce tummy tuck scars.
Treatment Details
How can I minimize scarring as my tummy tuck incisions heal?
There’s a variety of ways that you can help your incision heal after a tummy tuck, which can reduce the appearance of scars. Follow your provider’s instructions carefully about caring for and cleaning your wound. Avoid heavy lifting, strenuous exercise, sexual activity and stretching until your provider says it’s safe to do these activities (usually four to eight weeks after the procedure).
Your provider might recommend some topical treatments that you apply directly to the wound:
Antibiotic ointment.
Cocoa butter.
Petroleum jelly.
Scar cream.
Silicone gel sheets.
Vitamin D.
Vitamin E
.
About 2 to 3 weeks after your surgery, you may consider scar massage. Gently massaging the scar and the surrounding skin can increase blood flow to the area and help with the healing process. Massage can also break up some of the tougher scar tissue. Talk to your healthcare provider before trying scar massage.
It’s extremely important to stay out of the sun as your wound heals. Ultraviolet radiation can make your scar discolored or change its texture, making it thicker. For 12 to 18 months after your tummy tuck, wear sunscreen with an SPF (sun protection factor) of 30 if you have to be in the sun.
Getting
proper nutrition
is also an important part of wound healing. Talk to your healthcare provider or a registered dietitian about the best way to get all the vitamins and minerals you need. They may recommend taking a daily multivitamin or other supplements as you heal.
Can steroid injections treat a tummy tuck scar?
Steroid injections
may help reduce the appearance of a thick, raised or red tummy tuck scar. Most providers reserve these injections for abnormal scarring, but providers may give steroid injections at the time of surgery or a few weeks following surgery to reduce inflammation. Others may wait a few weeks until a scar forms.
Can laser skin resurfacing treatments treat a tummy tuck scar?
Laser skin resurfacing
may reduce the appearance of a tummy tuck scar. This is another treatment usually reserved for abnormal scaring. Lasers use light or heat to stimulate the growth of new skin cells. Laser treatments may also:
Decrease the scar’s tightness, so you have more skin movement.
Prevent the development of a raised scar.
Reduce itchiness, pain and irritation around your scar.
Can scar revision surgery treat a tummy tuck scar?
Some tummy tuck scars, such as
hypertrophic
or
keloid scars
, may need surgical treatment. During
scar revision
, a surgeon cuts the scar out of your skin and then closes the wound with stitches. Most people need to wait 12 to 18 months after their tummy tuck for scar revision surgery. This is a time when the scar is about as good as it is going to get and the skin has had a chance to further relax and take tension off of the scar.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Treatment for Scars
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the risks of tummy tuck scar treatment?
Most treatments for a tummy tuck scar don’t carry significant risks. Laser skin resurfacing can cause swelling, blistering and skin redness. Surgical scar revision may cause infection, bleeding or additional scarring.
What are the benefits of tummy tuck scar treatment?
Tummy tuck scar treatment can:
Improve skin elasticity around the scar.
Reduce redness or scar discoloration.
Smooth the texture of a scar.
Recovery and Outlook
What can I expect after tummy tuck scar treatment?
Small or fine tummy tuck scars may fade completely after about a year. However, most people will still have a visible scar.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you notice your incision is:
Bleeding.
Infected (pus or foul-smelling drainage coming from the wound).
Swollen.
Very painful.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A tummy tuck scar is a normal side effect of abdominoplasty. However, you may want to diminish the appearance of a noticeable tummy tuck scar. Taking care of your overall health and skin before surgery can help prevent severe scarring. Postoperative wound care, skin ointments, steroid injections, laser resurfacing and surgery may help improve the look of a scar after a tummy tuck.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Not all scars just fade away, and some are hard to hide. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts will create a personalized treatment plan for your unique scars.
Treatment for Scars
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/16/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment