Mpox (Monkeypox): Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Mpox
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mpox
Mpox, formerly called monkeypox, is a disease similar to smallpox caused by a virus.  It causes flu-like symptoms such as fever and chills, and a rash that can take weeks to clear. There’s no proven treatment for mpox, but it usually goes away on its own. Healthcare experts recommend getting vaccinated if you’re at higher risk for mpox.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Mpox causes flu-like symptoms and a rash that can be small or widespread. The rash can last for a few weeks.
What is mpox?
Mpox (previously known as monkeypox) is a disease caused by a
virus
. It usually causes a rash and
flu-like symptoms
. The rash is similar to the one caused by a related virus,
smallpox
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Cases of mpox happen regularly (it’s endemic) in parts of Africa. But outbreaks sometimes happen in other places around the world. An outbreak is an increase in cases, or a larger-than-expected number of cases.
Types of mpox
There are two known subtypes of mpox:
Clade I.
Clade I is endemic to Central Africa. It tends to cause more serious illness than clade II. Recent outbreaks of clade I have been less deadly.
Clade II.
Clade II is endemic to East Africa. There’s been a global outbreak of clade II mpox since 2022. It’s less likely to be fatal than clade I.
Outbreaks
Since 2023, there’s been an outbreak of clade I mpox in Central and East Africa.
Since 2022, there’s been an ongoing outbreak of clade II mpox affecting countries around the world. There were 1,700 reported cases in the U.S. in 2023. In total, there’ve been over 102,000 reported cases of clade II mpox worldwide since 2022.
The last outbreak in the U.S. before this was in 2003. Forty-seven people in six states were infected with mpox from pet prairie dogs. It wasn’t spread from person to person.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of mpox?
Symptoms of mpox include:
Rash
, skin ulcers or blisters.
Fever
.
Swollen lymph nodes
.
Chills
.
Headache
.
Muscle aches
.
Fatigue
.
Not everyone with mpox develops all the symptoms. Different ways you might experience symptoms include:
Advertisement
Only a rash (no other symptoms), or other symptoms developing later.
Flu-like symptoms, then a rash. Some people don’t get a rash at all.
What does the mpox rash look like?
The rash caused by mpox can appear as sores on your mouth, face, hands, feet, penis, vagina or anus (butthole). Some people have a widespread rash, but others only a have few bumps or blisters.
Mpox rash can go through several stages over two to four weeks:
It may start out as flat, red bumps. These can be painful.
The bumps become raised.
The bumps turn into
blisters
.
The blisters fill with pus.
The blisters crust over and fall off.
What causes mpox?
An infection with monkeypox virus (
Orthopoxvirus monkeypox
) causes mpox. Viruses are small pieces of genetic information in a protective coating. The virus that causes mpox is a pox virus, and a member of the genus
Orthopoxvirus
.
How do you get mpox?
Mpox can spread through:
Direct contact with mpox sores or scabs (from an animal or person).
Contact with
saliva
(spit), respiratory secretions from your nose or mouth (
mucus
), blood or other bodily fluids (from an animal or person).
Contact with materials like clothing, bedding and towels used by a person or animal who’s infected.
Vertical transmission — from a pregnant woman to the fetus during pregnancy or at birth.
Specific situations that can spread mpox include:
Close, intimate contact, like cuddling, kissing or sex. It’s possible, though less likely, that you could spread mpox by talking, sneezing or coughing very close to others.
Skin-to-skin contact.
Sharing personal items, like towels, bedding or sex toys.
Bites or scratches from an infected animal.
Eating the meat of an infected animal.
What are the risk factors for mpox?
Anyone can get mpox. The global outbreak appears to be disproportionately affecting men who have sex with men (MSM). On the other hand, in the clade I outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo, children under 15 years old make up more than half the cases.
In the U.S., you might be at a higher risk of exposure if:
Someone you’ve had sex with in the past two weeks has been diagnosed with mpox.
You’ve had sex at a sex club, bathhouse or another commercial sex venue in the past six months.
You’ve had sex at an event or location where mpox was spreading.
You have a sex partner who’s been in any of the above situations.
You’ve been diagnosed with one or more
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
in the past six months. This includes acute
HIV
,
gonorrhea
,
syphilis
,
chancroid
or
chlamydia
.
You’ve had sex with more than one person in the past six months.
Advertisement
You might be more likely to get severely ill with mpox if you:
Have a weakened immune system, especially if it’s caused by HIV.
Have a history of
eczema
.
Are pregnant.
Babies younger than 1 year old are also at a higher risk for severe illness.
What are the complications of mpox?
Complications caused by mpox can include:
Bacterial infections
, which can lead to
sepsis
.
Loss of vision
or eye damage from mpox ocular infections.
Myopericarditis
(inflammation around your heart).
Encephalitis
(inflammation in your brain).
Pneumonia
.
Respiratory distress (extreme difficulty breathing and getting oxygen to your body).
Severe scarring.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is mpox diagnosed?
To diagnose mpox, your healthcare provider will swab two to three sores (lesions). They’ll send the samples to a lab for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing. They may also do
blood tests
.
It’s important to let your provider know if you may have been exposed to mpox. Your provider might test you for other illness that cause a rash, like
measles
or
chickenpox
.
Management and Treatment
How is mpox treated?
There aren’t any approved
antiviral treatments
for mpox. If you’re very sick or if you’re pregnant, your provider might treat you with antiviral drugs, like
tecovirimat (TPOXX)
or
cidofovir
/brincidofovir.
Vaccinia immune globulin (VIG-IV)
, a type of
antibody
treatment, is also sometimes an option.
Advertisement
These drugs are approved to treat other
viral infections
(like smallpox) and could benefit some people. But researchers are still studying how well they work for mpox.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What happens if you have mpox?
Mpox normally takes about two to four weeks to run its course. Your provider will monitor you until the rash resolves.
Can you survive mpox?
Clade II mpox — the subtype causing a global outbreak — is rarely fatal. The fatality (death) rate for clade I has historically been around 10%. But during recent outbreaks,
it’s been less than 3.3%
.
Prevention
How can I prevent mpox?
The best way to reduce your risk of mpox is to get
vaccinated
if you’re at a higher risk of exposure. It’s important to get vaccinated before, or as soon as possible after, exposure.
In addition to vaccines, other ways to help prevent the spread of mpox include:
Avoiding close contact in social situations (like clubs, raves or parties), especially if you or other people have a lot of exposed skin.
Not touching mpox rashes, blisters or scabs.
Avoiding contact with bedding and other materials that could be contaminated with mpox.
Washing your hands
frequently with soap and water.
Practicing
safe sex
, including the use of
condoms
and
dental dams
.
Wearing a mask that covers your mouth and nose when around others.
Cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces.
Using personal protective equipment (PPE), like gloves and a mask, when caring for people with mpox.
Avoiding contact with infected animals or wild animals.
Thoroughly cooking all foods that contain meat and not eating the meat of wild animals.
Advertisement
You can have mpox and not know it. Even if you don’t show many signs of infection, it’s possible that you can still spread it to others through prolonged, close contact.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
If you have mpox symptoms, you can take care of yourself at home with:
Over-the-counter (OTC) medications
. Medicines like ibuprofen and acetaminophen can help relieve your symptoms.
Colloidal oatmeal baths.
Soaking in a warm bath with colloidal oatmeal products can relieve the dry, itchy feeling that comes with skin rashes.
Rest and fluids.
It’s important to stay home, rest and drink plenty of fluids to help you recover.
You can also reduce the risk of spreading mpox and take care of others by:
Isolating yourself if you’re infected.
Avoid contact with others until your skin has healed.
Wearing a mask.
If you have to be around others — for instance, to seek medical care — wear an N95 or KN95 respirator mask that covers your mouth and nose.
Covering small areas of ulcers or sores.
Use gauze or bandages to limit the spread to others and items you touch.
Avoiding contact with pets (especially rodents).
Mpox can be transmitted between humans and animals.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you:
Feel sick with fever, aches or swollen lymph nodes.
Have a new rash or sores.
Have been in close contact with a person who has mpox.
Want to learn more about or find out where to get the mpox vaccine.
If you’re pregnant, let your pregnancy care provider know right away if you’ve been exposed to mpox or have symptoms. They can help you reduce your risk of severe illness and passing mpox to the fetus during pregnancy and birth.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room or call 911 (or your local emergency services number) if you experience:
Trouble breathing or severe
shortness of breath
.
New or worsening
chest pain
.
Neck stiffness
.
Confusion
or difficulty thinking clearly.
Difficulty speaking or moving.
Loss of consciousness.
Seizures
.
A wound that’s not healing or is very painful.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
It might be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:
Should I get vaccinated?
Are there any treatments available?
How do I take care of myself at home?
Which serious symptoms should I look out for?
Additional Common Questions
Why don’t we call it monkeypox anymore?
The World Health Organization (WHO) changed the name to mpox in November 2022. This aligns it with the WHO’s current recommendations for naming diseases in a way that avoids stigmas. The virus that causes mpox is still called monkeypox virus.
What’s the difference?
Mpox vs. chickenpox
Although they both cause skin rashes, different viruses cause mpox and chickenpox. Mpox is an orthopoxvirus, while chickenpox is a herpes virus. Both viruses can spread through skin-to-skin or prolonged face-to-face contact, but chickenpox is very contagious and spreads more easily than mpox. People with mpox are more likely to have swollen lymph nodes than people with chickenpox.
The rashes act differently, too. While the chickenpox rash can appear in waves, mpox sores develop at the same time. Chickenpox symptoms — including the rash — tend to get better within two weeks, while it takes two to four weeks for mpox to resolve.
Mpox vs. smallpox
Smallpox and mpox are both part of the
Orthopoxvirus
genus, so they’re caused by similar but distinct viruses. Thanks to effective vaccines, smallpox was eradicated (is no longer a circulating disease) by 1980. Smallpox was very contagious and spread more easily than mpox. Mpox symptoms are similar to smallpox, but milder.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
News of a disease outbreak — and even the word “outbreak” — can cause a lot of anxiety and fear. Especially if, like many of us, you’d never heard of mpox until 2022, it might feel like one more thing to add to your list of concerns.
But research into similar viruses, like smallpox, has been going on for decades. Because of this, healthcare providers have been able to quickly implement vaccines and other measures to reduce the spread of mpox. If you think you’re at a higher risk for exposure to mpox, there are ways to reduce your risk. Talk to a healthcare provider if you have any concerns.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/25/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment