Eye Lens Replacement: What It Is, Surgery & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Eye Lens Replacement
Advertisement
Advertisement
Eye Lens Replacement
Eye lens replacement refers to two types of surgery: cataract surgery and refractive lens exchange. Both surgeries remove your eye’s natural lens and replace it with an intraocular lens (IOL). Your provider will help you choose the best IOL for your needs. You can expect a short procedure (30 minutes or fewer) and a quick return to your usual routine.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
What is eye lens replacement?
Eye lens replacement is an outpatient surgery in which an
ophthalmologist
removes your eye’s
natural lens
and implants an intraocular lens (IOL) in its place to improve your vision. Your natural lens is a clear structure located behind your pupil. Your lens helps focus light as it enters your eye so it lands properly on your
retina
, allowing you to see the world around you. An IOL is a clear artificial lens (made of acrylic or silicone) that serves this same purpose.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Eye lens replacement surgery is a general term that refers to two specific types of procedures:
Cataract surgery.
Refractive lens exchange.
Cataract surgery
Cataract surgery
removes a cloudy lens and replaces it with a clear one. Cataracts, or cloudy patches in your eye’s lens, naturally develop as you get older. They may start to form after age 40, with symptoms (like blurry vision) appearing after age 60.
When cataracts affect your daily life, your healthcare provider may recommend surgery to implant an IOL and restore your vision.
Refractive lens exchange
Refractive lens exchange
is a type of
corrective eye surgery
that replaces your lens. Like cataract surgery, refractive lens exchange replaces your eye’s natural lens with an IOL. But in this case, your natural lens isn’t cloudy. Instead, it’s clear. So, you may also hear this surgery called “clear lens extraction.”
The purpose of the surgery is to correct
refractive errors
(vision problems) that prevent you from seeing clearly. As a result, you may rely less on
glasses
or
contacts
in your daily routine.
Refractive lens exchange may help people who aren’t candidates for
LASIK
or
PRK
, which are vision correction surgeries that reshape your
cornea
(the outer window to your eye).
Advertisement
What are the different eye lens replacement types?
Many types of
intraocular lenses (IOLs)
are available to replace your eye’s natural lenses. Each type has pros and cons. The three general categories of IOLs are:
Monofocal lenses
, which correct your vision at one range (typically distance).
Multifocal lenses
, which correct your vision at two or more ranges.
Toric lenses
, which correct for
astigmatism
.
Talk to your ophthalmologist about the IOLs best suited to your needs.
Is eye lens replacement suitable for me?
Many factors determine whether eye lens replacement surgery is right for you. These include:
The health of your
eyes
.
The quality of your vision.
Your overall health and any underlying conditions that may raise your risk for complications.
Your age.
Your ophthalmologist will recommend the best approach based on your individual situation.
What is involved in eye lens replacement surgery?
Eye lens replacement surgery typically lasts 15 to 30 minutes. During that time, you’ll feel little or no discomfort. That’s because you’ll receive topical anesthesia (eye drops) to numb your eyes. You may also receive medication to help you relax.
When the surgery ends, your care team will briefly monitor you and then send you home. Make sure you arrange for someone to drive you home, as you won’t be able to drive right away. That’s because your vision will be blurry immediately after your surgery.
The procedure is minimally invasive, meaning surgeons use the smallest incision possible to get the job done. The incision is so small that it heals on its own without stitches. Surgeons use this incision to remove your natural lens and insert your IOL.
During the procedure, your surgeon removes your natural lens through a process called phacoemulsification. Here’s how it works:
Your surgeon breaks down the lens with a laser or manually with ultrasound.
Ultrasound waves liquefy these pieces.
A vacuum system suctions them out.
The removal of your natural lens leaves a clean, open space for your IOL implant. Your surgeon then inserts your IOL through the small incision, where it takes the place of your natural lens.
The surgical steps for cataract surgery and refractive lens exchange are similar. The main difference is that in cataract surgery, your surgeon removes a cloudy lens. In refractive lens exchange, they remove a clear lens.
Eye lens replacement surgery recovery time
Your eye will need up to eight weeks to fully heal. But you’ll be able to return to your normal routine much sooner after your surgery, likely within several days. Your provider will tell you when it’s safe to drive and return to all of your usual activities.
Can you replace one eye lens?
Yes. You may replace the lens in one or both of your eyes, depending on your needs. If you choose to replace both lenses, your ophthalmologist will schedule two surgeries several weeks apart.
Advertisement
How safe is eye lens replacement surgery?
All eye surgeries have some level of risk. However, research shows that eye lens replacement surgery is very safe. About 98% of people who have cataract surgery don’t experience any serious complications. When complications do occur, surgeons can typically treat the problem.
Possible eye-related complications include:
Bleeding.
Infection.
Inflammation.
Glaucoma
.
Posterior capsular opacification (secondary cataract, or clouding of the membrane that covers your lens).
Retinal detachment
.
Swelling.
Vision loss.
Talk to your ophthalmologist about your risk for complications. Individual levels of risk can vary based on the health of your eyes and underlying medical conditions.
How long do eye lens replacements last?
Intraocular lens implants are permanent. They’re designed to stay in your eyes for the rest of your life.
Rarely, some people need to swap their IOLs for new ones. This procedure (IOL exchange) can help if you:
Experience complications from your IOL implants.
Have visual side effects (such as glare around lights) from a particular type of IOL.
Need a different refractive power for your IOL to further sharpen your vision.
How much does it cost to replace a lens in your eye?
The cost of eye lens replacement varies depending on:
The reason for your surgery
. Most health insurance plans will cover at least part of the cost of your cataract surgery. But they may not cover the cost of refractive lens exchange.
The type of IOL you receive
. Most insurance plans only cover the cost of monofocal IOLs, including those set to monovision. These plans may consider other types of IOLs “premium” or “enhanced” due to the features they offer. So, you may need to pay for those lenses out-of-pocket.
Advertisement
Other factors, like your geographic location, may also come into play.
Talk to your provider and insurance company about the expected costs of lens replacement before scheduling your surgery.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Eye lens replacement is a quick, minimally invasive surgery that can improve your vision and reduce your reliance on glasses. Every surgery comes with some risks, so it’s important to talk to your provider about the pros and cons of your specific situation. Some people face a higher risk of complications due to their eye health or medical history. Make sure you get all the information you need to make an informed decision and feel comfortable with the process.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/28/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment