Whooping Cough (Pertussis) Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Whooping Cough (Pertussis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Whooping Cough (Pertussis)
Whooping cough (also called pertussis or the “100-day cough”) is a respiratory infection known for the high-pitched “whoop” sound some people make after coughing. Pertussis affects people of all ages but usually causes the most severe symptoms in infants. Antibiotics stop the infection from spreading to others and may make symptoms less severe.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Whooping Cough (Pertussis)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Whooping Cough (Pertussis)?
Whooping cough is a highly contagious
upper respiratory infection
that affects babies, children and adults of all ages. Early on, it might feel like a
common cold
. But after a week or two, a persistent
cough
develops.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The cough may come and go in what healthcare providers call “paroxysms,” or coughing fits. These coughing fits can make it hard to eat, breathe or sleep. You might make a high-pitched “whoop” sound after coughing as you try to take in air. Infants may struggle to breathe even if they don’t cough.
Pertussis is the medical name for whooping cough. You might also hear people refer to this infection as the “100-day cough.” This is because symptoms can last for weeks or even months before finally clearing up.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of whooping cough (pertussis) range from fever to violent coughing episodes.
Whooping cough symptoms
Symptoms of whooping cough start out cold-like and develop into a severe cough. This happens in stages.
Infants may struggle to breathe even if they never develop a cough.
If your baby has a severe cough, has a bluish discoloration around their mouth and/or trouble breathing, seek emergency care right away.
What are the three stages of whooping cough?
The three stages of whooping cough are:
Common cold symptoms
Coughing fits
Gradual recovery
Stage 1: Common cold symptoms
This stage lasts about one to two weeks. You or your child is most contagious during this time, but you might think it’s just a cold. Symptoms include:
Stuffy nose
Runny nose
Sore throat
Watery eyes
Mild or occasional cough that gradually gets worse
Low-grade
fever
(under 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit/38 degrees Celsius) or normal temperature
Feeling generally unwell or “off” (malaise)
Advertisement
Infants may struggle to breathe or have pauses in their breathing (apnea). You might notice:
Your baby is working hard to breathe.
Their stomach seems to be caving in or breathing looks like they’re panting.
Their skin or area around their mouth is turning blue or gray from lack of oxygen (
cyanosis
)
Stage 2: Coughing fits
The second stage usually lasts anywhere from one to six weeks. But it sometimes lasts as long as 10 weeks. During this stage, you have thick
mucus
in your
airways
and severe coughing fits (paroxysms). Here’s what to expect:
A coughing fit means you cough many times in a row for several minutes.
When you try to catch your breath between coughs, you may make a high-pitched “whoop” sound.
You may vomit and/or feel exhausted after a coughing fit.
Crying, eating or laughing may trigger a coughing fit.
Coughing fits occur during the day and night but may get worse at night.
Coughing fits get more frequent before leveling off and then gradually going down in number.
Stage 3: Gradual recovery
This stage lasts up to six weeks. During this time, you may have a mild cough that comes and goes, but you won’t have severe coughing fits like before. You’ll gradually cough less and less.
Even as you start to feel better, you’re more vulnerable to other respiratory infections during this time. Your body is still healing. Try to avoid exposure to
germs
. If you do get sick with something else, the coughing fits may return.
Whooping cough sound
Whooping cough gets its name from the “whoop” sound that some people make after coughing. If you’re coughing over and over, it can be difficult to catch your breath. When you finally take in some air, your efforts may come across as a high-pitched “whoop” or gasp. But not everyone with pertussis develops a “whoop sound.”
Whooping cough causes
The
bacteria
Bordetella pertussis
causes whooping cough. The bacteria damage the lining of your airways, causing them to swell. This swelling leads to thick mucus buildup and, in turn, severe coughing.
Whooping cough spreads through respiratory droplets when you cough or sneeze. It usually takes five to 10 days for
symptoms to start
after exposure, but sometimes it’s as long as 21 days.
Is whooping cough contagious?
Yes, it’s very contagious — that means it spreads easily from person to person. You’re likely to get it from someone you live with, and kids often get it from their classmates.
You can spread whooping cough from the start of symptoms until three weeks after the coughing fits start. This means, for example, if you have one week of cold-like symptoms before the coughing fits begin, you’re contagious for four weeks total.
Complications of whooping cough
Possible complications of whooping cough in infants and children include:
Advertisement
Ear infections
Nosebleeds
Nutritional deficiencies (
malnutrition
)
Pneumonia
Problems with brain function (
encephalopathy
), which can lead to permanent brain damage or death
Pulmonary hypertension
Respiratory failure
Complications are usually the most severe in babies under 12 months of age. Infants are most likely to be hospitalized due to pertussis. And those who face the greatest risk of severe complications or death include infants who:
Aren’t
vaccinated
(or whose birth mother didn’t receive the
vaccine during pregnancy
)
Are immunocompromised
Have severe asthma
Possible complications in adolescents and adults include:
Broken rib
Ear infections
Fainting
Migraines
Pee leaking out (
urinary incontinence
)
Pneumonia
Unintended weight loss
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose whooping cough
Healthcare providers diagnose whooping cough by:
Doing a
physical exam
Asking about your symptoms
Collecting a mucus sample (
nasopharyngeal swab
) to send to a lab for testing
Tell your provider if you were around anyone who had whooping cough or a
chronic cough
. This information will help your provider make a diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for pertussis?
Providers treat whooping cough with
antibiotics
like azithromycin, clarithromycin or erythromycin. Take your medicine exactly as your provider tells you to. The sooner you start taking antibiotics, the more they can help you.
Advertisement
Antibiotics won’t stop you from getting coughing fits or help the cough go away. But they keep you from spreading the infection to others. If taken early, they might make your symptoms less severe.
If your child is very sick, they may need to be monitored in the hospital. There, a team of healthcare providers can keep a close eye on your child’s breathing and give them
oxygen
and
fluids
if necessary.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Contact your pediatrician if your child:
Isn’t up to date on their pertussis vaccines
Was exposed to whooping cough
Has a cough that’s severe, getting worse or causing vomiting
Has a cough along with a fever
Can’t keep down milk, formula or food
Call 911 or your local emergency services number if your child has trouble breathing or their skin looks blue or gray (check their lips and fingertips).
Call your primary care provider if you:
Have questions about
vaccination
Were exposed to whooping cough
Have symptoms of whooping cough
Develop new or unexplained symptoms
Have
chest pain
when coughing or taking a deep breath (a possible sign of pneumonia)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have pertussis?
Whooping cough can make you feel miserable for weeks or months. And it’s possible to develop severe complications.
The good news is that your body will likely build up some
immunity
against
Bordetella pertussis
bacteria. So, you won’t get whooping cough again for a while — anywhere from four to 20 years, according to
some experts
. But you can get whooping cough again in the future once immunity wanes.
Advertisement
Your child might need to stay in the hospital, especially if they’re very young.
When is it safe to return to daycare, school or work?
It depends. If you or your child is taking antibiotics, it’s generally safe to return after five full days of treatment. Otherwise, you’re still contagious for three weeks after the start of the coughing fits.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Things you can do to feel a little better — and possibly ease coughing at night — include:
Take some
honey
. This may help calm your cough. But it’s only safe for adults and kids over age 1.
Never give honey to an infant
(because of the risk of
botulism
).
Rest
. Getting lots of rest helps your body heal.
Keep up the fluids
. Drinking plenty of fluids can help thin the mucus that’s making you cough.
Use a cool-mist
humidifier
. This helps break up mucus.
Eat small meals
. Eating just a small amount of food at a time may keep you from vomiting.
Avoid irritants
. Things like dust, smoke and chemical fumes (for example, from some cleaning supplies) might make you cough.
Prevention
Can whooping cough be prevented?
Pertussis vaccines
can reduce your risk of getting an infection or having severe symptoms if you do get sick. The vaccines that help prevent pertussis are the DTaP in children and Tdap in teens, pregnant
women
and adults. But they become less effective the longer it’s been since your last shot. Talk to your healthcare provider or your child’s pediatrician about when to get vaccinated.
Providers prescribe preventive (
prophylactic
) antibiotics in some cases. These are medicines you take after exposure to whooping cough even if you don’t yet have symptoms. They can help you avoid coming down with whooping cough.
Your provider may prescribe preventive antibiotics if you:
Are at high risk of getting very sick from whooping cough
Spend time with people who’d get very sick from whooping cough (for example, infants)
It’s important to keep in mind that good
handwashing
may prevent the spread of respiratory infections.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Whether you call it whooping cough, pertussis or the 100-day cough, this respiratory infection can make you or your child really sick. If your child has a persistent or severe cough, it’s always a good idea to check with their pediatrician. They can diagnose or rule out whooping cough and many other common infections. They’ll make sure your child gets any needed treatments and will give you tips on how to care for your child until they’re better.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider