Ependymoma: Symptoms, Treatment, Prognosis & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ependymoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ependymoma
An ependymoma is a tumor that forms in your brain or spinal cord. Providers grade them from 1 to 3 based on how quickly they spread. Grade 3 ependymomas are cancerous. You’ll probably need surgery to remove the tumor. You might need other treatments like radiation or chemotherapy, too.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Brain Tumor Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is an ependymoma?
An ependymoma is a
tumor
that forms in your
brain
or
spinal cord
. Ependymoma is pronounced eh-PEN-de-MO-ma.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Ependymomas are primary tumors. That means they form directly in your brain or spinal cord (they don’t spread there from somewhere else in your body).
They’re a type of
glioma
. Ependymomas are the sixth most common
brain tumor in children
. But they can affect adults, too.
Are ependymomas aggressive?
Healthcare providers grade ependymomas on a 1 to 3 scale, based on how quickly they grow. Grade 1 tumors grow the slowest and grade 3 grow fastest.
Grade 1 and 2 ependymomas are
noncancerous (benign)
. They usually grow slowly and don’t spread (metastasize) from where they form.
Grade 3 ependymomas are
cancerous
(malignant). They grow more aggressively (much faster) than lower-grade tumors.
Types of ependymomas
In addition to grades, there are several types of ependymomas, including:
Subependymomas (grade 1).
These grow near the chambers in your brain (ventricles) that contain cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). They’re more common in adults than children.
Classic ependymomas (grade 2).
Classic ependymomas are named that because they’re the most common type. They can affect both children and adults.
Myxopapillary ependymomas (grade 2).
These grow in your lower spinal cord. They’re most common in adult men.
Anaplastic ependymomas (grade 3)
. These usually form near the base of your brain. They grow quickly and often spread to other parts of your brain. They’re the most likely to regrow after treatment (recur).
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are ependymoma symptoms?
An ependymoma can cause a lot of symptoms depending on where it forms. Some of the most common symptoms include:
Back pain
Balance issues
Blurry vision
or other
vision
changes
Dizziness
Headaches
Mood swings
Muscle weakness
Nausea
&
vomiting
Neck pain
Numbness
in your arms or legs
Seizures
Trouble controlling your pee (
urinary incontinence
)
Babies and very young children can’t tell you they’re feeling pain or other symptoms. You might notice:
A larger-than-usual head
Sleeplessness
Unusual irritability or fussing
Vomiting or spitting up more than usual
What causes ependymomas?
Experts aren’t sure what causes ependymomas. They may happen by mistake when ependymal cells in your brain divide and replicate. Some
genetic variations
may cause them.
Some studies have found that people who carry the genetic variations that cause
neurofibromatosis type 2
may be more likely to develop ependymomas. But experts can’t say for sure that they’re linked. They’re still studying this possible connection.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose an ependymoma?
A healthcare provider will diagnose an ependymoma with a
physical exam
, a
neurological exam
and some tests. Your provider will ask about your symptoms, and when you first noticed them.
Your provider may use some of the following tests to diagnose an ependymoma:
Biopsy
CT scan
Lumbar puncture
MRI
Management and Treatment
What are ependymoma treatments?
Your healthcare provider will treat an ependymoma with:
Surgery
. Surgery is the most common ependymoma treatment. A surgeon will remove as much of the tumor as possible.
Radiation therapy
. Radiation therapy uses powerful X-rays to destroy tumor cells. You might need radiation before and/or after surgery.
Chemotherapy (chemo)
. Chemo is medication that kills cancer cells. You’ll usually only need chemo if the tumor has spread to other areas of your body. This is very rare with ependymomas.
Immunotherapy
. You’ll take medications that boost your
immune system’s
ability to fight cancer. Immunotherapy is a rare treatment for an ependymoma.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Brain Tumor Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the survival rate if you have an ependymoma?
The five-year survival rate for ependymomas is nearly 85%. That means around 85% of people are still alive within five years of being diagnosed. But this number may not apply to you or your unique situation. Your providers will tell you what can expect.
There are lots of factors that can impact your survival rate, including:
The tumor’s grade
The tumor’s location
Your age
Your overall health
Is ependymoma cancer curable?
There’s no cure for cancer, but it’s possible to remove or destroy a grade 3 ependymoma with treatment.
Remember, there’s always a chance an ependymoma
regrows (recurs)
, even after you’ve been declared cancer-free. That’s much more likely with grade 3 tumors. Your providers and surgeon will tell you what to expect based on your age and overall health.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you how often you’ll need follow-up visits to monitor any changes in your body. You’ll need regular imaging tests to keep an eye on the ependymoma during treatment.
Which questions should I ask my doctor?
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What grade is the ependymoma?
Which type of tumor is it?
Which treatments will I need?
What are the chances the ependymoma comes back after it’s removed?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ependymomas are tumors that grow in your brain or spinal cord. There are lots of grades and types, but the good news is they’re all treatable. Many people successfully have surgery to remove an ependymoma with no long-term effects.
Your provider will help you understand everything you need to know about the ependymoma and which treatments you’ll need. Don’t hesitate to ask them any questions you think of. There’s no such thing as a silly question when it comes to your health or body.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you learn you have a skull base tumor, you’ll want the best care from the best providers. Cleveland Clinic is here to help.
Brain Tumor Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment