Informed Consent: What It Is & Why It’s Important
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Informed Consent
Advertisement
Advertisement
Informed Consent
Informed consent is a principle in the code of medical ethics. It’s also a legal requirement for medical treatment. Your healthcare provider must fully explain to you all of your treatment options before you agree to a treatment plan. This ensures transparency between you and your provider and allows you to share in the decision-making process.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What is informed consent?
Informed consent is a formal conversation between you and your healthcare provider about your treatment plan. It’s required by law, as well as by the medical code of ethics. Your provider explains what the treatment is, what it can do and what risks it may have. You get to ask questions and decide if you want to go ahead. If you say “Yes,” that’s called giving your consent.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is the purpose of informed consent?
Informed consent protects you and your healthcare provider. It makes sure you get the facts you need before treatment starts. This helps you feel more confident and prevents confusion or surprises later. It also helps you take part in your care and make the best choice for yourself.
What medical procedures require informed consent?
In general, you need to give informed consent any time there’s a risk with a test or treatment. That includes physical risks and even privacy risks. Your provider will explain what’s involved so you can decide if you agree. That includes risks to your privacy. Specific tests and treatments that are likely to require informed consent include:
Anesthesia
Biopsies
Blood transfusions
Cancer treatments
like
chemotherapy
and
radiation
Childbirth
interventions like
forceps delivery
or
episiotomy
Clinical trials (research studies)
Genetic testing
Medical implants
Surgery
Treatment with high-risk medications, like
opioids
Tests or procedures that go inside your body, like an
endoscopy
Additionally, you’ll give informed consent any time your personal medical records are transferred to another person or place.
What does it mean to give my informed consent?
When you give your informed consent, you say it’s OK for your healthcare provider to move forward with a certain treatment or test. You understand what they’ve explained and feel ready to decide.
Advertisement
You might give your signature on a document that says you understand the risks, benefits and other options. But signing the paper doesn’t mean you have to keep going. You can change your mind at any time — even after giving consent.
Who sets the standards for informed consent processes?
In the U.S., several organizations help set the rules for informed consent:
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
They set the rules U.S. hospitals must follow if they want to get paid by the government.
The American Medical Association.
They have a Code of Medical Ethics that includes clear guidelines for how doctors should handle informed consent.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
They make rules for informed consent in clinical trials
U.S. state laws.
Each state can also have its own laws about how informed consent should work.
What are the exceptions to informed consent rules?
Sometimes, providers can treat you without going through the full informed consent process. Your provider might start treatment without your informed consent if:
You need care right away, but you can’t communicate.
In this case, your healthcare provider might treat you without asking first. They’ll try to talk to your family if they can or ask you once you’re stable.
You’re too sick to decide.
If you’re in a coma or very ill, your provider will check if you have an
advance directive
or someone legally allowed to decide for you. They may also treat you right away if you say it’s OK to skip consent.
You’re a minor.
If you’re under the age of 18, usually a parent, legal guardian or someone else (surrogate) will make healthcare decisions for you. But some states let older minors make their own choices in certain cases.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Healthcare providers need your permission before doing certain tests or treatments. Informed consent is how you give that permission. This process is here to help you understand what you’re agreeing to and why it matters.
You might feel confused or anxious about giving your consent if you don’t understand all the medical terms you’re hearing. Needing medical care, especially if it’s urgent, can make you feel powerless or make it hard to think clearly. But you’re not powerless. Informed consent processes allow you to take the time to understand. Ask as many questions as you need to feel confident in your decision.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/01/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us