Kallmann Syndrome: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Kallmann Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Kallmann Syndrome
Kallmann syndrome affects production of hormones that support sexual development and sense of smell. It may cause late puberty or prevent puberty. The syndrome happens when certain genes change during fetal development. Some people inherit the gene changes, but the changes may happen for no known reason.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Delayed Puberty Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Kallmann Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Kallmann Syndrome?
Kallmann syndrome (KS) is a
genetic disorder
that
delays puberty
and may affect your sense of smell (
anosmia
). It happens when
certain genes
change during
fetal development
. Biological parents can pass the genetic change down to their children. But the gene changes may happen for no known reason.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The condition is more common in
males
than females. When puberty doesn’t begin in adolescence, your child’s healthcare provider may start to look for possible causes. For this reason, most people are between the ages 8 to 15 when they receive the diagnosis.
Healthcare providers may call this a form of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Hypogonadism is when your
testicles
or
ovaries
don’t produce the usual amount of sex hormones.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Kallmann syndrome
The syndrome can cause a range of symptoms that may appear in childhood or adulthood:
Lack of breast development (girls)
No periods or significantly delayed periods (girls)
Small penis
and
testicles
(boys)
Infertility
(boys and girls)
Balance issues
Cleft palate
Dental abnormalities (such as
missing teeth
or unusually small teeth)
Eye movement disorders (like
nystagmus
)
Fatigue
Irregular periods
(in women)
Low sex drive
Loss of sense of smell (anosmia)
Mood changes
Renal agenesis
(missing kidney)
Scoliosis
Weight gain
Sometimes, it doesn’t affect your sense of smell.
Kallmann syndrome causes
Changes in certain genes cause the syndrome. These changes, or variations, disrupt the process that drives puberty. This process begins when your child’s
hypothalamus gland
makes gonadotropin-releasing hormone (
GnRH
). In Kallmann syndrome, your child’s hypothalamus doesn’t make enough GnRH. Without this signal, puberty doesn’t begin.
Advertisement
GnRH supports sexual maturity, sex drive and fertility. Blood vessels carry the hormone to your
pituitary gland
(part of your brain). GnRH tells your pituitary gland to make two more hormones:
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH
)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Some of the gene changes also affect how your child’s
brain
processes smells. Normally,
olfactory nerve cells
detect and send information about smells to their olfactory bulb. With Kallmann syndrome, these signals don’t reach your child’s brain.
This can lead to a reduced or absent sense of smell. If your child’s sense of smell isn’t affected, their healthcare provider may call their condition normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (nIHH).
Researchers have identified
more than 25
genetic changes that cause Kallmann syndrome and other types of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
Research
shows the following genes are most often linked to the condition:
KAL1 (ANOS1)
CHD7
FGFR1
GNRHR
IL17RD
PROK2
SOX10
TACR3
The gene changes happen during fetal development. Sometimes, the changes happen for no known reason. But children can inherit the changes from their biological parents.
Researchers have identified different ways a person can inherit these gene variations from their biological parents (inheritance patterns). Inheritance patterns in the syndrome are:
Autosomal recessive inheritance
, which means both parents carry some genetic variations
Autosomal dominance inheritance
, which is when one parent passes a genetic variation to their children
X-linked inheritance
, which means both parents pass the gene variation to their children in genes on the X
chromosome
Kallmann syndrome complications
Puberty is an important milestone in
child development
. Kallmann syndrome can keep your child from reaching that milestone. It can delay or prevent your child’s sexual development. Your child may not go through the same physical changes as their peers. That can cause
depression
or
anxiety
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Kallmann syndrome
Pediatricians
start with a
physical exam
. They’ll ask your child and you about changes that typically happen when children are ages 8 to 15. They may ask if any family members went through puberty later than usual or didn’t go through it.
They may do the following tests if they think your child may have the syndrome:
Blood tests
to check hormone levels
Tests to check your child’s sense of smell
Genetic tests
for specific genetic variations
Management and Treatment
How is Kallmann syndrome treated?
Hormone replacement therapy is a common treatment. The specific treatments will vary, but may include:
Testosterone injections
,
skin patches
or
skin gels
for males
Estrogen and progesterone pills or skin patches for females
GnRH injections to bring on
ovulation
or periods
HCG injections
(human chorionic gonadotropin) to boost testosterone and sperm in males and increase the chance of
pregnancy
in females
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Delayed Puberty Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has this condition?
Your child may always need hormone replacement therapy. That said, infertility in males with the syndrome may go away. Healthcare providers may call this reversible Kallmann syndrome.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Growing up is hard work. Kallmann syndrome can make that hard work more challenging. The syndrome causes delayed puberty. It can even prevent puberty. If your child has this syndrome, they might not experience the physical changes their friends go through. That may make your child feel self-conscious about their appearance. They may feel like they’re being left behind.
While there’s not a strict timetable for hitting puberty, you may want to talk to a pediatrician if you have questions or concerns about your child’s development.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic Children’s expert healthcare providers can uncover the reasons behind your child’s delayed puberty with the latest testing and treatments.
Delayed Puberty Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment