Skene’s Gland Cyst: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Skene’s Gland Cyst
Advertisement
Advertisement
Skene’s Gland Cyst
A Skene’s gland cyst can happen to any female. It can even develop at birth. It may be asymptomatic, or it may cause a movable lump, pain, or difficulty peeing or having sex. You may not need treatment. But severe Skene’s gland cysts may require surgical removal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is a Skene’s gland cyst?
A Skene’s gland cyst is a cyst near your
urethral opening
(pee hole).
Skene’s glands
exist on either side of your urethra and produce fluid for lubrication. Cysts are sacs of tissue that contain fluid.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hearing that you have any type of cyst can give you pause, especially if it develops in a sensitive area. But Skene’s gland cysts aren’t
cancerous
(they’re benign), and they aren’t common. You may not even know you have one because they’re often small and don’t always cause symptoms (they’re asymptomatic). Asymptomatic Skene’s gland cysts don’t need treatment.
Other names for Skene’s gland cysts include paraurethral cysts and Skene’s duct cysts.
How common are Skene’s gland cysts?
Skene’s gland cysts are rare. Healthcare providers rarely report them in adults. One
study
estimates that they occur in between 1 in 2,000 and 1 in 7,000 newborns (congenital Skene’s gland cyst).
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a Skene’s gland cyst?
A cyst on your Skene’s gland may not cause any symptoms. But if it does, common symptoms include:
Peeing more than usual (
frequent urination
)
Pain while peeing (
dysuria
)
Inability to pee (
urinary retention
)
Pain during sexual intercourse (
dyspareunia
)
Frequent
urinary tract infections
(UTIs)
A lump that you can feel or push on under your skin, near the opening of your urethra on either side
How big can a Skene’s gland cyst get?
Most Skene’s gland cysts are less than .5 inches (1 centimeter) — about the size of a pea. It’s very rare, but Skene’s gland cysts can grow bigger — between 2.75 inches and 3.1 inches (7-8 cm). This is about the same width of a soda can.
Advertisement
What causes a Skene’s gland cyst?
Healthcare providers aren’t sure what causes a Skene’s gland cyst at birth.
Adults can get a Skene’s gland cyst if something blocks the Skene duct.
Bacterial infections
and
inflammation
are common causes of Skene’s duct blockages.
What are the complications of a Skene’s gland cyst?
In rare cases, bacteria may cause an infection in a Skene’s gland cyst, which leads to an
abscess
. A Skene’s gland abscess requires
antibiotics
to treat the infection and surgical drainage to remove pus.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do I know if I have a Skene’s gland cyst?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have symptoms that affect your private areas. In most cases, a provider can diagnose a Skene’s gland cyst by reviewing your symptoms and conducting a
pelvic examination
.
What tests will be done to diagnose a Skene’s gland cyst?
It can be hard to tell the difference between a Skene’s gland cyst and a pocket or pouch that forms next to your urethra (
urethral diverticulum
). Your healthcare provider may need to order some imaging tests to confirm the diagnosis, including:
Ultrasound
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging)
Urethral diverticulum and Skene’s gland cysts may have similar symptoms.
Management and Treatment
Will a Skene’s gland cyst go away on its own?
In some cases, particularly in babies, healthcare providers may recommend a “watch and wait” approach. If the Skene’s gland cyst doesn’t cause problems, it may get better (resolve) on its own without treatment.
Adults don’t need treatment if the cyst isn’t causing symptoms.
How do you get rid of a cyst on your Skene’s gland?
If a Skene’s gland cyst causes painful symptoms, a surgeon will remove (excise) it. Surgery may take place in an office or surgical center. Skene’s gland surgical treatments include:
Therapeutic fine-needle aspiration
. A surgeon will use a tiny needle to drain the fluid from your cyst.
Marsupialization
. A surgeon will make a cut in the cyst and then use stitches (sutures) to tie the sides down. This leaves the Skene’s gland cyst open permanently. This allows the fluid to drain freely until the cyst no longer exists.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
If you have therapeutic fine-needle aspiration, you may have some soreness or bruising at the injection site. You should start to feel better within a few days.
The recovery time for marsupialization is usually two to four weeks.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a Skene’s gland cyst?
With proper diagnosis and treatment, the outlook for a Skene’s gland cyst is good. Skene’s gland cysts are benign (not cancer). They don’t increase your risk of developing
vulvar cancer
or
vaginal cancer
and they rarely come back after treatment.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk of developing a Skene’s gland cyst?
There’s currently no way to prevent a Skene’s gland cyst from developing in a baby.
For adults, avoiding bacterial infections — including sexually transmitted infections (STIs) — can help prevent Skene’s gland cysts. You can help prevent STIs by:
Advertisement
Using
condoms
or
female condoms
each time you have sexual intercourse
Getting tested for STIs regularly
Avoiding sexual intercourse if you suspect your partner has an STI
Adults can also reduce their risks by practicing good hygiene, including:
Using water or an unscented hypoallergenic soap to gently clean your vulva
Avoiding products that can irritate your vulva, including scented products (tampons, toilet paper or soap) and tight, synthetic underwear
Avoiding
douching
. Douching isn’t necessary, and it can lead to Skene’s gland cysts and vaginal infections
Using water-based lubricants
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you have difficulty peeing, or pain while peeing or during sexual intercourse. You should also see a provider if you see a lump under the opening of your baby’s urethra and/or their pee comes out at an angle instead of a straight stream.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the nearest emergency room if you’re unable to pee or in extreme pain.
Which questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
How will you diagnose a Skene’s gland cyst?
How big is my Skene’s gland cyst?
Do I have an abscess?
Do I need treatment for my Skene’s gland cyst, or should we wait to see what happens?
If I need surgery, which approach do you recommend?
What are all of the potential risks of Skene’s gland cyst surgery?
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Can Skene’s glands get clogged?
Yes, repeated infections can clog your Skene’s glands and cause a cyst or abscess to develop. You can help prevent infections by practicing safe sexual intercourse.
What is the difference between a Skene’s gland cyst and urethral diverticulum?
Urethral diverticulum and a Skene’s gland cyst may cause similar symptoms. Either condition may cause:
Pain when you pee
Pain during sexual intercourse
UTIs
A lump
But the conditions are different. Urethral diverticulum is a pocket that forms along your urethra and can hold pee. It’s not part of your Skene’s gland.
What is the difference between a Skene’s gland cyst and a Bartholin gland cyst?
A
Bartholin cyst
also affects the
female reproductive system
and causes pain during sexual intercourse.
A Skene’s gland cyst occurs near your urethra. The Bartholin glands are on either side of your
vagina
. You can feel a Bartholin gland cyst inside your vagina. It may even be big enough to make your vaginal lips (labia) on one side larger than the other.
What is the difference between a Gartner cyst and a Skene’s gland cyst?
A Gartner cyst occurs in the mesonephric duct (Wolffian duct) on the side walls of the vagina. It may cause:
Abdominal discomfort
Pain during sexual intercourse
Difficulty or loss of control when you pee or poop
Gartner cysts develop when the mesonephric ducts don’t fully develop during
fetal development
. They’re usually benign. But, unlike Skene’s gland cysts, they can sometimes be cancerous. A healthcare provider may discover a Gartner cyst during a pelvic exam or imaging tests.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you experience pain or discomfort while peeing or having sex, it’s your body’s way of telling you that something is wrong. Talk to a healthcare provider as soon as you notice symptoms. Even if you have a larger Skene’s gland cyst that causes more severe symptoms, the outlook is good — treatment is very effective, and these cysts rarely come back.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/16/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment