Factor VII Deficiency: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Factor VII Deficiency
Advertisement
Advertisement
Factor VII Deficiency
Factor VII deficiency is a blood disorder that involves issues with how your blood clots. It involves not having enough of a protein called factor VII, which helps your platelets form clots. Signs include bruising easily and prolonged bleeding. Treatments include medications and blood products that add factor VII protein to your blood.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is factor VII deficiency?
Factor VII (factor 7 or factor seven) deficiency is an inherited
blood disorder
that prevents your
blood
from clotting normally. Factor VII is one of several proteins in your blood known as a “coagulation” or “clotting factor.” These proteins work together to help your
platelets
form
clots
that stop bleeding if you’re injured.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Not having enough functioning factor VII can cause your blood to clot too slowly. This may cause you to
bruise
and bleed more easily than someone without this condition.
Other names for factor VII deficiency are Alexander’s disease and proconvertin deficiency.
How common is factor VII deficiency?
Factor VII deficiency is rare, occurring in about 1 in every 500,000 people worldwide. There are several inherited blood clotting disorders that medical experts classify as “rare.” Factor VII deficiency is considered the most common of these rare blood disorders.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms?
Factor VII deficiency can lead to prolonged bleeding and easy bruising. Signs and symptoms include:
Bleeding gums
.
Nosebleeds (epistaxis)
that are hard to stop.
Heavy periods (menorrhagia)
.
Bloody pee (hematuria)
or
bloody stools
.
Ongoing bleeding after an injury, surgical procedure or childbirth.
Internal bleeding (in your GI tract, tissue,
muscles
or
joints
).
Bleeding in your brain (
intracranial bleeding
).
Spontaneous bleeding (bleeding for no apparent reason).
Symptom severity and when they show up vary. For example, infants born with severe factor VII deficiency may get diagnosed at birth. People with mild symptoms may not learn there’s an issue until adulthood.
Advertisement
What causes factor VII deficiency?
Factor VII deficiency is primarily an inherited disorder, although there is a form you can acquire over time.
If you’re born with factor VII deficiency, that means you inherited a
mutation
(error) on your
F7
gene. This gene controls how your body makes factor VII. To have factor VII deficiency, you must inherit a mutation from both biological parents. This is called
autosomal recessive inheritance
. If both parents have the mutation, there’s a 25% chance they’ll have a child with factor VII deficiency.
The form of factor VII deficiency you develop over time is called acquired factor VII deficiency. Potential causes include:
Liver disease
. Your
liver
makes factor VII protein. Severe liver disease can prevent your liver from doing this work.
Vitamin K deficiency
. Vitamin K is a key ingredient your body needs to make factor VII. Not having enough can lead to factor VII deficiency.
Blood-thinning medications
. Taking
warfarin (Coumadin®)
or other blood thinners can lead to factor VII deficiency.
Blood cell disorders and cancer
. Studies report cases of people with
aplastic anemia
and
leukemia
who’ve developed factor VII deficiency.
What are the complications of factor VII deficiency?
In severe cases, untreated factor VII deficiency can lead to other health problems, like:
Anemia
. Too much blood loss can cause your red blood cell levels to dip too low.
Damaged joints
. Bleeding in your joints can wear down the tissue so you have less range of motion.
Hematomas
. A hematoma is a collection of congealed blood that forms beneath your skin. Large hematomas can place pressure on nearby organs and lead to painful symptoms.
Severe
blood loss
can be life-threatening without treatment. This is why it’s crucial to seek care if you’re experiencing blood loss that won’t ease up.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is factor VII deficiency diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will ask questions about your symptoms and your family history of bleeding disorders. Providers check for factor VII deficiency using
blood tests
that assess how effectively your blood clots. Tests include:
Prothrombin time (PT/INR) test
. This test measures how quickly blood forms clots based on the action of a clotting factor called prothrombin. Clotting usually takes longer than normal if you have factor VII deficiency.
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT) test
. This test checks clotting time based on the action of clotting factors other than prothrombin. Results are usually normal with factor VII deficiency.
Factor VII assay
: This test shows how factor VII protein is working.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is factor VII deficiency treated?
Treatment usually involves adding functioning factor VII to your blood. You’ll likely work with a blood disorders specialist called a
hematologist
to determine the type of treatment you’ll need and how often you’ll need it.
Treatments include:
Recombinant factor VIIa
(NovoSeven®)
: This medicine is U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved to treat factor VII deficiency. Scientists make it in a lab, which means that, unlike other factor VII replacement options, it doesn’t come from human-donated blood.
Prothrombin complex concentrates (PCC)
: This treatment contains high concentrations of four clotting factors taken from donated blood, including factor VII.
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP)
: You may need IV infusions of
plasma
to help build up your store of factor VII.
Other treatments include:
Antifibrinolytic agents
: These medications prevent your body from breaking down blood clots. Preserving the blood clots you do have prevents excessive bleeding. Types include
aminocaproic acid
and
tranexamic acid
.
Birth control pills
: Some types of
birth control pills
prevent heavy period bleeding.
Vitamin K supplements or injections
: Getting more vitamin K can help your body make more factor VII if your condition is related to a vitamin K deficiency.
Advertisement
Complications/side effects of the treatment
Treatments that add factor VII to your blood can sometimes lead to complications. Still, it’s important to remember that your healthcare provider is aware of the risks and will take steps to prevent them.
Potential complications of factor VII treatment may include:
Harmful blood clots
: Adding factor VII may increase your risk of clots that can block blood vessels. Your provider will monitor your medication dosage to reduce this risk.
Exposure to pathogens
: Receiving donated blood always comes with the risk of being exposed to harmful pathogens (like
viruses
or
bacteria
) in the blood. Providers screen blood products carefully to prevent this.
Transfusion reactions
: You may develop an allergic reaction to donated plasma.
Plasma overload
: Factor VII breaks down and leaves your bloodstream fast. You may need large amounts of plasma to counteract this effect so enough factor VII stays in your body. This can lead to too much plasma in your system. Potential effects of a plasma overload include
high blood pressure
and swelling in your lungs (
pulmonary edema
).
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have factor VII deficiency?
Factor VII deficiency is a lifelong condition. But even though there’s no
cure
, you can work with your healthcare provider to manage it.
Advertisement
One of the biggest challenges in determining prognosis is that there’s no way to predict symptom severity based on how low your factor VII levels are. Instead, providers work with people with this deficiency on a case-by-case basis. Your outlook depends on your unique experience, including what’s causing the deficiency, your response to treatment and how severe your bleeding tends to be.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
It’s essential that you let all healthcare providers know of your condition. If your child has factor VII deficiency, make sure their caregivers (including teachers and daycare workers) know.
Ask your provider about the day-to-day things you can do to care for yourself. They may recommend that you:
Avoid high-risk activities
. You may need to avoid activities that increase your risk of an injury, like contact sports.
Avoid certain medications
. You may need to steer clear of medicines that thin your blood, including
aspirin
,
NSAIDs
and
SSRI
anti-depressants. You may need to avoid taking fish oil,
vitamin E
and turmeric supplements, which can also cause worsening bleeding.
Have your treatment plan letter with you
. Be sure to carry paperwork from your hematologist outlining what healthcare workers should do to care for you in an emergency.
Get genetic counseling or
testing
. Before trying for a baby, you may choose to work with a genetic counselor to assess the risks of passing along factor VII deficiency to your child.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your provider if you or your child show signs of prolonged bleeding or frequent bruising. Things like nosebleeds and the occasional bruise are facts of life. But in excess, they could be a sign of a blood disorder.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room (ER) if your blood loss poses risks to your health. Signs include:
A nosebleed lasting an hour or more.
Bleeding through two or more pads or tampons every hour for two or more hours.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask your provider include:
Is my factor VII deficiency genetic or acquired?
What treatments will I need?
How often will I need treatments?
What potential treatment side effects should I know about?
What lifestyle changes should I make to manage my condition?
Additional Common Questions
Is factor VII deficiency the same as hemophilia?
Factor VII deficiency and
hemophilia
are two separate (but related) inherited blood disorders. But while factor VII deficiency involves having too little factor VII (7) protein, the most common type of hemophilia (
hemophilia A
) involves having too little factor VIII (8) protein.
Hemophilia A is more common than factor VII deficiency, affecting about 1 in 100,000 people. It’s also more likely to affect
males
.
But the most important takeaway is that both conditions can lead to excessive blood loss and require close management with the help of a healthcare provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
There’s no way to prevent being born with a factor VII deficiency, a blood clotting disorder. But this doesn’t mean that you (or your child) can’t live a healthy, active life with this condition. Your hematologist can advise you on ways to prevent and manage bleeding. And they can help you have a plan in place so you know what to do if you’re experiencing too much blood loss.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Living with a noncancerous blood disorder can be exhausting. But there’s hope. Cleveland Clinic’s benign hematology experts provide personalized care and support.
Benign Hematology Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/15/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials