Ablation Therapy: Procedure Details
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Ablation Therapy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ablation Therapy
Ablation therapy uses extreme heat (radiofrequency ablation) or cold (cryoablation) to destroy diseased tissue. Providers use ablative procedures to treat cancers, arrhythmias, bleeding problems and other issues. This less invasive alternative to major surgery has fewer risks and a faster recovery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
There are many kinds of ablation, but they fit into two main types: radiofrequency ablation and cryoablation.
What is ablation therapy?
Ablation therapy is a treatment that uses extreme cold or heat to destroy (ablate) diseased tissue. Some healthcare providers call it ablative therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Ablation therapy is a minimally invasive procedure. Your provider can use ablation without open, major surgery. It has a faster recovery time than typical surgery.
Types of ablation
Ablation therapy destroys cells that cause health conditions or dangerous symptoms.
There are lots of specific kinds of ablation therapy. But they all fit into two main types:
Cryoablation
.
Cryoablation uses extremely cold gas to destroy diseased tissue. Tissue freezes and thaws, starving cells of
blood
and oxygen. Providers sometimes call this
cryotherapy
or cryosurgery.
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA)
. RFA uses intense heat from electrical radio waves to destroy cells. Your provider might use microwave ablation (MWA) or lasers to generate the heat.
What does ablation therapy treat?
Healthcare providers use ablation therapy to treat many conditions throughout your body, including:
Cancer
.
Providers use ablation to treat many types of cancer. It’s also a common treatment to remove precancerous tissue that can cause
skin cancer
or
cervical cancer
. Your provider can destroy abnormal cells before they become cancer. Providers use ablation to treat certain types of
prostate
and
kidney cancer
, too.
Heart rhythm problems
.
Cardiac ablation
is ablation therapy for your
heart
. It can restore a normal heartbeat when you have a heart rhythm problem (
arrhythmia
). There are a few different types of cardiac ablation, depending on what’s causing the arrhythmia.
Heavy menstrual bleeding (
menorrhagia
)
.
You might need
endometrial ablation
if you have frequent heavy menstrual bleeding. It destroys a targeted amount of the lining in your
uterus
to reduce the heavy bleeding during your period.
Pain
.
Your provider might suggest ablation to help you manage
chronic pain
. They’ll destroy specific cells that cause chronic pain or make it worse.
Seizure disorders
.
Ablation can treat
epilepsy
and other seizure disorders. Your provider can destroy the cells in your
brain
that cause
seizures
.
Varicose veins
.
Providers use
endovenous thermal ablation
to manage
varicose veins
. They’ll seal off your affected
blood vessels
to restore blood flow to healthy veins.
Advertisement
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for ablation therapy?
It depends on which type of ablation therapy you need. Your provider will give you specific prep instructions based on your unique situation.
You might have to avoid eating and drinking (fast) for a few hours before your ablation appointment.
Tell your provider which medications and
over-the-counter supplements
you take. They’ll tell you if you need to stop taking any of them before your procedure.
You probably won’t be able to drive yourself home. Make a plan for someone to pick you up, or arrange transportation ahead of time.
What happens during ablation?
The exact steps of your procedure will depend on where in your body you need ablation and which condition your provider is treating. In general, the steps include:
Anesthesia
. Your provider may numb the area around where you need ablation with a local anesthesia. You might need general anesthesia for some types. This means an
anesthesiologist
will put you to sleep so you don’t feel anything during the procedure.
Punctures or incisions
.
Your provider will make small holes (punctures) or cuts (incisions) in your skin. They’ll insert the ablation device through your skin to reach the cells that need to be destroyed. The ablation device is a handheld wand with thin wires (probes) that carry either cold or heat.
Imaging tests to guide the procedure
.
Your provider will use an imaging test to give them real-time pictures of the inside of your body. This will help them guide the ablation device and reach the correct cells. They may use
ultrasound
,
MRI
,
CT scan
,
fluoroscopy
or a
laparoscope
to guide the probes.
How long does ablation take?
It depends on which type of procedure you need.
For example, ablation inside an organ like your brain, heart or uterus will take longer than a procedure to remove precancerous skin cells.
Your provider will tell you what to expect ahead of time.
What happens after?
Some types of ablations are outpatient procedures. That means you can go home the same day. More complex ablations are usually inpatient, which means you’ll have to spend at least one night in the hospital.
Either way, you’ll need to spend a few hours in a recovery area after your procedure. Your care team will monitor your
vital signs
and pain levels.
They’ll tell you when it’s safe for you to go home.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of ablation therapy?
Ablation therapy is less invasive than open, major surgery. If you have cancer, you can continue other treatments like
chemotherapy
at the same time.
Other benefits include:
Faster recovery with less pain and bleeding than open surgery
Shorter hospital stays (or no hospitalization)
Smaller incisions and minimal
scarring
What are the risks and side effects?
Ablation therapy is a safe procedure that has fewer risks than major surgery. However, complications can occur, including:
Blood clots
Bruising
Damage to blood vessels,
nerves
or nearby organs
Hemorrhage
(bleeding)
Infections
Scarring
Stroke
or
heart attack
(these severe complications are rare)
Advertisement
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time for an ablation?
Each kind of ablation has a slightly different recovery time. Recovery can take anywhere from a few days to a few weeks.
You might have to stay home from work or school for a few days after an ablation to rest.
Your provider will give you a specific recovery timeline, including:
How to prevent infections (you may need to take antibiotics)
Instructions on managing your pain with prescription or over-the-counter medications
Weight lifting limits (you may need to avoid lifting objects heavier than a few pounds for a while)
When it’s safe to resume physical activity or exercise
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your healthcare provider right away if you experience any of the following:
Excessive bleeding
Nausea
and
vomiting
Severe pain
Signs of infection like
fever
, discharge at your surgery site, discolored skin or a feeling of heat or warmth
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ablation therapy may sound intimidating. But it’s a safe, effective way for your healthcare provider to treat lots of conditions. They might even be able to use ablation to destroy dangerous cells before they can hurt you.
Ask your provider any questions you have before your procedure. Because ablation can be used in so many ways to treat so many conditions, general information you read ahead of time probably won’t cover every aspect of your exact procedure. Your provider will fill in the gaps and help you understand what they’ll do and how it will help you feel better.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointment Center
216.445.7050
Appointments & Locations