Functional Incontinence: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Risks
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Functional Incontinence
Advertisement
Advertisement
Functional Incontinence
Functional incontinence is when you lose control of your bladder, usually because of another health condition. However, physical obstacles that prevent you from getting to the bathroom on time can also cause functional incontinence. Treatment includes treating its cause, controlling leaks or making it easier to reach the bathroom.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is functional incontinence?
Functional incontinence is a type of
urinary incontinence
in which you lose control of your bladder, usually because another condition makes it difficult to get to a bathroom in time or prevents you from recognizing that you need to pee.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Another name for functional incontinence is functional urinary incontinence.
How common is functional incontinence?
In general, urinary incontinence is common. About 30 million people in the United States have some type of urinary incontinence, which may include functional incontinence.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs of functional incontinence?
Signs of functional incontinence may include:
Regularly leaking or dribbling pee (urine).
Involuntarily fully emptying your bladder.
Inability to hold your pee long enough to get to a bathroom.
The smell of pee on your clothes or around your house.
What is the cause of functional incontinence?
There are many possible causes of functional incontinence. Some causes include:
Conditions that affect how your brain processes thoughts (cognitive disorders), including
dementia
,
delirium
and intellectual disabilities.
Conditions that affect your
brain
,
spinal cord
or the
nerves
throughout your body (neurological disorders), including
multiple sclerosis
(MS),
Parkinson’s disease
and
stroke
.
Conditions that affect your muscles and make it hard or impossible to get to the bathroom or remove clothing, including
arthritis
.
Weak bladder or pelvic floor muscles.
Physical barriers, including stairs, poor lighting that makes it difficult to see or large crowds.
Thinning or irritation in
vaginal
tissues.
Medicines that affect your ability to process thoughts, such as
sleeping pills
.
Medicines that make you pee more often (
diuretics
).
Urinary tract infections
(UTIs).
Constipation
.
Advertisement
Who gets functional incontinence?
You’re at a greater risk of functional incontinence if you:
Have a cognitive disorder.
Have a neurological disorder.
Have a condition that affects your muscles or joints.
Take diuretics or medications that make you drowsy or sleepy.
Are 65 or older; functional incontinence is the most common type of urinary incontinence in residents of nursing homes.
Aren’t physically active.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is functional incontinence diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can diagnose functional incontinence. They’ll perform a
physical examination
and ask questions, which may include:
Are you currently receiving treatment for other conditions?
What’s your diet like?
How often do you eat?
How much do you drink each day?
What do you drink each day?
Do you drink alcohol or caffeine?
How often do you exercise?
What sort of exercises do you do?
Are you able to move around comfortably?
They may also order tests to help determine the cause of your functional incontinence.
What tests will be done to diagnose functional incontinence?
Your healthcare provider may order or perform the following tests to help confirm their diagnosis or determine the cause of your functional incontinence:
Urinalysis
. You’ll pee into a special container. Your provider will then examine the sample for signs of infection.
Pelvic floor dysfunction tests
. These tests measure how well your
pelvic floor muscles
work.
Urodynamic testing
. Urodynamic testing measures how well your nerves and muscles work. It also measures how strong your pee stream is and if there’s any pressure in or around your bladder.
Your provider may also refer you to a doctor who specializes in conditions that affect your urinary tract and reproductive system (
urologist
) or a doctor who treats
women
with pelvic floor dysfunction (urogynecologist).
Management and Treatment
How do you reduce functional incontinence?
Reducing or treating functional incontinence depends on its cause.
For example, if arthritis makes it difficult or painful to unbutton or unzip clothing, it’s a good idea to wear clothes that are easy to take off. If you have a UTI, a healthcare provider can prescribe
antibiotics
to kill the bacteria. If medications cause functional incontinence, ask your provider if there are alternative medicines you can take.
Other treatments that may help reduce functional incontinence include:
Incontinence pads or underwear (Depends®)
. You can wear incontinence underwear or line your regular underwear with incontinence pads to absorb leaks.
Bladder training
. You go to the bathroom at set times (usually every two hours) throughout the day to stop your bladder from getting too full, even if you don’t have to pee. Another name for bladder training is timed voiding.
Urinary catheter
. A urinary catheter is a flexible tube that a provider inserts into your urethra up to your bladder. It allows your bladder to drain pee into a bag outside your body.
Condom catheter
. A condom catheter fits over your penis to collect pee in a bag outside your body.
Pelvic floor physical therapy
. Pelvic floor physical therapy is a type of treatment that helps strengthen your pelvic floor muscles. Strengthening your pelvic floor muscles can help prevent leaks while you’re getting to the bathroom.
Kegel exercises
are a common type of pelvic floor exercise.
Advertisement
When you’re at home, it’s a good idea to ensure you have a clear path to the bathroom. Make sure the doors are open and clean up any clutter that could slow you down or make you trip. If you have trouble seeing, install extra lights around your house or carry a small flashlight in your pocket. If you’re in public, note where the bathrooms are before you need to pee.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have functional incontinence?
If you have a chronic (long-lasting) condition that causes functional incontinence, you may have functional incontinence for the rest of your life. In these cases, talk to a healthcare provider about the best ways to manage your symptoms.
Prevention
Can functional incontinence be prevented?
You can’t prevent the muscular, neurological or cognitive conditions that may cause functional incontinence.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
The following tips can help you take care of yourself if you have functional incontinence:
Keep a bladder diary
. A bladder diary helps track how much you drink, what you eat and drink, how much you pee, how long it takes you to pee and how often you pee. This information can help you during bladder training.
Avoid foods and drinks that can irritate your bladder
. Caffeine, alcohol, soda pop, spicy foods, chocolate, tomatoes and citrus juices can irritate your bladder and make you pee more often.
Maintain a healthy weight for you
. Losing weight in your abdominal area can help reduce pressure on your bladder.
Walk regularly
. Walking can help you recognize when your bladder is getting full and when you should start looking for a bathroom. Aim to walk for at least 30 minutes each day.
Quit smoking
. Quitting smoking may help reduce functional incontinence.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider as soon as you develop symptoms of functional incontinence. They can help you determine its cause and help avoid accidental leaks.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
What’s causing my functional incontinence?
What tests will you order to confirm functional incontinence?
When will I get the test results?
Are there any activities I should avoid?
What foods and drinks should I avoid?
How should I take care of myself at home?
How should I take care of myself when I’m away from home?
Are there any other symptoms I should look out for?
Additional Common Questions
What are the types of urinary incontinence?
There are many different types of urinary incontinence, including functional incontinence. Some other types of urinary incontinence include:
Overflow incontinence
. Overflow incontinence is when your bladder is full, but you can’t empty it completely. You may leak or dribble pee because your bladder is full, but you don’t realize you need to use the bathroom.
Stress incontinence
. Sudden pressure (stress) on your bladder causes you to unintentionally pee. Some common causes include sneezing, coughing, laughing, lifting heavy objects and certain physical activities.
Urge incontinence
. Urge incontinence is a sudden, uncontrollable need (urge) to pee, but you can’t make it to the bathroom in time.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Functional incontinence can interrupt your life. Even though it’s common, it can make you feel self-conscious or embarrassed. You may even refrain from participating in your everyday activities because you’re afraid you can’t get to a bathroom quickly. Talk to a healthcare provider if you or a loved one have signs of functional incontinence. They can help identify the cause and recommend ways to control or prevent leaks.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
It can be stressful (and painful) to have bladder disorders, like urinary incontinence or cystitis. But the urology providers at Cleveland Clinic are here for you.
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/28/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment