Eye Drops: Types, Uses, Potential Risks & Benefits
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Eye Drops
Advertisement
Advertisement
Eye Drops
Eye drops are liquid medications that you can put in your eyes a drop at a time. There are many types of eye drops. Knowing which type to use and how to use them safely is essential to taking good care of your eye health. And knowing how and when NOT to use eye drops can be just as important.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Details
Overview
Eye drops are solutions you put onto your eyes. Depending on the ingredients, they can treat many eye issues and conditions.
What are eye drops?
Eye drops are liquid solutions you put on the surface of your
eyes
, a drop or two at a time. Eye drops are topical, meaning you simply put them on your eyes’ surface. Once there, they can do their job.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Eye drop solutions can contain a variety of different medications and beneficial substances. And because eye drops contain different combinations of ingredients or medications, they can treat many different eye conditions, symptoms and concerns.
What do eye drops do?
Eye drops can do different jobs depending on what’s in them. Some ingredients in eye drops are common in over-the-counter (OTC) drops, while others come in prescription drops only.
What can OTC eye drops do?
OTC eye drops can have ingredients that do the following:
Reduce eye discharge.
Ingredients called astringents break down mucus and reduce eye discharge.
Lubricate your eyes.
Ingredients known as demulcents, like in
artificial tears
, reduce friction so parts of your eyes move more smoothly.
Soften tissues around your eyes.
Emollients help soften tissues that are cracked or dry (but eye drops use special ones that aren’t like what’s in hand lotion).
Treat red eye and inflammation.
Vasoconstrictors
reduce blood flow to surface
capillaries
, easing eye redness and inflammation.
Balance fluid levels.
Some eye drops keep fluid levels in your eye in a proper range.
Irrigate and flush.
Some eye drop formulations are best for rinsing your eyes (and are safer for your eyes than water from a tap or other sources).
Advertisement
What can prescription eye drops do?
Prescription eye drops have ingredients that do the following:
Numb
your eyes.
Anesthetics
numb your eyes or reduce
eye pain
.
Get rid of
bacteria
.
Antibiotics
are the main treatment for bacterial eye infections.
Reduce
allergic
response.
Antihistamines
treat allergy-related symptoms like eye itching.
Reduce
inflammation
.
Corticosteroids
are a common example of anti-inflammatory drugs found in eye drops.
Dilate your pupils.
Some drops temporarily make your pupils larger and keep your eyes from focusing up close. This can help with eye exams or when treating certain
iris
-related conditions.
Limit immune activity.
These medications can prevent damage from malfunctions in your immune system.
Lower
eye pressure
.
These medications can help prevent and treat glaucoma.
Help your eyes repair themselves.
Serum eye drops can include compounds that make it easier for your eyes to heal.
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of eye drops?
There are many advantages and benefits to using eye drops, and they vary widely depending on which type of drops you use, why you use them and how well they work.
Some of the general advantages of eye drops include:
They can be highly effective
. The right type of eye drop can make a huge difference in improving how your eyes feel and recovering from any conditions or issues.
They’re generally safe
. Prescription eye drops get the most scrutiny from government agencies that regulate medications, like the FDA in the U.S. OTC eye drops also have safety regulations, but these aren’t as strict.
They’re easy to use
. An eye care specialist or pharmacist can show you how to apply drops safely and properly.
What are the potential disadvantages of eye drops?
There are a few things everyone should be aware of when it comes to eye drops:
They may mask underlying conditions
. Eye drops may treat symptoms of a condition but not the condition itself. In those cases, they simply hide the symptoms while the condition causing them remains or even worsens. Drops that treat red eye are a key example of this. They get rid of redness for a while, but it can come back (and might be even worse). That’s one reason you shouldn’t use them without talking to an eye specialist first.
The wrong eye drops can make issues worse
. Some eye symptoms happen with conditions that are nothing alike. An example would be eye pain from glaucoma vs. from dry eye. In these cases, using the wrong type of eye drop can make conditions last longer or get worse.
They bypass your eye’s main defenses
. Your eyes are especially vulnerable to damage from germs and harmful substances. If something’s wrong with the eye drops you use, that can put your eyes at risk for serious complications.
Manufacturer noncompliance
. Some companies that make eye drops cut corners or don’t follow regulations meant to protect consumers from harm. And some sellers make and sell eye drops purely for profit without following regulations that are in place to keep you safe.
Advertisement
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
It’s a good idea to talk to your eye care specialist if you experience any eye issues that you think eye drops might be able to treat. An eye specialist can determine if the condition is treatable with eye drops and recommend specific types of products.
You should also call or see your eye specialist if:
Any eye drops you’re taking lose effectiveness or stop working altogether.
You notice any side effects that are enough to be troubling or disruptive (especially unexpected side effects).
You have any questions about how to store or use your eye drops.
Additional Details
Are eye drops healthy for your eyes?
There’s no universal way to answer this question because of all the factors in play.
Think of eye drops like tools in a tool set. You have different tools for different jobs or purposes. Using the wrong tool for the job may just keep you from doing what you wanted, or it could have the opposite effect and cause harm instead. This is why talking to an eye care specialist is so important. They can tell you which eye drop product is best for you. They can also guide you on avoiding eye drops that won’t help or will cause harm.
Check for recalls
In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates all eye drop products. They regularly issue updates about recalls and other safety-related eye drop issues. If you live outside the U.S., contact your healthcare provider or government agencies that oversee medication and medical product safety. This information changes frequently, so it’s a good idea to check recalls before you buy new eye drops.
Advertisement
What should I look for when buying eye drops?
The answer to this question varies. You should always look for eye drops that treat the issue you’re having. And always be sure to read the labels closely. Some other things are ones you should definitely avoid when buying eye drops.
Don’t use OTC eye drops for conditions that need prescription medications
Some conditions are too serious for OTC eye drops to treat. Conditions that have no OTC treatment include:
Cataracts
.
Glaucoma
.
Retinal diseases
like
macular degeneration
.
Diabetes-related eye diseases like
diabetes-related retinopathy
and
diabetes-related macular edema
.
Don’t use OTC drops with certain ingredients, labeling or packaging issues
Eye drops in the U.S. should never contain the following:
Silver sulfate (also known as argentum). This can cause an irreversible change in the color of the
sclera
, the white of your eye.
Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM). Using this drug in eye drops is illegal in the U.S.
Eye drops that include the word “homeopathic” on the label. Marketing these products for sale is illegal in the U.S.
What should I know to use eye drops safely?
Some important things to know about using eye drops include:
Wash your hands
before putting drops in.
Your eyes are particularly vulnerable to infection, especially when your hands are so close to your eyes when putting drops in.
Use drops prescribed for you exactly as instructed
. Don’t use someone else’s prescription eye drops. It’s important to follow prescription instructions closely to get the best effects. If you have questions or concerns about how to use your eye drops, ask your eye specialist.
Don’t use eye drops for other places on your body, and vice versa.
While some home or folk remedies say you can use some eye/ear products interchangeably, doing this can be dangerous. And remember that eye drop and ear drop bottles may look alike, so be extra cautious if you’re taking multiple types of drops.
Always close the cap on your eye drops.
Uncapped or unclosed eye drop bottles are at risk for contamination from
germs
and harmful substances. And some eye drops contain ingredients that are good for your eyes but can make you (or children and pets) sick if you ingest them.
Don’t touch the dropper tip to your eye.
You can contaminate your eye drop bottle if the tip touches your eye. Germs that contaminate eye drops can lead to dangerous infections and permanent eye damage.
Don’t use expired eye drops
. Eye drops have a shelf life. After that time limit expires, the ingredients in the eye drops may not be effective. Expired eye drops may not work or could cause unwanted complications.
Use caution when you buy
. You might think about buying eye drops online because they’re less expensive, but make sure you’re buying from a reputable seller.
Practice makes perfect
. If you’re having trouble putting drops in your eyes, you’re far from alone. Your eyes automatically and reflexively blink when something touches your eyelashes or eye surface. While that reflex is there to protect you, it might be frustrating if it makes it hard to put drops in your eyes or the eyes of someone you’re caring for. Be patient, and if it continues to be an issue, talk to your eye specialist. They may be able to help.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When your eyes hurt or are bothering you for some reason, it may feel hard to focus on anything else. All you know is you’ll go to great lengths to make your eyes feel better. Eye drops may help you, but it’s important to use them properly and safely.
“Over-the-counter” doesn’t mean eye drops are automatically safe. Be sure to talk to your eye care specialist to make sure you’re getting the right product and using it correctly. That way, you can focus on feeling better, drop by drop.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Getting an annual eye exam at Cleveland Clinic can help you catch vision problems early and keep your eyes healthy for years to come.
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/19/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment