Carotid Artery Stenting: Procedure & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Carotid Artery Stenting
Advertisement
Advertisement
Carotid Artery Stenting
Carotid artery stenting is a minimally invasive procedure to treat carotid artery stenosis and prevent stroke. A stent in your carotid artery increases blood flow to your brain. Carotid artery stenting has some advantages over a more invasive procedure, but it also has risks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Carotid Artery Stenosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Carotid artery stenting uses a small metal tube to keep your artery open for better blood flow to your brain.
What is carotid artery stenting?
Carotid artery stenting is a procedure to prevent a
stroke
. A healthcare provider can perform this procedure if a carotid ultrasound,
CT scan
or
MRI
shows you have a blockage in your
carotid artery
. Your carotid arteries are blood vessels that supply
blood
to your brain, face and neck. Sometimes, a fatty material (plaque) builds up in your arteries and causes a blockage.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A healthcare provider can put in a
stent
(a small, metal mesh tube) to open the blockage. Putting a stent in your carotid artery keeps it open to allow better blood flow to your
brain
. This lowers your risk of a stroke.
The stent stays in place permanently. It acts as a scaffold to support the artery and keep it open. After several weeks, the carotid artery heals around the stent.
Depending on what part of your carotid artery has the blockage, a provider will use a specially designed stent that is specifically approved for this purpose. The place where your carotid artery branches to supply your face and brain is the most common place for a blockage to happen.
A specially trained provider performs carotid artery stenting. This can be an
interventional cardiologist
,
vascular surgeon
, endovascular
neurosurgeon
, interventional neuroradiologist or
neurologist
. They can access your carotid artery by way of an artery in your leg or arm or through your neck (where your carotid artery is). Your provider can tell you which method is best for you.
What does it treat?
A carotid artery stenting procedure treats
carotid artery stenosis
(narrowing). The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved carotid artery stents beginning in 2004. People who get this procedure usually have:
Advertisement
Stroke or ministroke symptoms from a carotid artery blockage of more than 50%
A carotid artery blockage of 70% or more without symptoms
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for carotid artery stenting?
You may need to take
aspirin
and a second antiplatelet medicine (like
clopidogrel
, ticagrelor or prasugrel) for three to five days before your carotid artery stenting procedure and continue after the procedure. Failure to take these medicines will require a delay in performing your procedure. Your provider will give you specific instructions about what you can and can’t eat or drink before the procedure, too.
What happens during carotid artery stenting?
Your healthcare provider may perform one of two types of carotid artery stenting:
Transfemoral
or transradial percutaneous carotid artery stenting
Transcarotid artery revascularization
(TCAR)
The type determines how they’ll access your carotid artery. The procedures are somewhat similar except for the access point and the way they deal with plaque particles. Your provider will choose the best option for you.
Access points for each procedure are:
Transfemoral carotid artery stenting:
Through your
femoral artery
in your leg
Transradial percutaneous carotid artery stenting:
Through your
brachial
or
radial artery
in your arm
TCAR or transcarotid arterial revascularization:
Through your carotid artery just above your collarbone
During the procedure, you’ll receive medication like heparin or
bivalirudin
to reduce the risk of blood clots. You’ll need to keep the site of entry (leg or arm) straight and still for two to six hours after the procedure.
How long does it take?
A carotid artery stenting procedure usually takes about one to two hours. However, the preparation and recovery time add several hours. You can expect to stay at the hospital all day for the procedure and will stay overnight.
What happens after carotid artery stenting?
After a provider places the carotid artery stent, they’ll:
Perform an
angiogram
to confirm that the stent expanded completely and that it corrected the narrowing or blockage.
Remove the sheath, catheter and any other tools. The stent will stay in permanently.
Give you medication to reduce discomfort.
Check in on you and give you tests to see how well the procedure worked.
Discuss the results of the carotid artery procedure with you and your family.
Give you instructions about your medications, meals and activity.
Prescribe aspirin and a second
antiplatelet medicine
(clopidogrel, ticagrelor, or prasugrel) to take after the procedure. These medications help prevent
blood clots
from forming at the site of the carotid artery stent placement.
Follow your healthcare provider’s instructions about how and when to take these medications. Don’t stop taking them without first talking to your provider. They’ll determine how long you’ll need to take these medications, but it will be at least one month. But in many cases, it’s at least six months.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Carotid Artery Stenosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of carotid artery stenting?
People who have carotid artery stenting instead of a
carotid endarterectomy
have these benefits:
A less invasive approach
Smaller incisions or no incision
Less risk of nerve damage in the neck
Less pain after their procedure
How successful is this procedure?
For most people, carotid artery stents increase blood flow to their brains and decrease their risk of a stroke.
Researchers have compared the results of the carotid stenting procedure with that of the carotid endarterectomy surgery. Studies have found that there were no significant differences in major risks of the two treatments through 10 years.
However, people who get a stent in their carotid artery may be more likely to have a minor stroke. But they also don’t have the risks of
nerve
damage.
Both treatments have similar rates of restenosis (an artery getting narrow again). This can happen in the first two years due to scar tissue or later from the process of
atherosclerosis
or hardening of the arteries. Both treatments have a likelihood of being a lifetime repair in over 95% of cases.
What you can do to improve your prognosis
Although the carotid stenting procedure opens up a blocked carotid artery, it doesn’t
cure
carotid artery disease. You’ll still need to focus on reducing your risk factors and making certain lifestyle changes to prevent atherosclerosis from developing or getting worse.
Advertisement
For the best results, follow these recommendations:
Avoid all tobacco products, including
vaping
.
Take medications as prescribed.
Stay at a weight that’s healthy for you.
Get regular physical activity.
Follow a heart-healthy meal plan.
Manage
blood pressure
(under 130), cholesterol (
LDL
under 70) and
diabetes
(HgBA1c below 7).
Go to follow-up visits as your provider recommends.
Have follow-up imaging of your repair and the opposite carotid artery with ultrasounds.
What are the risks or complications of carotid artery stenting?
Some of the possible carotid artery stenting risks include:
Hypotension
Hypertension
Bradycardia
Bleeding at the catheter insertion site
Bleeding at your neck incision site for TCAR
Damage to your leg artery, arm artery or carotid artery
Blood clots
Stroke
Brain bleeding
Death
There may be other possible carotid artery stenting complications. When you meet with your healthcare provider, ask questions to make sure you understand the potential risks and benefits of the procedure. Certain risk factors may make you ineligible for carotid artery stenting.
Carotid artery stenting risks vary depending on:
The severity of your disease.
The location of the blockage.
Whether you’ve had a previous stroke.
The presence of other medical conditions.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time?
You’ll need to take it easy for a few days after the carotid artery stenting procedure.
Advertisement
Follow these guidelines:
No heavy lifting (more than 20 pounds) for one week after the procedure.
No soaking (meaning no sitting in a bath or going swimming) the area of skin puncture for seven days. Showering is OK.
Use a slower pace when climbing stairs.
Gradually increase your activities until you reach your normal activity level by the end of the week.
If you have
bruising
in your groin, arm or neck area, it should go away in a week or less.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
It’s important to call 911 or emergency services if you have stroke symptoms similar to what you experienced before your carotid artery stenting procedure. This includes facial asymmetry, any speech issues (like an inability to talk), or an inability to move or feel parts of your body.
If you have any bleeding or drainage from the puncture site, call your provider as soon as possible.
Scar tissue
at the treatment site can cause another blockage, or
restenosis
. This re-narrowing in the treated carotid artery is more likely to occur in the first 24 months after treatment. Providers check for this with a
carotid ultrasound
. This is why keeping your follow-up appointments is important. Various studies estimate the rate of restenosis at 11% to 40%. However, significant narrowing requiring retreatment occurs in less than 5% of cases.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Talk with your provider about which treatment for carotid artery stenosis is best for you. Carotid artery stenting is a good option for some people, but a different procedure may be better for others. If you end up having a carotid artery stenting procedure, using a facility that does a lot of them can give you peace of mind. It’s important that the provider doing the procedure has performed them many times. Don’t be afraid to ask your doctor questions about their experience and your concerns.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When the carotid arteries in your neck are blocked, you’re at risk for a stroke. Cleveland Clinic’s experts are world renowned in treating this condition.
Carotid Artery Stenosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment