Hypophosphatemia: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hypophosphatemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hypophosphatemia
Hypophosphatemia is a short-term or chronic condition that happens when you have a low level of phosphate in your blood. While mild hypophosphatemia is somewhat common and usually isn’t a cause for concern, severe hypophosphatemia can be life-threatening and requires medical treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is hypophosphatemia?
Hypophosphatemia happens when you have a low level of phosphate in your blood. Phosphate is an essential
electrolyte
you need for several bodily functions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hypophosphatemia can be mild or severe. It can also be acute (sudden) or chronic (long term).
How does phosphate affect my body?
Phosphate is a charged particle that contains the mineral phosphorus. Your body needs phosphorus for several important bodily functions, including:
Building and repairing your
bones
and
teeth
.
Helping your
nerves
function.
Making your
muscles
contract (tighten).
Approximately 85% of the phosphorus contained in phosphate is found in your bones. The rest is stored in tissues throughout your body. You get phosphorous/phosphate from the foods you eat.
The level of phosphate in your blood affects the level of
calcium in your blood
. Calcium and phosphate react in opposite ways: As blood calcium levels increase, phosphate levels decrease. This takes place minute by minute.
A
hormone
called
parathyroid hormone
(PTH), which your parathyroid glands release, controls the levels of calcium and phosphate in your blood.
How common is hypophosphatemia?
Mild hypophosphatemia is a relatively common finding in laboratory (blood) tests, affecting about 5% of people in the U.S. It’s often an incidental (insignificant) finding and typically doesn’t cause symptoms.
Acute, severe hypophosphatemia is much more common in people with certain conditions, including:
Advertisement
Alcohol use disorder
.
Diabetes-related ketoacidosis
(DKA).
Sepsis
(severe infection).
Burns
.
It affects up to 80% of people with these conditions.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hypophosphatemia?
The symptoms of hypophosphatemia depend on how severe it is.
Most people with mild hypophosphatemia don’t have symptoms. But some people may notice subtle muscle weakness.
Symptoms of severe hypophosphatemia include:
Muscle pain
and
bone pain
.
Severe muscle weakness.
Altered mental status
, such as experiencing confusion or irritability.
Respiratory
or
heart failure
.
Numbness
or weak reflexes.
Seizures
.
Severe hypophosphatemia can result in
coma
and
death
if it’s not treated.
If you’re experiencing symptoms of severe hypophosphatemia, get to the nearest hospital as soon as possible.
Symptoms of chronic hypophosphatemia
Symptoms of mild chronic (long term) hypophosphatemia include:
Bone pain.
Bone fractures
.
Weakness.
Loss of appetite
.
Children with chronic hypophosphatemia often have features of
rickets
, including:
Short stature (height) for their age.
Bowing of leg bones
.
Widening of their wrists and ankles due to bone changes.
It’s important to see your healthcare provider if you or your child has these symptoms.
What causes hypophosphatemia?
Hypophosphatemia has several causes based on whether it’s mild or severe and if it’s acute (sudden) or chronic (long term).
Moderate to severe hypophosphatemia occurs in several medical settings, including the following:
The recovery phase of diabetes-related ketoacidosis (DKA).
Alcohol use disorder and during
alcohol withdrawal
.
Severe burns.
Refeeding syndrome
(potentially fatal shifts in fluids and electrolytes that may happen when you receive food after prolonged starvation).
Severe
respiratory alkalosis
(when your blood doesn’t have enough carbon dioxide).
Causes of chronic hypophosphatemia include:
Increased parathyroid hormone levels, as in
hyperparathyroidism
.
Other hormonal imbalances, like
Cushing’s syndrome
.
Vitamin D deficiency
.
Malnutrition
and conditions that lead to
malabsorption
(like intestinal issues).
Electrolyte imbalances
, like
hypomagnesemia
and
hypokalemia
.
Receiving IV
iron infusions
, especially
ferric carboxymaltose
(FCM), for
iron-deficiency anemia
. This typically only happens with repeated infusions.
Long-term
diuretic
use.
Frequent or excessive use of over-the-counter phosphate-binding
antacids
, including aluminum- calcium- and magnesium-containing antacids.
Theophylline
(a bronchodilator medication) intoxication.
People with advanced
chronic kidney disease
(especially those on
dialysis
) often take
phosphate binders
with meals (prescribed by their kidney specialist) to limit the absorption of dietary phosphate. Long-term use of these binders can cause hypophosphatemia.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hypophosphatemia diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose hypophosphatemia with a simple
blood test
that measures phosphate levels. They’ll diagnose you with hypophosphatemia if your blood phosphate concentration is less than 2.5 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL).
For reference, normal blood phosphate levels are usually 2.5 to 4.5 mg/dL in adults and 4.5 to 6.5 mg/dL in children. But these ranges can vary depending on the laboratory that tests the blood sample.
The cause of hypophosphatemia, especially acute hypophosphatemia, is usually apparent due to your medical history and symptoms.
As hypophosphatemia is often the result of other conditions, your provider will likely order additional tests to find the cause and check your overall health. Additional testing may include:
Other blood tests, like a
kidney function test
, calcium blood test and vitamin D blood test.
Urinalysis
.
Imaging scans.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for hypophosphatemia?
Treatment for hypophosphatemia involves treating the underlying cause and stabilizing blood phosphate levels.
Healthcare providers most often use oral phosphate replacement medication (pills taken by mouth) to treat mild to moderate cases of hypophosphatemia. They may also recommend eating foods high in phosphorus to correct your phosphate levels.
Advertisement
If hypophosphatemia is severe, they provide phosphate replacement through an IV.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for hypophosphatemia?
The prognosis (outlook) for hypophosphatemia depends on whether it’s mild or severe and acute or chronic. Mild cases typically respond well to treatment. Severe acute cases can lead to complications if you don’t get treatment in time.
What are the possible complications of hypophosphatemia?
Without treatment, chronic hypophosphatemia can result in
osteomalacia
— a condition in which you have soft bones that are prone to fracture (breaks).
It’s important to get to the nearest hospital as soon as possible if you’re experiencing symptoms of severe hypophosphatemia, like unexplained muscle pain and altered mental status.
Prevention
How can I prevent hypophosphatemia?
Not all cases of hypophosphatemia are preventable, especially severe and acute cases. But there are steps you can take to prevent mild hypophosphatemia, such as consuming a healthy, balanced diet.
Foods that are high in phosphorus include:
Meats and other proteins, like eggs, chicken, turkey, pork, seafood, and organ meat like liver.
Dairy products, like milk, cheese, cottage cheese and yogurt.
Nuts and seeds, including almonds, cashews, Brazil nuts, pumpkin seeds and sesame seeds.
Always talk to a healthcare provider before making drastic changes to your eating patterns.
Advertisement
If you have a condition that makes it more likely that you’ll develop hypophosphatemia, like hyperparathyroidism, malabsorption issues or vitamin D deficiency, it’s important to see your healthcare provider regularly and follow your treatment plan for that condition. This can help prevent hypophosphatemia.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Phosphate is a very important electrolyte in your blood. Mild hypophosphatemia — a low level of phosphate — is a somewhat common laboratory finding that usually isn’t a cause for concern. Your healthcare provider may recommend eating more sources of phosphorus.
If you have a condition that raises your risk for severe or chronic hypophosphatemia, like alcohol use disorder or intestinal malabsorption, talk to your healthcare provider. Ask how you can prevent hypophosphatemia and the signs to look for. Your provider is your partner in care.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/11/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes