Urinary Tract Infection in Children (Symptoms of UTI in Kids)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) in Kids
Advertisement
Advertisement
Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) in Kids
Urinary tract infections (UTI) in kids can happen when bacteria or other germs get into their bladder, kidneys, ureters or urethra. Symptoms include peeing very little, painful urination, fever, fussiness, belly or back pain, and more. UTIs in kids need treatment from a healthcare provider to prevent serious complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a UTI in Kids?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is a UTI in Kids?
Urinary tract infections
(UTIs) in kids happen when
bacteria
or other
germs
infect your child’s urinary tract. Sometimes, people just call them “bladder infections,” but your
urinary tract
includes your
bladder
,
kidneys
, and the tubes that connect them to each other (ureters) and to the outside of your body (
urethra
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You might hear a bladder infection in your child called a lower UTI or
cystitis
. If your child has an upper UTI, it means they have an infection in one or both kidneys (
pyelonephritis
).
UTIs in kids are common. But they can sometimes go unnoticed, especially if your child is too young to let you know something’s bothering them. Talk to your child’s healthcare provider right away if you notice that your child is eating or drinking less, not peeing much and is fussy or cranky.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of UTIs in kids
Symptoms of a UTI in infants, babies and toddlers include:
Fever
Belly pain
or fullness
Strong, foul-smelling
pee
Weight loss
Irritability
Vomiting
Poor feeding
Fatigue
Yellowish skin or eyes
Diarrhea
Symptoms of a UTI in older kids include:
A frequent,
urgent need to pee
, especially if only a small amount comes out when they go
Daytime accidents or
bedwetting
after being fully potty trained
Painful
or difficult urination
Pain or discomfort in their lower belly, back or side
Pee that smells bad, is cloudy or has
blood in it
Nausea and/or vomiting
Fever and chills
Fatigue
Symptoms of a UTI are the same in both
boys
and girls.
Causes of urinary tract infections in kids
Bacteria cause most UTIs in kids.
E. coli
bacteria
are the most common cause. They live in your
digestive tract
and can get into your urinary tract through your poop. This can happen if you don’t wipe properly after pooping. Sometimes,
fungal infections
can cause UTIs in kids, too, but they’re less common.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Your child might be at higher risk for a UTI if they:
Have
vesicoureteral reflux
, a condition where your pee flows backwards from your bladder towards your kidneys
Are
constipated
, which can block pee from flowing normally
Have differences in their urinary tract (like
posterior urethral valves
or
ureteroceles
)
Hold their pee when they need to go to the bathroom
Female children
are more likely than males to get UTIs because their urethras (the tube that carries pee out of their bodies) are shorter and closer to their anuses (where poop leaves their bodies). This means it’s easier for bacteria to get into the urinary tract and cause an infection.
Can boys get UTIs?
Boys are less likely to get UTIs than girls, but they can get them, too, especially if they have anatomical differences that cause pee to back up. Uncircumcised boys are at a slightly higher risk for UTIs than
circumcised boys
.
Complications of UTIs in kids
If left untreated, UTIs can lead to:
Sepsis
, a serious reaction to an infection that can cause organ failure
Growth faltering
, or not growing as expected
Kidney infection
Kidney (renal) scarring, which can lead to chronic
kidney failure
and other health conditions
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose UTIs in kids
A healthcare provider can diagnose a UTI by asking about your child’s symptoms and getting a sample of their pee for a
urinalysis
or
urine culture
. They may also get
blood tests
to look for infections and test
kidney function
. In some cases, they’ll use imaging (like
ultrasound
or
CT scans
) to look at your child’s kidneys or bladder.
Management and Treatment
How are UTIs in kids treated?
Antibiotics
treat UTIs in kids. A provider will give them to your child through an IV (through a vein in their arm) or your child will take them by mouth (as a pill or liquid).
Recovery time
Your child will need to be on antibiotics for a week or two, in most cases. But they should start to feel better within a couple of days. Make sure they take the entire course of medication as prescribed, even if they feel better.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your child’s healthcare provider if you think your child has a UTI, or if they’ve been taking antibiotics as prescribed for three days and aren’t getting better. Take your child to the emergency room if they:
Have symptoms of a UTI and are under 6 months old
Have a fever and symptoms of a UTI
Aren’t eating or drinking or can’t keep any food or liquids down
Haven’t had a wet diaper in six hours
Have yellowish skin or eyes
Have severe pain
Have bloody pee
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has a UTI?
Your child should start to feel better after a day or two on antibiotics. Make sure they get plenty of rest and stay hydrated by drinking enough fluids. Contact your provider if they don’t feel better after three days of treatment.
Your child may need additional tests if they have frequent UTIs or infections that keep coming back.
Can a child’s UTI go away on its own?
If your child has a UTI, they need to see a healthcare provider and get antibiotic treatment. Left untreated, UTIs can lead to kidney infections and other health issues.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can I prevent my child from getting UTIs?
You can reduce your child’s risk of getting a UTI by:
Changing wet diapers frequently and dirty diapers as soon as possible
Wiping front to back and teaching your child to wipe that way, too (for instance, if your child has a vagina, that means wiping away from the
vulva
toward the butt)
Encouraging your child to go to the bathroom when they need to and not “hold it” if they’re potty trained
Having them wear cotton underwear
Making sure they drink plenty of water
Using gentle soap in the tub — even though bubble baths don’t cause UTIs,
scented soap
can irritate your child’s urethra and make infections more likely
Making sure they poop regularly — talk with your provider if your child has frequent constipation
A note from Cleveland Clinic
UTIs are fairly common in kids. And most of the time, a healthcare provider can easily treat them. If your child isn’t acting like themselves or you notice anything unusual about their bathroom habits, it’s a good idea to check with your family doctor or pediatrician. Quick treatment can prevent serious complications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us