Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF): Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tetralogy of Fallot
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tetralogy of Fallot
Tetralogy of Fallot is a congenital heart condition, which means it’s present at birth. ToF makes it hard to get enough oxygen to your body because of four issues in your heart’s structure. Surgery in infancy repairs the problems and helps blood flow better, but you’ll need lifelong follow-ups with a provider.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Tetralogy of Fallot Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Tetralogy of Fallot?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Tetralogy of Fallot?
A baby born with tetralogy of Fallot has four issues in their heart that cause problems with getting oxygen to their body.
Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) is a condition in which a baby has four abnormalities in their
heart
at birth. These issues make it hard for your baby’s heart to send enough oxygen to their entire body. This matters because your body needs oxygen to function.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Normally, your blood travels a specific
route through your heart
with every heartbeat. Because of the structural problems in a heart with ToF, some
blood
that doesn’t have oxygen in it can go out to your baby’s body. Medicines and procedures can help your child get relief during infancy.
Babies have these four issues with tetralogy of Fallot:
Ventricular septal defect
(VSD)
. A hole in the wall between your lower
heart chambers
lets blood without oxygen combine with blood that has oxygen in it.
Pulmonary artery stenosis
. A narrow
pulmonary valve
and main
pulmonary artery
keep you from getting enough blood through to your lungs with each heartbeat.
Overriding aorta
. Your aorta and its valve are above and open to both ventricles because of a VSD. This allows blood without oxygen to go out to your body instead of to your pulmonary artery and
lungs
to get oxygen.
Ventricular hypertrophy
. The wall of muscle around your right ventricle is too thick because it’s working harder than it should to make up for the heart’s other abnormalities.
This condition is rare. One out of 2,077 babies born in the U.S. each year has tetralogy of Fallot. But it’s one of the more common
congenital heart disorders
. Tetralogy of Fallot tends to happen more often in
male
babies. Healthcare providers also see ToF often in babies who have
Down syndrome
or other chromosome disorders.
Advertisement
Rarely, some people don’t get treatment in childhood and may develop issues in adulthood.
Symptoms and Causes
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider can diagnose tetralogy of Fallot during pregnancy or after your baby is born. They usually find ToF in the first few weeks or months of life. During prenatal tests, your healthcare provider may use a fetal
echocardiogram
to look at the fetal heart’s structure if the initial ultrasound looks suspicious.
Tests used to diagnose ToF after birth
During a
physical exam
, a healthcare provider will listen to your child’s heart. If they have ToF, their provider will most likely hear a
heart murmur
.
Tests a provider may use to diagnose tetralogy of Fallot may include:
Pulse oximetry
Echocardiogram
Chest X-ray
or cardiac CT (
computed tomography
)
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Cardiac catheterization
Diagnosis and Tests
How is tetralogy of Fallot diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider can diagnose tetralogy of Fallot during pregnancy or after your baby is born. They usually find it in the first few weeks or months of life.
Tests before birth
During prenatal tests, your healthcare provider may see something in an
ultrasound
image that looks like it could be tetralogy of Fallot. From 18 to 22 weeks into your pregnancy, your provider will be able to use a fetal
echocardiogram
or ultrasound image of the fetus’s heart to see if the heart’s structure is normal.
Tests in infancy
If your baby has tetralogy of Fallot, your provider will most likely hear a heart murmur when listening to your baby’s heart. They can easily check your newborn baby’s oxygen level with pulse oximetry (pulse ox). If it shows a low oxygen level, your provider can do an echocardiogram (ultrasound of the heart). These tests are painless and don’t go through the surface of your baby’s skin.
Pulse oximetry
. Before you take your baby home, your provider will put sensors on your newborn’s feet or hands to find out how much oxygen is in their blood.
Echocardiogram
. This uses sound waves to show your baby’s heart structure and how well their heart is working.
Chest X-ray or CT (
computed tomography
)
. This may show a heart that has the abnormal shape of a boot.
Tests in childhood or adulthood
To diagnose tetralogy of Fallot in a child or adult, a provider may use the above methods, as well as an electrocardiogram (EKG) and
cardiac catheterization
.
Management and Treatment
How is ToF treated?
Tetralogy of Fallot treatment includes medicine to ease symptoms and surgery to fix the issues. As a first step in tetralogy of Fallot treatment, your child’s provider can give them
beta-blockers
(to improve blood flow) and extra oxygen. Three to six months after birth, your baby can have surgery to make blood move through their heart the way it should.
Advertisement
Tetralogy of Fallot repair
Repair options vary depending on your child’s condition. If your baby is too small or weak for a full repair, their provider can do a simpler procedure until they can do the complete ToF repair. These techniques can relieve symptoms for a number of years — well into adulthood — until a provider can do a more complete repair surgery.
Tetralogy of Fallot repair procedures include:
Complete repair
. A surgeon can make the pulmonary valve and the path to the pulmonary artery bigger. And they can patch the hole between the two ventricles.
BTT shunt
procedure
. Your provider can put a shunt or tube between your child’s
subclavian
and pulmonary arteries to help blood get to the lungs.
Catheter procedure
. A provider can put in a stent for better blood flow out of the right ventricle. They can also put a stent in the
patent ductus arteriosus
to keep it from closing.
Surgery for adults
Occasionally, a person reaches adulthood without having had any surgical repair. This isn’t common. Specialists recommend they have a complete surgical repair to prevent future complications or sudden death.
To perform a complete repair, a surgeon who specializes in
adult congenital heart disease
closes the ventricular septal defect with a patch. They open the passageway out of the right ventricle and repair or replace the pulmonary valve. They enlarge the pulmonary arteries to both lungs. Sometimes, they place a tube between the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery to improve blood flow.
Advertisement
Many adults who undergo repair for a ToF heart defect don’t need further surgical treatment. But they should continue to follow up with an adult congenital heart disease specialist for regular monitoring.
Complications of ToF surgery
Complications of tetralogy of Fallot surgery (some of which may show up later) may include:
Electrical disturbances
. Having a patch on the VSD can block your atria from sending electrical signals to your ventricles. A
pacemaker
can correct this. With repaired ToF, you’re at risk for
arrhythmias
in your heart’s top and bottom chambers. You should get an evaluation for a syncopal episode.
Residual ventricular septal defect
. Sometimes, the ventricular septal defect doesn’t seal completely and there’s some leaking around the patch.
Aneurysm
. Patches that repair a ventricle can cause weak sections of the ventricle to bulge out, forming an
aneurysm
. There’s also an increased risk of aneurysms of the ascending
aorta
.
Shunt issues
. The shunts providers use for an initial repair can cause issues like narrowing (stenosis),
high blood pressure
in your pulmonary artery or excess volume load on the left side of your heart.
Leaky valves
. Your pulmonary, aortic or tricuspid
heart valves
can leak. Sometimes, a provider will need to replace the pulmonary valve.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Tetralogy of Fallot Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Surgery for tetralogy of Fallot creates a normal blood flow path. But you or your child can still have other issues, including:
Heart infection risk
. You can have a higher risk of an infection in your heart (
endocarditis
), so dental care is important.
Antibiotics
can help prevent infection during dental visits.
Slow development
. Babies with tetralogy of Fallot may be slower to develop and grow. They may need
physical
,
speech
or
occupational therapy
to help them.
Pregnancy risks
. Your provider may need to check your heart before you get pregnant, and there’s a higher risk of
miscarriage
.
Medication restrictions
. You may only be able to use certain kinds of medicines and
birth control
with your heart issue as an adult.
Outlook for ToF
With medical advances, the outlook for babies with tetralogy of Fallot is better than it was in the past. Surgical treatment is very effective in correcting structural defects and blood flow through the heart. With an experienced congenital heart disease
surgeon
, surgical repair of the defect in adults has a very high success rate.
Most babies who have surgery today to fix tetralogy of Fallot will have active lives. But people with repaired ToF typically have some restrictions on certain strenuous activities, like competitive sports. Long-term survival after ToF repair is very good. Most people who undergo repair are alive 30 years later. Without a repair, 1 out of 3 people with tetralogy of Fallot live to age 10.
Some adults who had tetralogy of Fallot surgery as infants may develop issues that require medicines, medical care or surgery in adulthood. Adults should consult with their
cardiologist
before having surgery on a different part of their body.
Is there anything I can do to help my child feel better?
Until your baby has surgery, you can help them through tet spells. When your baby has trouble breathing, put them into a squatting position. (Push their knees to their chest.) Squatting helps move more blood to their lungs.
It’s also helpful to make sure your child is drinking enough fluids and isn’t exerting themselves too much.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If your baby is having a severe tet spell, take them to the closest emergency room. If you’ve passed out, are dizzy, are short of breath or have chest pain, you should also go to the emergency room.
Adults who’ve had initial surgery for ToF as a child should have thorough cardiac evaluations every year or two. You may need various tests to check cardiac function, like:
Holter monitor
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Exercise stress test
Echocardiogram
Heart MRI
Also, your provider will need to monitor the size and function of the right side of your heart.
After tetralogy of Fallot repair, your child will need regular visits with a provider who specializes in children’s hearts (pediatric cardiologist). Regular care will continue into adulthood.
Questions to ask your provider include:
Will my child need to limit their sports activities after surgery?
Will my child need additional surgeries?
What medicines, if any, will my child need to take?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that your newborn child has a heart problem can feel like a heavy weight to bear. But your healthcare team has helped other parents in this situation and they can help you, too. Don’t be afraid to talk to a therapist if you feel stressed about caring for a child with tetralogy of Fallot. A counselor can also help kids and teens who may feel like their classmates are ahead of them in development.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your baby needs lifelong care for congenital heart disorders like tetralogy of Fallot. Cleveland Clinic Children's compassionate providers offer personalized treatment.
Tetralogy of Fallot Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment