Blunt Force Trauma: Definition, Diagnosis, Types, Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Blunt Force Trauma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Blunt Force Trauma
Blunt force trauma can injure your body inside and out. You might not be able to see all the effects, but that doesn’t make it any less serious. Blunt force trauma is extremely common, especially when it involves motor vehicles. It can be minor and self-treatable, or it can be life-threatening without medical care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Blunt Force Trauma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Living With
What Is Blunt Force Trauma?
Blunt force trauma happens when you sustain an injury after an impact or forceful movements injure you. Those injuries can range from slight skin redness or a minor bruise to broken bones and internal injuries. Blunt force trauma is extremely common. It’s the most common cause of traumatic injuries and deaths worldwide.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your body has internal defenses to protect you from blunt force trauma or at least limit its severity. Some examples of these defenses include your:
Bones
: Bones like your skull, rib cage and
spine
are like armor. Other bones, like those in your limbs, provide structure and limit movements that could injure soft tissues.
Connective and soft tissues
: Connective tissues absorb and dissipate impact forces. Your soft tissues can also stretch, bend and absorb blunt forces.
Internal spaces
: Your
thoracic
and abdominal cavities, among others, allow room for your internal organs to shift and jostle. It’s similar to how earthquake-resistant structures sway so ground movement doesn’t snap or break them.
Membrane layers
: Examples include the
pericardium
around your heart and the
meninges
around your
brain
and
spinal cord
. Some layers also hold fluid that provides additional cushioning.
Senses
: Your
vision
,
hearing
and sense of balance all help you avoid or minimize blunt force trauma from falls or impacts.
Reflexes
: Many of your motor (movement) reflexes exist to protect you from injuries, including blunt force trauma. And your
nervous system
links your reflexes and senses to speed up reaction times.
Pain
: When you feel pain, that’s your body telling you something’s wrong. That helps you avoid some injuries or keeps you from making injuries worse.
Advertisement
Blunt trauma is different from penetrating trauma, which involves injuries that pierce your body. But blunt trauma can still split or tear
your skin
. An example of that would be a split lip from something hitting you in the face.
What are some specific conditions that happen from blunt force trauma?
Blunt force trauma can take many forms, including (but not limited to) the following:
Bone fractures
Concussions
and
traumatic brain injuries (TBIs)
Bumps (
contusions
) and bruises (
ecchymosis
), including to your internal organs and even your
bones
Eye injuries
, including
open globe injuries
Facial injuries like a fractured
jaw
, broken
nose
or
orbital fractures
Flail chest
Internal organ injuries that are more severe, like a
ruptured spleen
or
collapsed lung (pneumothorax)
Joint
dislocations
Ruptured testicle
Shaken baby syndrome
Skin tears (lacerations)
Spinal cord injuries
, including ones that cause
paraplegia
or
quadriplegia
Strain injuries like
whiplash
or a
hyperextended knee
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of blunt force trauma?
Some symptoms of blunt force trauma are the same no matter which part of your body the injury affects. These include:
Pain
Bruising or redness
Swelling
Bleeding (when the force is enough to tear or split skin)
But some symptoms are very specific to the affected body part. Examples include:
Head trauma
:
Confusion
, feeling
dizzy
or lightheaded, or
coma
Chest trauma
:
Trouble breathing
, heart rhythm
irregularities
, or blue fingernails or lips (
cyanosis
)
Abdominal trauma:
Nausea
and
vomiting
or rebound pain (this happens when you press on your abdomen and the pain starts when you stop pressing)
What causes blunt force trauma?
Motor vehicle crashes are the top cause of blunt force trauma worldwide. Other common causes of blunt force trauma include:
Falls
Sports injuries
Violent incidents (abuse, assault, war, etc.)
What are the risk factors for blunt force trauma?
Some risk factors for blunt force trauma are very specific to your life and circumstances. Others are more general. Some examples of risk factors include:
Driving automobiles or frequent encounters with them
Not using safety items like seat belts or protective gear like helmets for sports, bicycling, etc.
Age, especially with decreased balance, strength or flexibility that happens naturally over time
Jobs or activities that put you at risk, like working around machinery, large or massive items, etc.
How blunt force trauma causes injuries
There are four specific ways that blunt force trauma can damage your body:
Strain (pull)
: This happens when forces pull body parts in opposite directions, like with a joint dislocation.
Shear (twist or bend)
: This can happen when forces push different sections of your body or a body part in different (but not opposite) directions. That’s what happens with injuries like whiplash.
Compression (crush)
: This happens when forces press on or crush body parts, like with
cauliflower ear
. It can also happen with internal swelling. That can cause dangerous conditions like
compartment syndrome
or
brain swelling
.
Overpressure (crush and break or burst)
: This is when there’s too much pressure on a body part and the part breaks, bursts or splits. That’s how skin lacerations from blunt trauma happen. It can also damage organs and other parts inside your body.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is blunt force trauma diagnosed?
Healthcare providers can diagnose blunt force trauma using a combination of the following:
Imaging tests
: Imaging tests are incredibly valuable for diagnosing and treating blunt force trauma. These tests can include
X-rays
and
CT scans
for most injuries. In some cases,
ultrasound
or
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
may be better (especially with soft tissue injuries).
A
physical exam
: Providers will examine your body and the injury, looking and feeling with their hands or listening with a stethoscope. They do that to search for signs of blunt force trauma and determine its effects.
A
neurological exam
: When there’s a chance of brain, spinal cord or nerve injury, providers will do a neurological exam.
Lab tests
:
Blood
and
urine
tests may reveal hidden damage to your internal organs from blunt force trauma.
Your symptoms
: If you’re conscious, your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms. But if you’re not, the other exams will give them the information they need.
Management and Treatment
How is blunt force trauma treated?
The severity of the injury and the affected body part(s) are key factors in treating blunt force trauma. Some examples include:
Rest, ice, compression, elevation (RICE)
: Minor injuries like bruises may only need simple treatments.
Skin closure
: Lacerations may need bandaging or closure with stitches or staples.
Immobilization
: Broken bones may need a splint, cast or another way to keep the affected body part from moving.
Medications:
Pain relievers
, either over the counter or prescribed, are common for lingering symptoms of blunt force trauma.
Surgery
: Internal injuries may need surgery to repair or treat. Severe fractures may need internal fixation with metal hardware like rods, pins screws or plates.
Hospital care
: More severe injuries may need a hospital stay, especially when you have injuries that affect your brain, heart, lungs or other vital organs.
Advertisement
Other treatments are possible depending on the situation and circumstances. Because treatments can vary so widely, your healthcare provider is the best person to tell you about the options for your specific case.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Prevention
Can blunt force trauma be prevented?
There are several things you can do to prevent blunt force trauma or lower your odds of having it.
To prevent blunt force trauma when driving or riding in motor vehicles, remember the following:
Wear your seatbelt in moving vehicles, like automobiles, industrial vehicles, airplanes, etc.
Use other automobile safety measures properly. Examples include positioning your seat (so airbags can deploy safely) and headrests (so they can protect you from whiplash).
If you’re driving, follow speed laws, slow down when road conditions aren’t ideal and avoid distracted driving.
Make sure children in your care know how to use safety gear like seatbelts and helmets correctly.
Don’t let children drive vehicles intended for adults, like all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), motorbikes and golf carts.
Here are some ways you can try to prevent blunt force trauma from everyday activities:
Limit tripping hazards and clutter in your home.
Follow manufacturer instructions when using ladders and stepstools.
Install grab bars and/or nonslip mats in bathrooms and showers.
Wear grip-sole socks or shoes in or around the house if they’ll help.
If you’re a pedestrian, use crosswalks and ALWAYS look before crossing (even if you’re sure you have the right of way).
Wear the proper safety gear for any activity.
Sit out from sports if you have an injury because it can make you vulnerable to even worse injuries.
Be cautious about wearing headphones or earbuds during activities like walking or cycling. They might keep you from hearing sounds that would alert you to danger.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I go to the emergency room?
You should go to the emergency room or get emergency medical care if you experience a blunt force injury and then you:
Lose consciousness, especially if the injury involved your head
Start having trouble breathing or feel changes in your heart rate
Have a bone that seems visibly broken
Have symptoms of severe
blood loss (hemorrhage)
, especially if you take
blood thinners
Have severe pain, especially if it feels much worse than what you’d expect from the visible effects of the injury
Have an eye injury from blunt trauma, especially when it affects your vision
Cough or vomit blood
Notice a color change in your pee to pink
Can’t move your body or a body part the usual way
Are pregnant and are involved in a motor vehicle crash
Getting medical care quickly is absolutely vital with severe blunt force trauma injuries. That’s why experts call the first 60 minutes after an injury “the golden hour” for people with life-threatening injuries.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Some questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider include:
How severe is my injury?
What’s the outlook for my case?
Which treatment option(s) do you recommend?
Are there any side effects or complications I should watch for, and what should I do if I notice them?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Blunt force trauma can cause injuries inside your body that your eyes can’t see. Maybe it’s whiplash from a fender-bender or a bruised foot from dropping a tool while working around the house. The pain and damage are no less disruptive to your life. Knowing when you need expert medical care can make a big difference. And getting timely treatment can help you recover faster and could even save your life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider