Hyponatremia: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hyponatremia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hyponatremia
Hyponatremia is when the amount of sodium in your blood is too low. Common causes include heart, liver, kidney and brain diseases, hormone issues and medications. Treatment could include limiting water intake, getting IV fluids and adjusting medications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Symptoms of hyponatremia (low sodium) can come on suddenly or slowly, over time.
What is hyponatremia?
Hyponatremia is when your blood sodium (salt) level is lower than it should be. Healthcare providers consider sodium (Na+) levels below 135 milliequivalents/liter (mEq/L) to be lower than normal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It might seem like very little salt would be a good thing. But like many things in life, it’s all about balance. You need the right balance of water and sodium in your body to stay healthy. They can become unbalanced due to medical conditions or medications. When this happens, water moves into your tissues, causing them not to work properly. This can be especially dangerous in your brain.
If your kidneys are working as they should, drinking too much water almost never causes your blood sodium to fall too low unless you’re very
dehydrated
(like after running a marathon) and you don’t replace
electrolytes
(important minerals that keep your body working) at the same time.
Hyponatremia can be chronic or acute. Chronic hyponatremia can happen over a long time, with symptoms coming on slowly and your body making adjustments for the low sodium levels. With acute hyponatremia, blood sodium levels fall quickly, and your symptoms may become severe suddenly.
What are the types of hyponatremia?
Types of hyponatremia include:
Euvolemic hyponatremia/dilutional hyponatremia
. This is when the amount of sodium in your body stays the same but the amount of water in your body increases.
Hypervolemic hyponatremia
. This is when the amount of water and sodium in your body both increase, but the amount of water increases more.
Hypovolemic hyponatremia
. This is when the amount of water and sodium in your body both decrease, but the amount of sodium decreases more.
Advertisement
Knowing which type of hyponatremia you have helps your healthcare provider diagnose the cause and determine treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hyponatremia?
Symptoms of hyponatremia include:
Muscle cramps
or weakness
Nausea
and
vomiting
Lethargy
, or extreme low energy
Headache
Confusion
or other mental changes
Seizures
What causes hyponatremia?
In most cases, high levels of water in your body — which dilute sodium levels — cause hyponatremia. Losing a lot of sodium from your body can also cause it (this is less common). When water and sodium levels in your body are unbalanced, fluid can move into your cells and prevent them from working properly.
Specific causes of hyponatremia include:
SIADH
(syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion)
Heart failure
Kidney failure
Liver cirrhosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Neurological conditions like
brain tumors
Excessive thirst (
polydipsia
)
Hypothyroidism
Drinking too much beer or other alcohol (beer potomania)
Diarrhea
or vomiting
Certain medications, like
diuretics
(“water pills”) and
SSRIs
Nonmedical or recreational drugs, like MDMA (known as “Molly,” “E” or “Ecstasy”)
What are the risk factors for hyponatremia?
You’re more likely to develop hyponatremia if you have any of the ongoing medical conditions that cause it. Having surgery can also increase your risk.
Is hyponatremia life-threatening?
Yes. Severe hyponatremia can cause swelling in your tissues, including your brain. Untreated, this can lead to
coma
, permanent brain damage or death.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hyponatremia diagnosed?
Healthcare providers use
blood tests
and
urine (pee) tests
to diagnose hyponatremia. They’ll check the levels of sodium, potassium, hormones and other substances in your body. They’ll also check how well your
kidneys
and
liver
are working. Depending on your symptoms, your provider might get imaging, like a
CT scan
or
chest X-ray
.
Your provider may ask you about:
The kind of sports you participate in and how you train
The kind of prescription medications you take
The kind of medical conditions and surgeries you have or have had in the past
The amount of alcohol you drink
Management and Treatment
How is hyponatremia treated?
Treatment for hyponatremia depends on the cause and what kind of hyponatremia you have. Treatments could include:
Water intake restrictions
Adjustments to your medications (like stopping them or taking a different dosage)
IV fluids
Medication that treat low sodium levels, like
tolvaptan
or
conivaptan
Your provider may also treat you for ongoing medical conditions that could lead to hyponatremia.
Complications of treatment
Healthcare providers are careful not to overcorrect when treating hyponatremia. Increasing sodium levels in your body too quickly can cause life-threatening side effects, like
central pontine myelinolysis
or osmotic demyelination syndrome. These are types of brain damage. This is why it’s important to see a healthcare provider right away if you think you have hyponatremia.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have hyponatremia?
The outlook for hyponatremia depends a lot on the cause. Many people who get quick treatment can make a full recovery. If you have brain swelling that doesn’t resolve quickly, it can lead to permanent damage.
But sometimes, hyponatremia is a sign that an ongoing medical condition is getting worse. In general, people with kidney or liver disease have a higher mortality (death) rate than people with other causes of hyponatremia.
Prevention
Can hyponatremia be prevented?
You can reduce your risk of hyponatremia by:
Not drinking too much beer or other forms of alcohol
Using thirst as your guide for how much water to drink (unless your provider tells you otherwise)
Not taking MDMA
Drinking fluids that include electrolytes (like sports drinks) instead of just water while training and during sporting events
Talking to your provider about how to best manage medical conditions that put you at a higher risk of hyponatremia
Eating balanced meals, including food with plenty of protein
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Talk to your provider if you have a medical condition that increases your risk for hyponatremia. They can help you manage your health and know what signs to look for.
Chronic hyponatremia may have symptoms that come on slowly, like tiredness or difficulty thinking. Talk to your provider if you notice even small changes in how you feel, especially if they get worse over time.
Advertisement
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room if you or someone you know experiences:
Confusion
Seizures
Difficulty waking up
Severe headache
Severe vomiting or diarrhea
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It might be helpful to ask a healthcare provider:
What caused this?
How can I avoid it in the future?
What are early warning signs of hyponatremia?
How do I take my medication?
How much water should I drink each day?
Additional Common Questions
Should you eat more salt if your sodium is low?
You should follow the recommendations of a healthcare provider if your blood sodium is too low. Treatment depends on the cause, and eating too much sodium can cause additional medical issues.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
We tend to think of salt as a bad thing — but like everything, we need balance. Too little sodium can cause serious health problems. Hyponatremia is common, and most people fully recover if they’re treated right away. But many things can cause hyponatremia, so managing ongoing medical issues and medications is the best way to reduce your risk. Don’t hesitate to ask your provider if you have any questions or concerns.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your kidneys, you want experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work with you to craft a personalized treatment plan.
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/27/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment