Meningococcal Disease: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Meningococcal Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Meningococcal Disease
Meningococcal disease is a serious bacterial infection. It’s contagious between people, usually from infected spit or mucus. It shares many of the same symptoms as a cold or the flu. But a common symptom of meningococcal disease is a stiff neck. Treatment includes antibiotics. The sooner you get treatment, the better your chances of recovery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Meningococcal Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Meningococcal Disease?
Meningococcal disease can damage your skin and tissue. It commonly affects your chest, back abdomen and legs.
Meningococcal disease (meh-ning-goh-KOK-uhl deh-ZEEZ) is a rare
infection
that
Neisseria meningitidis
(
N. meningitidis
)
bacteria
cause. Another name for
N. meningitidis
is meningococcus (meh-ning-goh-KOK-uhs).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
N. meningitidis
can infect your
meninges
and blood. Your meninges are the three membranes that cover your
brain
and
spinal cord
. Membranes are thin layers of tissue that protect what they surround, like the skin around an orange or grapefruit.
In 2023, there were
around 400 cases
of meningococcal disease in the U.S.
Meningococcal disease is serious. It can be fatal without treatment. Get medical help immediately if you have symptoms of the disease.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of meningococcal disease?
Common symptoms of meningococcal disease include:
Being bothered by bright light
Diarrhea
Fever
Headache
Nausea and vomiting
Skin rash
that looks like dark, discolored pinpoints or a bigger area that looks like a bruise
Stiff neck
Other signs that you may have meningococcal disease include:
Confusion
and irritability
Feeling very sleepy
Difficulty walking
or staying upright
Grunting and moaning
Joint pain
and
muscle pain
Loss of appetite
What are symptoms in babies?
It can be difficult to notice meningococcal disease symptoms in babies and young children. They may even be different from symptoms in older children or adults. Common symptoms include:
Being irritable for no reason
Being twitchy or floppy
Being very tired
A bulging
soft spot
in their
skull
Refusing to eat
How do people get meningococcal disease?
Meningococcal disease spreads from person to person, usually through close contact with someone who has it. It spreads through
spit
or
mucus
through activities like:
Advertisement
Coughing
Kissing
Sharing drinks or eating utensils like forks or spoons
Sneezing
N. meningitidis
doesn’t live long outside of your body. It can’t survive on surfaces.
Risk factors
Anyone can get meningococcal disease. But you’re at a greater risk of developing it if you:
Are less than a year old, a teenager or an early adult, especially if you
smoke
or are exposed to smoke
Have a
spleen
injury or no spleen
Have
sickle cell disease
Live in the same area as a lot of other people, like college campuses or military barracks
Take complement inhibitor medications, like
eculizumab
(Soliris®) and
ravulizumab
(Ultomiris®)
Visit areas outside of the U.S. where meningococcal disease is common, like sub-Saharan Africa
Complications of meningococcal disease
Meningococcal disease is serious. About
10 to 15 out of every 100 people
who have meningococcal disease die, even with treatment.
About
1 in 5 people
who survive have long-term complications, including:
Brain damage
Kidney
damage
Loss of limbs
Nerve
damage
Total
hearing loss
(deafness)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Meningococcal disease can be challenging for healthcare providers to diagnose because it shares many of the same symptoms as the common cold or flu. If a provider suspects you have meningococcal disease, they’ll recommend
blood tests
and a
spinal tap
to collect spinal fluid.
They’ll send your samples to a lab to look for bacteria and see if they grow. If
N. meningitidis
grows in your samples, that means you have meningococcal disease.
If providers can’t tell if you have meningococcal disease from your samples, they may order a
PCR test
.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Healthcare providers treat meningococcal disease with
antibiotics
like
ceftriaxone
(Ceftrisol Plus®, Rocephin®) or
penicillin
. They usually give them to you through an intravenous (IV) tube they inject into a vein. If they think you have meningococcal disease, they’ll start you on antibiotics even before an official diagnosis. It’s very important to start treatment as soon as possible.
In addition to antibiotics, you may need treatments such as:
Corticosteroids
to reduce damage to your
nervous system
IV fluids
Medications to treat
low blood pressure
Oxygen therapy
Surgery to treat dead or damaged skin
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider immediately if you or your child has symptoms of meningococcal disease. If you have any reactions to your treatments, or if you find your symptoms getting worse, reach out again.
During your appointment, you may wish to ask the following questions:
How did I get meningococcal disease?
How severe is my case?
Do I need any other treatment besides antibiotics?
Should people I’m in close contact with see a provider for testing?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have meningococcal disease?
Meningococcal disease is very serious. It can even be fatal. Getting treatment right away is very important. But even with early treatment, it’s still possible to have complications, including permanent damage to your skin or loss of limbs. A complete recovery can take weeks or months. You’ll receive antibiotics over seven to 10 days. But it may take longer to feel better.
Unlike other types of infections, you can get meningococcal disease more than once. Healthcare providers might test your
immune system
if you get it again.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
Yes, you can help prevent meningococcal disease in a few different ways. They’re similar to how you might prevent other bacterial infections.
Avoiding people who are sick
Avoid close contact with people who are sick. Don’t share food or drinks. If you have to spend time around people who are sick, it’s a good idea to wear a mask over your nose and mouth. You should also
wash your hands
and avoid touching your
eyes
,
nose
or
mouth
with unclean hands.
Getting vaccinated
There are three
vaccines
in the U.S. that help prevent meningococcal disease:
Meningococcal conjugate (MenACWY) vaccines
Pentavalent (MenABCWY) vaccines
Serogroup B meningococcal (MenB) vaccines
Taking preventive antibiotics
If you take complement inhibitors or are in close contact with someone who has meningococcal disease, healthcare providers may suggest you also take antibiotics.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between meningococcal disease and meningitis?
Even though they sound the same, meningococcal disease and meningitis are different issues.
N. meningitidis
causes meningococcal disease.
Meningitis
refers to
inflammation
of your meninges. It can happen if you have meningococcal disease. But it can happen if you have other conditions, too.
N. meningitidis
doesn’t cause all cases of meningitis.
What is the difference between meningococcal disease and meningococcemia?
Meningococcemia
is another condition
N. meningitidis
causes. It happens when the bacteria get into your bloodstream and cause an infection. It can destroy your
blood vessels
and keep the tissues in your body from getting oxygen.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
With symptoms like a fever and body aches, meningococcal disease can look like other less serious diseases. But it’s also rare. So how should you know when to see a healthcare provider? If you have flu-like symptoms along with a stiff neck, skin rash and/or light sensitivity, it’s time to make an appointment. The disease gets worse quickly, and getting treatment as quickly as possible is important to your recovery. You can also give yourself some peace of mind by talking to a healthcare provider about meningococcal disease vaccines. Shots aren’t fun. But some temporary discomfort is better than the serious meningococcal disease complications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/01/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment