Peritoneal Carcinomatosis: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Peritoneal Carcinomatosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Peritoneal Carcinomatosis
Peritoneal carcinomatosis is metastatic cancer that forms in the membrane inside your abdomen (peritoneum). It happens when cancer from a different part of your body (usually your ovaries or colon) spreads to your peritoneum. There’s no cure, but surgery and a form of chemotherapy called HIPEC help people with this disease live longer.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Peritoneal Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is peritoneal carcinomatosis?
Peritoneal carcinomatosis is
cancer
that’s spread to your peritoneum. Your
peritoneum
is a membrane that lines your abdominal and pelvic cavities. It coats several organs housed inside these cavities. With peritoneal carcinomatosis, cancer that’s started in a different organ travels to this membrane and forms
tumors
there. It’s different from cancer that starts in your peritoneum (
primary peritoneal cancer
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Any type of cancer can spread to your peritoneum. But the primary (originating) cancers most likely to lead to peritoneal carcinomatosis are:
Ovarian cancer
(most common)
Colon cancer
Stomach cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Appendix cancer
Rectal cancer
Cancers that have spread, like peritoneal carcinomatosis, are also called late-stage or
metastatic
cancers. They’re usually more serious than early-stage cancers. But treatments can help slow disease progression and help you live longer.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of peritoneal carcinomatosis?
Peritoneal carcinomatosis doesn’t usually cause symptoms until it affects a large portion of your peritoneum. At this point, the condition may cause fluid build-up in your abdomen called
ascites
.
Related symptoms include:
Fatigue
Swollen abdomen
Abdominal pain
Abdominal mass
Low back pain
Nausea
and
vomiting
Constipation
Unexplained weight loss
or weight gain
These symptoms are common across lots of conditions. And many of them aren’t as serious as peritoneal carcinomatosis. But only a healthcare provider can rule out cancer in your peritoneum.
What causes peritoneal carcinomatosis?
Peritoneal carcinomatosis forms when cancer in one part of your body travels to your peritoneum. Usually, the cancer begins in a nearby organ in your abdomen, like your
ovaries
or
colon
.
Advertisement
In about
10%
of people with peritoneal carcinomatosis, cancer starts in organs outside of the abdominal cavity. When this happens, cancer cells use the bloodstream or
lymphatic system
to reach your peritoneum.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is peritoneal carcinomatosis diagnosed?
Tests that diagnose peritoneal carcinomatosis include:
Imaging tests
. Procedures may include a
CT scan
,
MRI
,
PET scan
or a combination of these. They show how much the cancer has spread throughout your peritoneum.
Blood tests
. Your provider may need to check your blood for
tumor markers
(substances that tumors release). High levels of certain proteins may be a sign of peritoneal carcinomatosis.
Paracentesis
. Your provider may remove a sample of the fluid in your abdomen if you have ascites. They can test the sample in a lab for signs of the primary cancer (the cancer that’s spread).
Biopsy
. Your provider may remove a sample of the tumor and test it in a lab for cancer cells.
What is the peritoneal carcinomatosis index (PCI)?
The PCI is one resource your healthcare provider may use during the diagnostic process to plan treatment. Using this index, providers map the location of the tumor in your abdomen and your small intestine. They assign a score based on the tumor’s size.
This information helps your provider know how likely it is that surgery can get rid of the tumor.
Management and Treatment
How is peritoneal carcinomatosis treated?
The standard treatment for peritoneal carcinomatosis is cytoreductive surgery (CRS) with
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC)
. The goal of cytoreductive surgery is to remove all visible tumors in your peritoneum. HIPEC destroys any remaining microscopic cancer cells. This treatment circulates heated
chemotherapy drugs
throughout your abdominal cavity. The heat and direct application make it stronger than traditional
chemotherapy
.
People receive cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC in addition to
treatments
for primary cancer.
If you’re not a candidate for surgery, you may still need
palliative care
. This treatment can help you manage symptoms better, no matter your
cancer stage
or
prognosis
(likely outcome of treatment).
What are the complications of treatment?
Research
shows that CRS and HIPEC are both safe and effective when people are screened carefully to ensure they’re good candidates for treatment. Results are best when surgery happens at a center that delivers this treatment regularly. But as with any surgery, complications can happen. In rare instances, they can be fatal without emergency care. They include:
Heavy bleeding
Perforation
Anastomotic leak
Infection
Abscess
Sepsis
Your healthcare provider will discuss potential complications with you beforehand. It’s important to understand how the benefits of treatment outweigh the risks.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Peritoneal Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis of peritoneal carcinomatosis?
CRS and HIPEC treatment have improved the prognosis associated with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Although there’s no
cure
, this treatment can help you live longer.
The five-year
survival rate
for people who receive CRS that removes all signs of the tumor is
45%
. This means that 45% of people who receive CRS successfully are alive five years later. But the five-year survival rate is less than 10% when surgery can’t remove all the cancer. Other factors that play a role in your prognosis include:
The type of primary cancer
How abnormal the cancer cells look
How severe your symptoms are
Your PCI score
Your healthcare provider can explain the factors that impact your likely outcome.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Living with any metastatic cancer (cancer that has spread) — including peritoneal carcinomatosis — is hard. It causes physical symptoms that can make for challenging days ahead. The uncertainty of not knowing how your body will respond to treatment can take an emotional toll, too.
This is why it’s essential to seek every available resource. This may include getting
palliative care
to help with symptom management. It may include getting counseling to process the complex emotions surrounding your diagnosis. It’s an especially good idea to join a support group that allows you to connect with others also living with metastatic cancer.
Advertisement
Ask your healthcare provider to recommend resources that can make living with peritoneal carcinomatosis more manageable.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll need regular visits with your healthcare provider to check how treatment is working. In the meantime, contact your provider if you’re experiencing new or worsening symptoms. They may recommend additional treatments or changes to your care plan that can help.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask include:
What tests will I need?
What treatments would you recommend?
What treatment side effects should I expect?
What outcomes should I expect after treatment?
What resources are available that can help me cope with symptoms and side effects?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A peritoneal carcinomatosis diagnosis once meant that a person had very little time left. But today, treatments are extending the survival timeline of people with this condition. Still, your experience depends on your unique diagnosis. Your healthcare provider can explain whether you’re a candidate for treatments like cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC. They can also connect you with resources to ensure you’re receiving the support you need to help manage this disease.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic offers expert diagnosis and personalized treatment for peritoneal cancer, including surgery, systemic therapy and HIPEC.
Peritoneal Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials