Cerebellar Hypoplasia: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cerebellar Hypoplasia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cerebellar Hypoplasia
Cerebellar hypoplasia is a rare neurological disorder that happens when a fetus’ cerebellum is smaller than normal or doesn’t develop completely. Symptoms may affect your child’s movement, development and intelligence. Healthcare providers treat it by managing symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is cerebellar hypoplasia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is cerebellar hypoplasia?
Cerebellar hypoplasia (pronounced “seh-ruh-beh-lur” “hai-puh-play-zhee-uh”) is when a fetus’s
cerebellum
doesn’t develop completely or is smaller than normal. The cerebellum is the part of your
brain
that coordinates movement and helps with speech. It’s located in the back of your brain, just above where your neck and skull meet.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This rare condition often causes developmental delays. Children may need support in learning to walk, talk or other functions.
Types of cerebellar hypoplasia
There are two types that vary based on the cause:
Primary
. It happens with a congenital (present at birth) condition.
Secondary
. It’s acquired. Certain factors make your child more likely to develop it.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of cerebellar hypoplasia
Symptoms vary for each child. They depend on factors like the underlying cause or part of the cerebellum that didn’t develop as expected.
Common symptoms that affect infants include:
Abnormal eye movements and difficulty with visual tracking
Developmental delays
(like not learning to walk or talk at the expected age)
Difficulty with balance when walking
Intellectual disability
Seizures
(less often)
Weak muscle tone
Common symptoms in older children may include:
Clumsiness
Dizziness
Headaches
Hearing loss
Cerebellar hypoplasia causes
Many things may cause this rare condition. These include problems with the development of the cerebellum due to a pregnancy complication or a genetic condition caused by changes or mutations in your baby’s DNA.
Cerebellar hypoplasia can occur by itself, or it may occur as part of a syndrome such as:
CHARGE syndrome
Joubert syndrome
Wilson disease
Certain metabolic disorders
Other conditions related to DNA changes
Advertisement
Risk factors of cerebellar hypoplasia
If you’re
pregnant
, your child may be more at risk of developing this condition if you:
Smoke
or use tobacco products
Drink
alcohol
Take
antiseizure medication
Have a virus (
Zika virus
or
cytomegalovirus
)
These factors may affect how a fetus’s cerebellum develops. In addition, a baby with
preterm birth
or
low birth weight
may be more likely to have cerebellar hypoplasia.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose cerebellar hypoplasia
A healthcare provider will review imaging tests to diagnose this condition. They’re looking for any size and shape abnormalities of your child’s cerebellum. They may notice signs on an
ultrasound
during pregnancy. A provider may order an
MRI
scan for babies or children who have symptoms.
Additional tests may help confirm the underlying cause, like
genetic testing
or testing for an infection or other exposure during pregnancy.
Management and Treatment
How is cerebellar hypoplasia treated?
Because symptoms vary from person to person, a healthcare provider will create a treatment plan to help your child manage their symptoms specifically. This may include:
Educational support
Occupational therapy
(to help with skills such as reaching and grabbing or handwriting)
Physical therapy
(to help with skills like balance while walking)
Speech therapy
(to help with skills like producing clear speech)
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
Contact your child’s
pediatrician
if you notice they’re not reaching developmental milestones as expected. This could include not walking or talking at the appropriate age.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has cerebellar hypoplasia?
Many children with this condition will need some support in their motor skills (such as using utensils or balancing while walking) or intellectual skills (to help with learning). Some children with cerebellar hypoplasia may need lifelong supportive care. How much care depends on the severity. For example, whether their cerebellum is mildly or severely underdeveloped and the underlying cause, and whether or not there are other related symptoms.
Many different treatment options are available based on your child’s needs. Their care team can help you choose the best treatment for your child’s situation.
Cerebellar hypoplasia life expectancy
The life expectancy varies depending on the cause and what symptoms your child has. For example, some children have a normal life expectancy, while others may not survive childhood. Your child’s case may or may not match statistics. It’s best to talk to your child’s provider to learn more about what you can expect.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You’ll probably have a lot of questions if your child receives a cerebellar hypoplasia diagnosis. You may feel overwhelmed at the prospect of raising a child who may need a lifetime of medical care and support. If that’s your situation, look to your child’s healthcare providers for more information. They’ll be with you every step of the way to make sure you have the support you need.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your child has a neurological condition, you want them to have the best care. At Cleveland Clinic Children’s, we offer compassionate, personalized treatment.
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment