Lead Poisoning: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Lead Poisoning
Advertisement
Advertisement
Lead Poisoning
Lead poisoning is a serious condition that can affect anyone who is exposed to high levels of lead. While many people think lead poisoning is a thing of the past, the condition is still very much an issue in certain areas in the U.S. and across the world. Treatment to remove lead from your body is effective. But long-term health effects are likely.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Lead Poisoning?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Lead Poisoning?
Lead poisoning, or lead toxicity, is a serious condition that occurs when your child is around high levels of lead. Exposure to lead may come from a variety of sources. Old,
lead-based paint
is where it’s most common. Lead poisoning often affects children who live in older houses with peeling lead paint or lead pipes. Lead can also contaminate:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Soil near roadways, older houses and industrial sites
Herbal remedies or medicines
Toys and candies from countries outside the U.S., Canada and Europe
Stained glass
Leaded crystal glassware
Glazed ceramic ware, including plates, pitchers and cups
While lead poisoning can affect anyone, it’s especially dangerous in children. It can damage your child’s nervous system, brain and other organs. Lead poisoning in children can also lead to severe learning and behavioral problems. This can include sudden brain damage and long-term
intellectual disabilities
.
Since the ban of lead-based paint, lead poisoning cases have dropped by
more than 95%
. But it’s still a major public health issue that can have severe effects on your child.
Lead poisoning effects
No amount of lead in your child’s blood is safe. Even low blood lead levels in children can affect all the organs and systems in their bodies. These effects can include:
Developmental delays
Behavioral problems
Learning disabilities
Attention deficits
Growth delay
Hearing problems
Higher blood lead levels can cause seizures and comas. In very rare cases, it can be fatal.
Lead poisoning in adults can also lead to serious health effects. These effects can include:
High blood pressure
Cardiovascular disease
Chronic kidney disease
Reproductive issues
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Some children with lead poisoning have no symptoms. For others, lead poisoning symptoms may include headaches, stomach pain and fatigue.
When do lead poisoning symptoms appear?
Sometimes, children and adults who’ve experienced lead exposure have no symptoms. Other times, the symptoms of lead poisoning won’t appear right away. When they do occur, the symptoms may develop over several weeks or months. Sometimes, symptoms flare up randomly.
Symptoms of lead poisoning
Often, children who have lead poisoning have no symptoms. Children can have high levels of lead in their bodies even if they’re not showing any signs of the condition. Lead poisoning symptoms may include:
Cramps
Hyperactivity (restlessness or fidgeting)
Learning problems
Changes in behavior
Headaches
Vomiting
Fatigue
Anemia
In adults, lead poisoning symptoms may include:
Headaches
Abdominal pain
Personality changes
Anemia
Numbness in your feet and legs
Loss of sex drive
Infertility
Lead poisoning causes
In the U.S., children mainly get lead poisoning by swallowing and/or absorbing lead-based paint used in houses that were built before 1978. Lead paint gets into children’s systems when they:
Eat or touch peeling paint chips and flakes that contain lead
Put their hands, toys and other items covered with lead dust in their mouths
Breathe in lead dust (which may get into the air during a renovation in an older home)
Chew on windowsills, furniture, door frames and other items covered with lead-based paint
Drink water from older water pipes that may leach lead
Adults can get lead poisoning by being exposed to lead through eating food and drinking water contaminated with lead. They may eat from dishes or drink from cups contaminated with lead. If you work in an environment with lead paint or are working on a home remodel, you could be exposed to lead dust.
Risk factors
Lead poisoning can affect anyone, but babies and children under the age of 6 are most at risk. This is because their
bodies are still developing
. Their brains and nervous systems are more sensitive to the harmful effects of lead. Also, babies and young children tend to pick up objects and put them in their mouths more frequently. These objects could be contaminated with lead.
Other people at risk for lead poisoning include:
Children who live in low-income households
Immigrants and refugees, due to less strict rules about lead exposure in their home countries
Pregnant
women
with previous exposure to lead
Babies breastfed by those with previous exposure to lead
Babies fed with formula prepared with contaminated water
People who work in industries or have hobbies that expose them to lead
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose lead poisoning
Your child’s healthcare provider will perform a physical exam. They’ll also ask you about your child’s lead poisoning symptoms. Many providers do routine screenings for lead in children who live in high-risk zip codes. This is to make sure they haven’t been exposed to lead, even if they have no symptoms.
Advertisement
To diagnose the condition, your child will need a blood lead test. This test measures the amount of lead in your child’s blood. This is called the blood lead level. Any detectable amount of lead in your child’s blood means they’ve had exposure to lead.
There are two ways to do a blood lead test:
Capillary test
: Your child’s provider will prick your child’s finger or heel to get a sample of their blood. A capillary test produces quick results. But high results will lead to a second test to confirm.
Blood draw
: Your child’s provider will take a sample of your child’s blood through a vein in their arm. This test takes longer to produce results. But it can confirm the results of a capillary test.
Additional tests that your child’s provider may order include:
Anemia screening
Iron storage
X-ray of your child’s stomach and intestines
An anemia screening may be included with a test called a CBC (complete blood count) or hemoglobin. An X-ray can show flecks of paint that may be visible and would require further treatment.
Management and Treatment
How is lead poisoning treated?
Lead poisoning treatment begins by identifying the source of the exposure. Once you’ve figured out where your child was exposed to lead, you can take steps to stay away from the source and remove it. Ask your child’s healthcare team for guidance.
Advertisement
Your child’s provider may also recommend making sure your child eats
foods high in vitamin C
,
iron
and
calcium
. This can help lower the lead levels in their blood while keeping their
immune system
strong. They’ll probably also want your child to have routine follow-up blood testing. Early diagnosis of any future cases of lead poisoning can help reduce long-term effects.
How do you flush lead out of a child’s body?
If your child’s blood lead levels are very high, your child’s healthcare provider may treat them with
chelation therapy
. This lead toxicity treatment binds to the lead in your child’s blood and makes it easier for their body to get rid of it.
Your child’s provider may also recommend whole-bowel irrigation. With this procedure, your child’s provider gives your child a special solution called
polyethylene glycol
by mouth or through a stomach tube to wash out the contents of their stomach and intestines. Providers use bowel irrigation to prevent further lead absorption if they find lead paint chips on an X-ray of your child’s belly.
Can lead poisoning be reversed in adults?
The effects of lead poisoning aren’t reversible. But you can reduce blood lead levels and prevent further exposure by finding and removing the sources of lead from your home or environment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for lead toxicity?
The outlook for lead poisoning has improved dramatically since chelation therapy was introduced. Improvements in critical care have also allowed for better treatments. And there are more local and government resources to help identify and repair sources of lead in homes and water pipes.
Many more children now survive the condition. But survivors of lead poisoning will typically have severe health complications. Long-term effects can include intellectual disabilities, seizure disorders and
stroke-like symptoms
. Your child will most likely need lifelong care.
Prevention
What can I do to reduce my child’s risk of lead toxicity?
Lead poisoning is preventable. If you live in a house or apartment in the U.S. built before 1978, talk to your state or local health department about having your home’s paint and dust tested for lead. If you rent your home, talk to your landlord about peeling and flaking paint. Call the health department if the paint isn’t safely repaired.
Stagnant or hot water can leach lead into your tap water if you have lead pipes. So, let your faucet run cold water for one minute before using it for drinking, cooking or making baby formula.
Talk to your child’s healthcare provider about other ways you can reduce your child’s risk. They may suggest ideas, like:
Making sure your child eats healthy foods that are high in iron, calcium and vitamin C
Washing your child’s hands, bottles, pacifiers and toys frequently
Always
washing your hands
before eating
Always wiping your feet before entering the house and leaving your shoes at the door
Wiping floors and other surfaces with a damp mop or cloth regularly
Not trying to remove lead-based paint yourself
Avoiding any home remedies that contain lead
What can adults do to prevent lead poisoning?
If you work with lead or are at risk of coming into contact with lead dust, you should:
Use personal protective equipment
Change your clothing and shoes after work
Shower when you get home
Additional Common Questions
Should I be concerned about lead poisoning if I’m pregnant?
Avoid exposure to lead if you’re pregnant. A fetus can be harmed by lead poisoning even before birth. If your blood lead levels are too high, it can:
Increase your risk for
miscarriage
Cause
preterm labor
Damage the fetus’s brain, nervous system and kidneys
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Lead is a naturally occurring toxic element that can cause serious health effects. Although lead-based paint was banned in 1978, lead toxicity is still a major public health concern. Lead is especially dangerous to babies and young children. It can harm them even before they’re born. It can cause long-term health, behavioral and learning effects. If your child develops any of the symptoms of lead poisoning, make sure to see their healthcare provider right away. They can provide treatment and important resources for the future.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us