Gingival Hyperplasia: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Gingival Hyperplasia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Gingival Hyperplasia
Gingival hyperplasia refers to gum overgrowth. If you have this condition, your gums might look puffy, and your teeth may appear small. Causes include certain medications or poor oral hygiene. Treatment involves oral surgery to remove excess gum tissue. Routine brushing and flossing can help prevent gum hyperplasia.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Gingival Hyperplasia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Gingival Hyperplasia?
Gingival hyperplasia refers to excess gum tissue. Many things can cause it, including inflammation and genetics.
Gingival hyperplasia is another term for gum overgrowth. Some people are naturally prone to developing extra gum tissue. But it often happens when your gum tissue gets inflamed.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Inflammation
can occur because of hormonal changes, orthodontic treatment, certain diseases, some medications or poor oral hygiene. As a result, your
gums
might look puffy, and your
teeth
might appear smaller than usual.
Gingival enlargement affects the appearance of your teeth, but it can also have a negative impact on your oral health. Treatment can get rid of excess gum tissue, reduce your risk for oral health issues and bring symmetry back to your smile.
In many cases, improving your
oral hygiene
can reverse gingival hyperplasia. In severe cases, you might need a periodontal procedure to get rid of excess gum tissue.
Other names for gingival hyperplasia include:
Gingival/gum enlargement
Gingival/gum hyperplasia
Gingival/gum overgrowth
Hyperplasia of gingiva
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of gingival hyperplasia
Gingival hyperplasia symptoms might include:
Bleeding gums
Sore or tender gums
Swollen gums
Gingival hyperplasia causes
Causes of gingival enlargement include:
Periodontal disease
. If plaque stays on your teeth for too long, your gums can swell in response.
Genetics
. Some
genetic conditions
, like hereditary gingival fibromatosis, make you more prone to gum overgrowth.
Orthodontic treatment
.
Braces
or Invisalign® can increase your risk of developing gingival hyperplasia.
Hormonal imbalance
. Hormone changes that happen during
puberty
,
pregnancy
or
menopause
can increase your risk for tender, swollen gums.
Medications
. Certain drugs — especially
immunosuppressants
,
antiseizure medications
and
calcium channel blockers
— can make gingival hyperplasia more likely.
Tooth position
. For instance, if a tooth is angled toward your gum line, there’s a higher chance that gum tissue could grow over it.
Oral surgery
. In some cases, wisdom tooth removal can cause excess gum tissue to grow over the molar next to the extraction site.
Advertisement
How to lower your risk
Regular
brushing
and
flossing
can reduce the risk of gum hyperplasia. But if you’re genetically prone to the condition, good oral hygiene may not be enough to prevent it. Talk to your healthcare provider about ways to lower your risk.
Complications of gingival hyperplasia
Untreated gingival hyperplasia can lead to complications like:
Cavities
Cosmetic concerns (like a gummy smile)
Gum disease
Tooth loss
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose gingival hyperplasia
A healthcare provider (usually a
dentist
or
periodontist
) diagnoses gingival hyperplasia during a dental appointment. They’ll review your medical history and ask about your symptoms. Your provider may do one or more of the following:
Dental exam
. They’ll check your teeth and look for signs of plaque buildup near your gum line.
Dental X-rays
. These images help your provider check the health of your teeth roots, jawbone and other supporting structures.
Periodontal charting
. Your provider may use a tiny instrument called a periodontal probe to measure the pockets around your teeth. This tells them how swollen your gums are and whether you have bone loss.
Tissue
biopsy
. Your provider may take a small sample of your gum tissue and send it to a
pathologist
for testing. They might do this to rule out other conditions.
Management and Treatment
How is gingival hyperplasia treated?
Gingival hyperplasia treatment depends on the cause. From least to most invasive, these treatments may include:
Improved oral hygiene
. In many instances, better brushing and flossing is enough to reverse gum overgrowth.
Dental cleaning
. Routine cleanings with a hygienist remove plaque and
tartar
buildup. This helps get rid of tender, swollen gums.
Scaling and root planing
. This procedure reaches deeper under your gums compared to a routine dental cleaning. It allows your provider to sweep away harmful bacteria hidden around your tooth roots.
Gingivectomy
. Your provider may need to surgically remove excess gum tissue. A gingivectomy can make your teeth easier to clean and enhance the appearance of your smile.
Laser gum therapy
. A healthcare provider uses a handheld laser to remove excess gum tissue. A laser can also cauterize (seal) tissue to stop bleeding.
Pocket reduction surgery
. When gum overgrowth is a symptom of
periodontitis
, you might need oral surgery to remove diseased tissue and clean around the roots of your teeth.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
More frequent brushing and flossing may be all you need in some cases. But if you develop puffy, swollen gums that don’t go away, let your healthcare provider know. They can do an evaluation and may refer you to a periodontist.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have gingival hyperplasia?
The outlook for gum overgrowth is usually positive with treatment. Depending on your situation, treatment could be as simple as ramping up your oral hygiene. If you’re taking medications that can contribute to gum hyperplasia, you and your dentist might need to ask your provider about switching drugs or dosages. In severe cases, you might need periodontal surgery to remove excess gum tissue.
Advertisement
How successful is treatment?
Overall treatment success depends on the severity of your condition and whether you can find and address the cause. Most people who get gingival hyperplasia treatment experience positive results.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
You may be able to prevent gingival hyperplasia by following these guidelines:
Brush your teeth at least twice a day using a soft toothbrush and
fluoridated
toothpaste.
Floss between your teeth once daily. Ask your dentist for product recommendations.
Rinse your mouth twice a day with an antiseptic mouthwash.
Visit your dentist and periodontist regularly for exams and cleanings.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Swollen or overgrown gums might make you feel a little self-conscious. But did you know that excess gum tissue can also increase your risk for cavities, gum disease and other oral health issues? If your gums bleed or look puffy, talk to your healthcare provider. There are many reasons for gum overgrowth. Your provider can help find the cause and recommend appropriate treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Dentistry plays an important role in oral health. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can design a personalized plan that will keep you smiling for the long haul.
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/26/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment