Cancer Survivorship
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Cancer Survivorship
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cancer Survivorship
Cancer survivorship emphasizes the health, well-being and quality of life of people living with cancer. Cancer survivorship starts with a diagnosis. It continues after cancer treatment and through to the end of life. Healthcare providers help cancer survivors manage cancer symptoms and cancer treatment side effects.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Start Your Survivorship Journey
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Cancer Survivorship Support
Overview
What is cancer survivorship?
Cancer survivorship is healthcare that supports you throughout your journey with
cancer
. That journey starts the day you receive a
cancer diagnosis
. It continues during and after your treatment and for the rest of your life. That support is important because having cancer is a life-changing experience. Cancer survivorship care focuses on your health and well-being. It works to improve your quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Early detection and new cancer treatments are helping people live longer with cancer. The National Cancer Institute (U.S.) estimates there are more than
18 million
cancer survivors in the U.S. An estimated 8 million people are living 10 years or more after diagnosis.
What are the three stages of cancer survivorship?
There are different ways to think about cancer survivorship. Some experts tie cancer survivorship to the
cancer stage
. Their perspective is that the cancer stage determines cancer survival issues and needs:
Early-stage cancer, when cancer is diagnosed and treated before it can spread
Regional cancer, when cancer is in nearby lymph nodes or tissues
Advanced cancer (
metastatic cancer
), when cancer has spread to more distant areas of your body
Other experts see survivorship in three phases — acute, extended and permanent:
Acute survivorship, which starts with diagnosis and ends when cancer treatment ends
Extended survivorship, which may include the months after treatment ends
Permanent survivorship, when you’ve been cancer-free for several years
Experts have different points of view about cancer survivorship stages or phases. But they find common ground in the issues that cancer survivors often face.
In general, cancer survivors often experience the following physical and mental health issues.
Advertisement
Common physical issues
Cancer treatment
often comes with side effects. They usually become less noticeable when you finish treatment. But some may last for months and years after treatment. Examples of side effects that start with treatment and may continue include:
Cancer fatigue
. This is feeling exhausted, no matter how much rest you get. Cancer fatigue often eases once you finish treatment. But some people have long-term cancer fatigue that makes it hard to get back to daily activities.
Cancer pain
. This can be from cancer or cancer treatments.
Cognitive dysfunction (
chemotherapy brain fog)
. Cancer treatment may make it difficult for you to make decisions. You may have memory issues.
Second cancer
. This is a new form of cancer. It’s completely different from the cancer for which you received treatment. Second cancers are more common as more people live longer with cancer. Second cancers are different from recurrent cancer or cancer that comes back.
Common mental health issues
Cancer can upend your life and mental health. Some common mental health issues in cancer survivorship include:
Anxiety disorders
. You may have anxiety during or after treatment. That can happen during or after you finish your treatment. Some people develop
scan-related anxiety
(scanxiety). This is emotional stress and anxiety that spikes when you have cancer tests. Some people with cancer have
post-traumatic stress disorder
.
Depression
.
One in four
people with cancer experiences depression. Feeling sad or afraid is a normal reaction to a cancer diagnosis. But depression in cancer is more serious than that. It may interrupt your sleep and keep you from your daily activities.
Emotional
stress
. You may experience stress if cancer treatment costs put pressure on your finances or if cancer causes strain on family relationships.
Fear of cancer recurrence (FCR)
. This is extreme fear that cancer will come back. An
analysis
of research shows more than half of cancer survivors experience FCR.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Start Your Survivorship Journey
Cancer Survivorship Support
Support for cancer survivors starts the day you receive your cancer diagnosis. Your cancer care team typically includes:
Healthcare providers who diagnose and treat cancer. This may include medical
oncologists
and
surgical oncologists
and other cancer specialists.
Cancer rehabilitation
specialists provide medical care, like
physical therapy
or
occupational therapy
. This care may help prepare you for cancer treatment or manage cancer symptoms and treatment side effects.
Palliative care
providers offer specialized treatment to ease symptoms and treatment side effects. Palliative care providers also offer spiritual and emotional support.
Many healthcare organizations offer cancer survivorship programs. Some organizations have cancer survivorship programs tailored to specific kinds of cancer.
What can I expect after I complete cancer treatment?
Cancer survivorship centers on your care plan. This is the plan you and your cancer care team put together. Survivorship care plans vary, but typically include:
Check-up schedules
. You’ll see your care team every two to three months. You’ll have check-ups during the first two or three years after you finish treatment.
Guidance for lifestyle changes
. Your team may discuss avoiding activities that increase cancer risk. They may make suggestions for
eating well
and being active.
Resource recommendations
. Your care plan may include information about national and regional support groups. These are ways to connect with people living with cancer.
Advertisement
Will I always need cancer survivorship support?
That depends on your situation. You may need ongoing care if you have advanced cancer or a second cancer. But you may finish treatment and feel ready to move on with your life. Either way, you can shape your cancer survivorship to be whatever you need it to be. For example, your cancer survivorship plan could emphasize healthy living after cancer treatment. Or your plan could emphasize ways for you to return to your daily routine.
I have an advanced form of cancer. How does cancer survivorship help me?
If you have advanced cancer, cancer survivorship plans may focus more on managing your symptoms. Cancer survivorship conversations may shift to the kind of care you’d prefer toward the end of your life. For example, you may want to ask about
hospice
care. This is end-of-life care that helps you live your final days as you choose.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having cancer may feel like running a hard race toward a finish line. People with cancer may keep the line in mind as they do their best to power through treatment. Some people are cancer-free after their initial treatment, but they don’t feel free from cancer. Other people still see the finish line, but they keep running into cancer. For others, the finish line they reach is very different from the one they expected. This is where cancer survivorship comes in.
Advertisement
Cancer survivorship helps people with cancer — from diagnosis to treatment to the rest of their lives — live as long as they can and with the best possible quality of life. If you’re receiving cancer treatment or have completed treatment, your care team can create a cancer survivorship plan tailored to the changes you may encounter. They’ll also support you throughout those changes.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
You’re a survivor the moment you get a cancer diagnosis. At Cleveland Clinic, our survivorship experts will be with you every step of the way.
Start Your Survivorship Journey
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/01/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials