Angioedema: Causes, Symptoms, Types & Treatments
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Angioedema
Advertisement
Advertisement
Angioedema
Angioedema is swelling in the tissue under your skin. It’s most common in your lips, eyelids, tongue, genitals, hands and feet. Causes include allergies, medication side effects, vibrations, inherited gene changes and some health conditions. Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) or go to the ER if you’re having trouble breathing or have a sudden drop in blood pressure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Angioedema?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Angioedema?
Angioedema most often makes your lips or eyelids swell. Sometimes, it causes severe airway swelling or low blood pressure.
Angioedema is a reaction that causes swelling in the tissue below your skin. It most often affects your lips and eyelids. But it can affect any body part. It usually comes on quickly and lasts a few hours to a couple of days.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Swelling from angioedema can happen when your body reacts to something like food, medicine or even vibrations. Sometimes, it happens for no clear reason. It may be due to a health problem you were born with or another issue that makes the swelling come and go without warning. Your provider might consider other causes if the swelling lasts longer than two or three days.
Angioedema can be serious, even fatal, if your
airways
swell or your
blood pressure drops too low
.
Call 911 (or your local emergency number) or get to an emergency room if you’re having trouble breathing or feeling weak or dizzy.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of angioedema
Angioedema causes swelling, most commonly in your:
Face
Eyelids
Lips
Tongue
Throat and airways
Hands
Feet
Genitals
Other symptoms include:
Abdominal pain
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
Dizziness
Fainting
Hives
often happen at the same time as angioedema. But you can have angioedema without hives.
Is it life-threatening?
It can be. Angioedema can sometimes cause severe airway swelling or a sudden drop in blood pressure.
Call 911 (or your local emergency number) or get to an emergency room if you’re having trouble breathing or feeling weak or dizzy.
Angioedema causes
Angioedema happens when liquid from small
blood vessels
escapes and fills up tissues, causing swelling. It often happens in
response to allergies
, drug side effects or vibrations. Inherited
gene changes
, cancer,
autoimmune diseases
and infections can also cause it without a predictable trigger. Sometimes, it happens for no known reason (idiopathic angioedema).
Advertisement
Specific causes of angioedema include:
Allergies
: Triggers for allergic angioedema include
food allergies
, drug allergies, latex allergies, insect stings and spider bites. Swelling usually happens within minutes to a couple of hours after exposure. It often causes hives, too.
Non-allergic drug reactions
:
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
are the most common cause of non-allergic drug reactions. The reaction doesn’t happen right away. Swelling can happen within a few weeks or months of starting the medication.
Vibrations
: Vibratory angioedema can happen while you’re riding a motorcycle, running, jogging, using powered gardening tools or during other activities that cause vibrations.
Gene variations
: You can inherit
hereditary angioedema
(HAE) from one or both biological parents. It can cause frequent, unpredictable swelling.
Low levels of C1-inhibitor
: C1-inhibitor is an
immune system
protein. Acquired C1-inhibitor deficiency causes episodes of swelling that don’t seem to have a specific trigger. Cancers, autoimmune disorders and infections can cause C1-inhibitor deficiency.
Can stress cause it?
Sometimes. If you have idiopathic or hereditary angioedema, stress might make swelling more likely.
Risk factors
You’re at higher risk for angioedema if you:
Have allergies to food, latex or medications
Have a health condition that affects your
B cells
(like certain types of cancer)
Have an inherited gene variation that causes angioedema
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose angioedema
Your healthcare provider will begin with a physical examination. They’ll ask you questions about:
When the swelling started
What you may have eaten or touched that could have caused the reaction
What medications and
supplements
you’re taking
Whether or not you’ve had this type of reaction before
If you have family members who experience similar swelling
Allergy skin tests
and
allergy blood tests
can help determine if the swelling is an allergic reaction. If there’s no known trigger,
genetic testing
and other blood tests can help determine if another health condition is causing the swelling.
Management and Treatment
How is angioedema treated?
If you have allergic angioedema, you should avoid food, medications and other substances that cause swelling. Check with your provider before stopping prescription medications. If the swelling is a medication side effect, your provider will help you find a medication to replace the one that’s causing you to swell. They might also recommend applying ice or taking cool showers to reduce swelling.
Advertisement
Medications
Medications your provider might recommend to prevent or treat angioedema depend on the cause. They include:
Antihistamines
,
steroids
or epinephrine to treat swelling in allergic angioedema
Omalizumab
(Xolair®) to reduce the risk of an allergic reaction if you’re accidentally exposed to a food you’re allergic to, or to treat chronic idiopathic angioedema
Medications that reduce your risk of swelling for HAE (like Cinryze®, Haegarda® Orladeyo® or Takhzyro®)
Medications that treat HAE swelling when it happens (like Berinert®, Firazyr®, Kalbitor® or Ruconest®)
An
epinephrine autoinjector
(Epipen®, Auvi-Q®) for severe swelling
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have repeated episodes of swelling, especially if you don’t know the cause. Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) or go to the ER if you or someone you’re with experiences:
Swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat
Sudden weakness or fainting
Severe vomiting or diarrhea
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have angioedema?
Most of the time, angioedema is manageable by avoiding things that cause it or taking medications that help prevent it. But don’t stop taking medication prescribed by your doctor unless they say it’s OK. Your provider might also recommend keeping an epinephrine autoinjector or other emergency medications with you in case of unexpected swelling.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can I prevent angioedema?
There are medications that can reduce your risk of swelling if you have HAE, acquired C1-inhibitor deficiency or chronic idiopathic angioedema. If you have allergy-related angioedema, you can prevent swelling by avoiding the food, medication or other triggers that cause allergic reactions. If you have non-allergic angioedema as a drug side effect, you’ll need to work with your healthcare provider to find another medication.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Whether it’s a known allergy or out of the blue, swelling in your body can be scary. Fortunately, most causes of angioedema are manageable. A healthcare provider can help you determine the cause and make recommendations to reduce your risk of swelling. They can also make a plan for what to do if you have an episode. Being prepared with this plan can be reassuring and help you feel empowered to manage any unexpected symptoms.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergies can wreak havoc on your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our team of experts can help create a treatment plan that’ll help you breathe easier.
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/01/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment