Alexander Disease: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Alexander Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Alexander Disease
Alexander disease is a rare condition that affects the white matter in your brain. A genetic variant causes it. Symptoms vary by age, but they can include developmental delays, seizures, muscle weakness and trouble speaking or swallowing. This progressive condition worsens over time, but treatment may help manage symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurosurgery Care for Adults
Neurosurgery Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Alexander Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Alexander Disease?
Alexander disease is an extremely rare
neurological disorder
and a type of
leukodystrophy
. This means it affects your brain’s white matter.
White matter
is a network of
nerve
fibers in your brain that helps nerve cells communicate.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This disease damages myelin.
Myelin
is a fatty substance that protects nerve fibers in white matter. It conducts signals throughout your body (signals are how your nerve and brain cells talk to each other). Without healthy myelin, communication breaks down. It can cause developmental delays, seizures and other serious symptoms.
This condition worsens over time and can be life-threatening for certain age groups.
Types of Alexander disease
Healthcare providers determine the type based on when symptoms show up. These include:
Neonatal
: It develops during the first month of life.
Infantile
: It affects children before age 2. This is the most common type.
Juvenile
: Symptoms may appear between ages 2 and 13, but they’re most common between ages 4 and 10.
Adult
: It can develop any time during adulthood, starting after the late teen years.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Alexander disease
Symptoms vary depending on the age they start. Alexander disease is a progressive condition. That means symptoms tend to get worse over time. Your provider can help you manage symptoms to slow their progression.
Neonatal and infantile Alexander disease symptoms
Symptoms of neonatal and infantile types include:
Developmental delays
(like walking or speech delays)
Growth faltering
Hydrocephalus
(buildup of fluid in your child’s brain)
Megalencephaly
(enlarged brain)
Seizures
Spasms, stiff muscles or involuntary muscle movements (spasticity)
Advertisement
Juvenile-onset Alexander disease symptoms
Symptoms of the juvenile type include:
Difficulty swallowing
and speaking
Frequent vomiting
Front-to-back
and
side-to-side
spine curvature (kyphoscoliosis)
Muscle problems (like weakness, pain or spasms, often in the legs)
Slowed mental functioning (not all cases affect this)
Adult-onset Alexander disease
The symptoms of adult-onset may include those from juvenile onset, along with:
Tremors
Sleep disturbances
Problems with balance, coordination and movements (
ataxia
)
Symptoms are usually mild for this type.
Alexander disease causes
A
genetic variation
in the glial fibrillary acidic protein (
GFAP
)
gene
causes this condition. Normally, this gene produces proteins that link together to form filaments. These help support and strengthen cells in your
nervous system
.
With this condition, abnormal clumps of proteins called Rosenthal fibers build up in cells where they don’t belong. These fibers damage myelin, the protective coating around nerve fibers. Myelin is essential for sending signals throughout your body. When a signal disruption happens, nerve communication stops working effectively, leading to symptoms.
Risk factors of Alexander disease
Anyone can develop this disease. And it usually happens randomly. A new genetic variant most often causes it. This happens without any history of the condition in your biological family history.
In rare cases, you may inherit it from your biological family. It passes in an autosomal dominant pattern. This means that you only need one copy of the genetic variant to develop symptoms.
If you have a family history of this condition or another type of leukodystrophy, a genetic counselor can help you understand the risk of passing on the condition to future children. You may consider preimplantation genetic diagnosis. This is when you undergo
in vitro fertilization
with embryos that don’t have the
GFAP
gene that causes it.
Complications of Alexander disease
Complications may include:
Feeding challenges
Gastrointestinal issues
(like acid reflux)
Mobility issues (difficulty walking independently)
Obstructive hydrocephalus (the flow of fluid to your brain is blocked)
Urinary retention
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Alexander disease
A healthcare provider will perform physical and
neurological exams
to learn more about your symptoms. An imaging test (MRI) confirms a diagnosis. Your provider is looking for changes to the white matter in your brain on this noninvasive test. They may also recommend a
genetic blood test
to look for a genetic variant that causes the condition.
Management and Treatment
How is Alexander disease treated?
Treatments focus on relieving symptoms and slowing disease progression. Your provider may recommend:
Advertisement
Participating in physical therapy or taking medication like
baclofen
for spasticity
Taking
antiseizure medications
to manage seizures
Taking
proton pump inhibitors
to prevent complications from vomiting
Undergoing surgery to get a shunt to treat hydrocephalus
Using a
feeding tube
to get enough nutrients
Using mobility devices to help you move independently
Your provider may offer other types of treatments to manage complications if they arise.
Researchers are working to develop new therapies in
clinical trials
. You can talk to your provider to see if a clinical trial can offer benefits for you.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if you notice:
Balance or mobility problems
Difficulty swallowing, eating or speaking
Nausea and vomiting (that isn’t related to an illness)
Seizures
Contact emergency services if you have a seizure for the first time or have trouble breathing.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurosurgery Care for Adults
Neurosurgery Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy of someone with Alexander disease?
The prognosis varies. The disease is progressive, and children usually develop more severe symptoms as time goes by. Symptoms and
lifespan
depend on the type:
Newborns with neonatal Alexander disease are severely disabled. Most pass away before their second birthday.
Children with the infantile type may live five to 10 years.
Children with the juvenile-onset disease may live into their 30s or 40s.
Some adults with Alexander disease have mild or nonexistent symptoms. For many, the disease doesn’t shorten life expectancy.
Advertisement
Talk to your provider for the most up-to-date information about what you can expect. Your case is as unique as you are. It may or may not relate to these statistics.
Care is available for you and your family if your provider suspects a
short life expectancy
. Mental health professionals are available to help you cope and
grieve
in your time of need.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that you or a loved one has Alexander disease can be overwhelming. You may have many questions about what the future holds. But you’re not alone. Your care team will be there to support you. They’ll answer your questions and guide you through each step. Don’t hesitate to reach out whenever you need them.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Learning your child needs brain surgery can turn your life upside down. Cleveland Clinic Children’s neurosurgery experts are here to help make things right.
Neurosurgery Care for Adults
Neurosurgery Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment