Dentinogenesis Imperfecta: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Dentinogenesis Imperfecta
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dentinogenesis Imperfecta
Dentinogenesis imperfecta (DGI) is a genetic disorder that makes your teeth weak, brittle and discolored. Dental fillings and crowns can help strengthen weak teeth. If you lose teeth because of DGI, dental implants or dentures can replace them. Regular dental care is essential for people with this condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is dentinogenesis imperfecta?
Dentinogenesis imperfecta (DGI) is a tooth development disorder. It causes weak, brittle
teeth
that wear down or break easily. People with this condition have see-through (translucent) teeth that are blue-gray or yellow-brown in color. Dentinogenesis imperfecta can affect primary (baby) teeth or permanent (adult) teeth, and symptoms can appear at any age.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
DGI interferes with dentin production. Dentin is the calcified substance beneath your tooth enamel. When your dentin doesn’t form properly, it can cause your
tooth enamel
to chip off or wear away. Dentinogenesis imperfecta is different from
amelogenesis imperfecta
, which directly affects your tooth enamel rather than your dentin.
Dentinogenesis imperfecta is a rare disorder. It affects about 1 out of every 6,000 to 8,000 people in the general population.
Types of this condition
There are three types of dentinogenesis imperfecta:
Dentinogenesis imperfecta type 1 (I)
. This occurs in people who have
osteogenesis imperfecta
(brittle bone disease). It’s related to variations (changes) in a certain
gene
, usually either the
COL1A1
or
COL1A2
gene (both responsible for making
collagen
).
Dentinogenesis imperfecta type 2 (II)
. This type affects baby teeth more than permanent adult teeth. People with type II typically don’t have any other inherited disorders, but they may experience
age-related hearing loss
.
Dentinogenesis imperfecta type 3 (III)
: The rarest type of DGI, type III affects permanent teeth more often than primary teeth. Researchers have identified cases in people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent and a few families living in southern Maryland.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of dentinogenesis imperfecta?
Tooth discoloration
and weak, brittle teeth are the most common dentinogenesis imperfecta symptoms. People with DGI have teeth that are translucent and yellow-brown or blue-gray in color.
Other dentinogenesis imperfecta symptoms may include:
Baby teeth that fall out later than expected
Enamel hypoplasia
(you don’t have enough tooth enamel)
Joint hypermobility
(extreme flexibility)
Tooth agenesis
(you were born missing certain teeth)
Weakened tooth enamel
What causes dentinogenesis imperfecta?
A
variation (change)
in the
DSPP
gene causes dentinogenesis imperfecta. The
DSPP
gene gives instructions for making dentin (a hard substance that makes up the middle layer of each tooth). You can inherit this gene change from one of your biological parents, or it can happen randomly.
People with dentinogenesis imperfecta type I have a variation in the
COL1A1
or
COL1A2
genes — the same gene changes that occur in people with osteogenesis imperfecta (brittle bone disease).
Diagnosis and Tests
How is dentinogenesis imperfecta diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will start with a
physical exam
. They’ll also ask you about your family history. If they suspect dentinogenesis imperfecta, they’ll take imaging tests like
dental X-rays
or
CT scans
to confirm the diagnosis.
Your healthcare provider may also recommend
genetic testing
. This lab test can detect the
DNA
changes that cause dentinogenesis imperfecta.
Management and Treatment
How is dentinogenesis imperfecta treated?
Dentinogenesis imperfecta treatment focuses on strengthening weak teeth.
Dentists
do this with restorative procedures like
fillings
,
veneers
or
crowns
. They can use tooth-colored materials to enhance the appearance of your smile.
With dentinogenesis imperfecta, you’re more likely to lose teeth as you grow older. If this happens, dentists can replace missing teeth with
dental implants
or
dentures
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for dentinogenesis imperfecta?
Your outlook depends on a few things, like:
Your age at the time of your diagnosis
How soon you begin treatment
The type of dentinogenesis imperfecta you have
Dentinogenesis imperfecta isn’t
curable
. But the right dental care can strengthen your teeth and reduce your risk of further damage. The sooner you get a diagnosis and start treatment, the better your outlook will be.
Prevention
Can dentinogenesis imperfecta be prevented?
You can’t prevent dentinogenesis imperfecta because you can’t control the DNA changes that cause it. But treating it early gives you the best chance of reducing dental damage in the long run.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
If you have dentinogenesis imperfecta, good
oral hygiene
is imperative. To reduce your risk for tooth decay and damage:
Ask your dentist about preventive
fluoride
treatments to strengthen your teeth.
Brush your teeth two to three times a day using a soft-bristled toothbrush and fluoride toothpaste.
Limit sugary, acidic foods.
Swish with a fluoride mouth rinse once a day.
Visit your dentist regularly for checkups and cleanings.
Advertisement
What can I eat or drink with dentinogenesis imperfecta?
It’s best to choose foods and drinks that are low in sugar and acidity. This means limiting things like sodas, citrus fruits and tomato-based products. It’s also a good idea to avoid foods that are hard or crunchy.
Here are some examples of foods to eat if you have dentinogenesis imperfecta:
Baked fish
Casseroles
Cooked vegetables
Oatmeal
Pasta with cream-based sauce
Scrambled eggs
Smoothies
When should I see my healthcare provider?
It’s best to tell your healthcare provider as soon as you notice something isn’t quite right. Remember, DGI symptoms can appear at any age. If your baby’s first teeth look bluish, gray or brown, take them to a pediatric dentist for a consultation.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you received a dentinogenesis imperfecta diagnosis, here are some questions you might want to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of DGI do I have?
What kind of treatment do I need?
How long will treatment take, and how long will it last?
How often should I get my teeth cleaned?
What are some preventive steps I can take to reduce dental wear and tear?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having brittle teeth is frustrating. Being on high alert every time you eat can be exhausting. If you have dentinogenesis imperfecta, you might be embarrassed about the appearance of your teeth. Maybe you even avoid social situations because of it. Your healthcare provider is here to help. They can recommend treatments to strengthen your teeth, enhance your smile and boost your confidence.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Dentistry plays an important role in oral health. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can design a personalized plan that will keep you smiling for the long haul.
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment