Vaginismus: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vaginismus
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vaginismus
Vaginismus is tensing of your vaginal muscles that’s out of your control. You may experience it at the start of sex, while inserting a tampon or while getting a pelvic exam. Vaginismus can make intercourse painful. It’s treatable, often with pelvic floor therapy, talk therapy and vaginal dilation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Vaginismus?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Vaginismus?
Vaginismus is when the
muscles
around your
vagina
tense or contract uncontrollably in response to something trying to go in it. These
muscle spasms
can cause discomfort and pain.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The
DSM-5
combines vaginismus and
painful intercourse (dyspareunia)
under a condition called genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder (GPPPD). Your healthcare provider may use this term when talking about vaginismus.
Vaginismus can get in the way of intimacy and other health needs, causing a lot of distress. You don’t have to live this way. It may be difficult to talk about your vagina and
sexual history
. But doing so can help your healthcare provider diagnose and treat vaginismus.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of vaginismus
The main symptom of vaginismus is muscle tightening around your vaginal opening when you anticipate or attempt penetration. The spasms may be mildly uncomfortable or very painful. And you can’t control them.
The tightening could happen when:
You try to insert a
tampon
.
You try vaginal penetration during sex, like with a finger, a sex toy or a penis.
A healthcare provider tries to insert a medical tool (like a
speculum
).
Vaginismus symptoms may begin when you try one of these for the first time. Some
women
develop the condition later in life. It can happen after years of doing these things without any issues.
The spasms or discomfort may occur any time there’s vaginal penetration. Or you may have them only at certain times.
Advertisement
How do I know if I have it?
You know your body best. Based on the symptoms of vaginismus, you may be sure you have it. But many other conditions can cause vaginal pain and painful sex. That’s why it’s best to see a healthcare provider to get an accurate diagnosis.
Vaginismus causes
Researchers don’t know the exact cause of vaginismus. The main theory is that a fear of painful sex causes your
pelvic floor muscles
to tighten automatically when you attempt penetration. This can create an ongoing cycle of fear, tightening and pain.
Several mental and physical factors may contribute to vaginismus and this cycle, like:
A negative experience with a
pelvic exam
or
vaginal delivery
A painful sexual experience
Anxiety or fears about having sex
Negative beliefs or feelings about sex
Pelvic pain
, like from a
yeast infection
or surgery
Sexual assault
or abuse
You can get vaginismus even if you don’t have a psychological explanation for it. Developing vaginismus is out of your control. But you can take back that control by seeking treatment.
Complications of this condition
Vaginismus can affect your sex life and relationships with your partner(s). Vaginismus may also make it more challenging to
get pregnant
.
It can affect your mental health, too, leading to increased stress, anxiety and/or depression.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
To diagnose vaginismus, a healthcare provider (usually, a
gynecologist
) will ask about your symptoms, like when they happen and when they started. They may also ask about your sexual history. It’s important to be honest about what you’re experiencing.
Your provider may recommend a pelvic exam to help rule out other physical issues that may be causing pain. Vaginismus can make it difficult to have these exams. Some strategies that may help include:
Talking about the exam before it begins and how you and your provider will communicate during it
Using a mirror so you can see what your provider is doing and what areas they’re checking
Placing your hand on your provider’s hand to have a better sense of control
Management and Treatment
How is vaginismus treated?
Treatment for vaginismus is individualized to address the physical and emotional aspects of the condition. Treatments may include:
Pelvic floor
physical therapy
: A specialist can teach you exercises to help relax your pelvic muscles and decrease pain.
Talk therapy
: A
psychologist
or
sex therapist
can help you navigate the thoughts and fears you may have about sex or penetration. They can also help you and your partner(s) work out relationship issues that vaginismus may be causing.
Vaginal dilator therapy
: Vaginal dilators are tube-shaped devices of various sizes that help you get used to penetration. Your provider will explain the therapy in detail. You do it at home.
Advertisement
It may take several weeks to months to notice an improvement in your symptoms. But it’s possible. Reach out to your provider if your treatment plan isn’t working.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have vaginismus?
Vaginismus doesn’t go away on its own. But treatment helps most women. According to one
study
, 4 out of 5 women (80%) responded well to treatment involving more than one therapy (like talk therapy and physical therapy).
Keep in mind that it may take time. Lean on your healthcare team and partner(s) for support. In the meantime, remember that it’s possible to have fulfilling intimacy by doing other things that don’t trigger vaginismus.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you experience muscle spasms or pain that makes penetrative sex uncomfortable or impossible, don’t be embarrassed to talk to a healthcare provider. You don’t have to keep dealing with it. Many conditions, including vaginismus, can cause painful intercourse. Almost all of these issues are treatable. Many see significant improvements in their sex lives and mental health after vaginismus treatments.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment