Ataxic Cerebral Palsy: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ataxic Cerebral Palsy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ataxic Cerebral Palsy
Ataxic cerebral palsy is a movement condition that affects your child’s balance and coordination. Damage to the cerebellum, or the part of your child’s brain that regulates their movement, causes this condition. Treatment with physical or occupational therapy can help keep them safe while boosting their independence.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Cerebral Palsy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is ataxic cerebral palsy?
Ataxic cerebral palsy is a condition that causes unsteady movements, and difficulty with coordination (
ataxia
) and balance. It may also affect your child’s
depth perception
. This is the understanding of an object’s size and how far away it is from your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This condition occurs when there’s a disruption in the brain pathways that control muscles and movement. For example, your child might reach for something, but their hand misses its target. This happens because the message that their brain sends to their arm doesn’t get to where it needs to go in time.
How rare is ataxic cerebral palsy?
Ataxic cerebral palsy is the least common type of cerebral palsy.
Fewer
than 1 in 10 people diagnosed with cerebral palsy have the ataxic type.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of ataxic cerebral palsy?
The signs and symptoms of ataxic cerebral palsy may include:
Tremors
or shaking
Difficulty with precise movements (reaching for something but missing it)
Overcorrection of movements (over-adjusting the reach to try to get to the right spot)
Difficulty with coordinated movements (like clapping or writing)
Unstable walking and poor balance
Wide
gait
(walking with feet reaching farther apart than their hips)
Difficulty with speaking and swallowing
Slow eye movements
Eye movements that miss their target (moving eyes to look at something but the eyes move past where they want to go and have to adjust to get to the right spot)
Sometimes, this condition can look like your child is clumsy or “under the influence” due to the unpredictability of their movements.
Advertisement
How does ataxic cerebral palsy affect speech?
Ataxic cerebral palsy can affect the muscles that regulate your child’s speech and ability to swallow. This can cause “scanning speech,” where there are pauses between words and syllables. Their voice may be monotone, without changes to pitch or expression. Loud breathing may be common as well.
What parts of the body does ataxic cerebral palsy affect?
This condition can affect one or many different parts of your child’s body, including their:
Legs
Arms
Hands and fingers
Eyes
Throat muscles
What causes ataxic cerebral palsy?
An injury to the part of the brain called the
cerebellum
causes ataxic cerebral palsy. Your cerebellum is the part of your brain that regulates movement and coordination.
Brain injury can occur during pregnancy, birth or shortly after birth if the following occur:
Lack of blood flow to the brain (
ischemic stroke
)
Bleeding in the brain (
hemorrhagic stroke
)
Injury to the brain due to infection
Injury to the brain due to trauma (
traumatic brain injury
)
A genetic variant (
mutation
) may cause it, too. Research is ongoing to learn more about this cause.
You may be more at risk of having a child with cerebral palsy if you (the birth mother) or your baby experience:
An infection during pregnancy that affects your baby or the placenta
An
early birth
(preterm)
Pregnancy complications (such as placental abruption or
uterine rupture
), which may affect blood flow to the fetus
Multiples in your uterus (twins, triplets)
Low birth weight
Jaundice
after birth that’s severe and doesn’t get treated
What are the complications of ataxic cerebral palsy?
Complications of ataxic cerebral palsy may include:
Uncoordinated movements
High risk of falls and injuries
Developmental delays
with motor function (like crawling, walking and grabbing)
While less likely, problems with cognitive development (intellectual disability) or seizures may occur.
Is ataxic cerebral palsy an intellectual disability?
Many cases of ataxic cerebral palsy don’t affect your child’s intelligence and don’t cause
intellectual disability
, but some do. The condition affects each child differently and it mainly affects your child’s movement.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is ataxic cerebral palsy diagnosed?
A healthcare provider usually diagnoses ataxic cerebral palsy during infancy or childhood. A
physical exam
in the office is the first step in diagnosis. Your child’s provider may also recommend some follow-up testing. They may ask you questions about their movement and developmental milestones, along with any other symptoms you notice. They’ll also review your child’s muscle tone, motor skills and coordination during the physical.
What tests diagnose ataxic cerebral palsy?
Findings on physical examination may suggest ataxic cerebral palsy. Their provider may recommend imaging tests to look for areas of damage in your child’s brain. Other tests help your child’s provider rule out conditions with similar symptoms. Tests to diagnose ataxic cerebral palsy may include:
Advertisement
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) test
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Electroencephalogram
(EEG)
Blood
and/or urine tests
Speech evaluation
Eye exam
Genetic testing
Management and Treatment
How is ataxic cerebral palsy treated?
Treatment for ataxic cerebral palsy may include:
Exercises at home to practice coordination
Physical, occupational and/or
speech therapy
Braces or assistive devices (like a wheelchair)
Medications
to relax muscles
Your child’s care team will help your child manage their symptoms so they can gain independence. Management of their symptoms will be lifelong, as there isn’t a cure for ataxic cerebral palsy. Talk to your child’s provider about the possible side effects of treatment so you know what to look out for.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Cerebral Palsy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis (outlook) for ataxic cerebral palsy?
Ataxic cerebral palsy isn’t a progressive condition. This means it won’t get worse as your child grows, but their symptoms can still affect them as they get older. They’ll likely need support from their care team to help them manage the condition for their entire life. With treatment, many people gain independence and learn how to take care of themselves and navigate their environment safely.
What’s the life expectancy for ataxic cerebral palsy?
Ataxic cerebral palsy doesn’t directly affect a person’s life expectancy. A person diagnosed with this condition will have a normal to near-normal life expectancy. Your child may face some complications as a result of their diagnosis, but treatment is available to reduce these.
Advertisement
Living With
When should my child see a healthcare provider?
If you notice abnormal movements (like tremors or slow eye movements) in your child or they have trouble reaching developmental milestones for their age (like walking or talking), contact a healthcare provider.
Visit the emergency room or call 911 or your local emergency services number if your child severely injures themselves after experiencing a fall.
What questions should I ask my child’s healthcare provider?
Can you help me understand my child’s diagnosis?
What type of treatment is best to treat my child’s symptoms?
What are the goals of this treatment?
Are there side effects of the treatment?
Are there assistive devices that may help my child?
How often do you recommend my child participate in physical or occupational therapy?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ataxic cerebral palsy can be a frustrating condition for your child to manage. While they try their hardest to reach for something or balance, that part of their brain doesn’t communicate well enough to help them complete the task. Treatment is available to help your child. They’ll work on improving their balance and coordination so your child can feel more independent and confident in their movement as they grow.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A lot of things in adulthood can be hard. Finding the right provider to treat your adult cerebral palsy shouldn’t be one of them. Cleveland Clinic is here to help.
Adult Cerebral Palsy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment