Smokeless Tobacco: Types, Side Effects & Quitting
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Smokeless Tobacco
Advertisement
Advertisement
Smokeless Tobacco
Smokeless tobacco is an addictive tobacco product that isn’t burned or inhaled, like cigarettes. There are two main types that you either pack in your mouth or inhale through your nose. Smokeless tobacco can affect your mouth and nasal tissues, teeth and heart.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is smokeless tobacco?
Smokeless tobacco is shredded or crushed tobacco that you chew or place in your
mouth
, usually between your
gums
and your cheek or lips. You may also sniff or snort it up your
nose
. Unlike cigarettes, you don’t smoke it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Smokeless tobacco contains nicotine that your body absorbs through the tissues in your mouth or nose. Nicotine is an
addictive substance
. It’s also a stimulant. That means when it enters your system, it causes your
adrenal glands
to release more
adrenaline
(epinephrine). This increases your
heart rate
, which causes more blood to flow to your
muscles
and
brain
. It also binds to brain receptors and causes your brain to release more
dopamine
. Dopamine is a chemical that gives you pleasure.
Other names for smokeless tobacco include oral smokeless products or nasal smokeless products.
What are the two main types of smokeless tobacco in the U.S.?
The two main types of smokeless tobacco in the U.S. are:
Chewing tobacco
Snuff
Chewing tobacco is large, dried (cured), dark brown tobacco leaves — it looks like tea leaves. It may be a loose pile of leaves, or it may look like a dense brick (plug) or braid (twist). People typically pinch the leaves between their thumbs and pointer fingers and place it between their gums and cheeks or lips. Or they may cut or bite a piece off the plug or chew and place it in the same area. Most people spit out tobacco juices when they use smokeless tobacco orally. But some people swallow some of it.
Snuff is finely crushed tobacco. It can either be moist (dip) or dry, and manufacturers typically add artificial flavors, like mint or fruit, and other additives to it. People typically pinch moist snuff between their thumbs and fingers and pack it between their gums and cheeks or lips. But it may also come in tiny pouches that resemble tea bags. Dry snuff typically enters your body by snorting it up your nose.
Advertisement
What is snus?
Snus (snüs; pronounced like “snoose”) is a dry snuff that comes in a pouch. People typically place it between their upper lip and gums. But some put it under their tongues.
Snus originates from Sweden.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What are the risks of using smokeless tobacco?
Smokeless tobacco contains around 30 chemicals that have a connection to
cancer
. Tobacco-specific nitrosamines (TSNAs) are the most
carcinogenic
(cancer-causing) chemicals in smokeless tobacco. Using smokeless tobacco causes or increases your risk of developing:
Head and neck cancers
. These include
lip cancer
, gum cancer,
tongue cancer
and
inner cheek cancer
(buccal mucosa cancer).
Esophageal cancer
. Your
esophagus
is the hollow, muscular tube that transports liquids and food from your throat to your stomach.
Pancreatic cancer
. Your
pancreas
is a large gland in your abdomen (belly) that helps with digestion and controlling the amount of sugar in your bloodstream.
Other smokeless tobacco risks include:
Stained teeth, tooth decay and
tooth loss
White patches inside your mouth (leukoplakia)
Gum disease
(periodontal disease)
Accelerated heart rate
(tachycardia)
High blood pressure
(hypertension)
Irregular heartbeat
(atrial arrhythmia)
Stroke
Heart attack
(myocardial infarction)
Using smokeless tobacco while pregnant can cause early
labor
and
stillbirth
.
What are the benefits of dipping?
Many people incorrectly assume that smokeless tobacco is harmless because you don’t inhale it. But the chemicals you absorb through your tissues or ingest in your
saliva
(spit) still contain nicotine and other harmful chemicals. Smokeless tobacco isn’t safe. It can cause life-threatening conditions.
Some people use smokeless tobacco to help them
quit smoking
. But smokeless tobacco may not help you quit smoking, and you may end up addicted to smokeless tobacco, as well. Talk to a healthcare provider if you smoke and want to quit. They can recommend different ways to stop.
What does dip do to your body?
The chemicals you absorb when you use smokeless tobacco can cause
inflammation
in your mouth, nose and
blood vessels
. Inflammation can also affect the layer of cells that help your blood vessels tighten and relax (
endothelium
). Endothelial inflammation increases your risk of developing a buildup of fatty substances (plaque) in your blood vessels. It also makes you more likely to get a secondary
infection
. A secondary infection is an infection that develops while treating another infection.
Smokeless tobacco inflammation can also:
Damage your
liver
(hepatic injury)
Destroy cells in your liver and
thyroid
tissues (
apoptosis
)
Advertisement
Is dipping tobacco worse than smoking?
Any type of tobacco use can be very addictive and cause serious health conditions. Smokeless tobacco and cigarettes contain similar amounts of nicotine.
Is smokeless tobacco legal in the U.S.?
You must be 21 or older to purchase any tobacco products in the U.S. This includes smokeless tobacco as well as:
Cigarettes
E-cigarettes
(vapes)
Cigars
A note from Cleveland Clinic
There are many reasons people use smokeless tobacco. Some people think it’s safer than cigarettes or easier to use because it doesn’t produce smoke. Others think they can use it to quit smoking. But it’s a harmful, highly addictive product, and it won’t help you quit nicotine. The chemicals in smokeless tobacco pose serious risks to your long-term health.
If you don’t use smokeless tobacco, don’t start. But if you need help quitting, know that you’re not alone. Healthcare providers can answer any questions you have and recommend the best ways to quit. They can also point you toward support groups or other resources, including texting and apps, to help you break the habit.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment