Germinoma: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Germinoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Germinoma
A germinoma is the most common germ cell tumor that forms in your brain. A type of cancer, it’s most commonly diagnosed in children, teens and young adults. Symptoms include fatigue, nausea and vomiting, vision changes and hormone-related problems. Most germinomas are curable with radiation therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is a germinoma?
A germinoma is a type of
germ cell tumor
that forms in your
brain
. They’re also called “intracranial germinomas.” Most form in either the pineal region of your brain (where your
pineal gland
is) or the suprasellar region (where your
pituitary gland
is).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Germ cell tumors (GCTs) form from reproductive cells that eventually become eggs or sperm. Related, most GCTs start in the organs that house these cells — your
ovaries
or
testicles
. But germinomas are different. With a germinoma, the cells travel to your brain or spine. Once there, they grow and form masses. Although they can be
benign
(noncancerous), most germinomas are
malignant
(cancerous) tumors.
Still, germinomas have an excellent outlook (prognosis). They grow slowly and are usually
curable
with treatment.
How common are germinomas?
Brain germ cell tumors
are rare. But germinomas are the most common type of these rare tumors. They’re most commonly diagnosed in children, teens and young adults.
Males
are more likely to develop them.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a germinoma?
Germinomas can cause cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to build up in your brain (
hydrocephalus
). The pressure from the
tumor
or the fluid buildup can lead to symptoms like:
Headaches
.
Nausea
and
vomiting
.
Problems with muscle coordination (
ataxia
).
Vision issues (including
blurred vision
,
double vision
and an inability to look upward).
Mood changes.
Trouble concentrating.
Fatigue
.
Depending on where the tumor is located, germinomas may also cause
hormone
-related symptoms, like:
Advertisement
Excessive thirst or having to pee a lot (signs of
diabetes insipidus
).
Early or delayed
puberty
.
Stunted growth in children.
Excessive sleepiness or sluggishness.
What causes a germinoma?
With a germinoma, the reproductive cells that normally travel to your ovaries or testicles during
fetal development
take a detour to your
central nervous system
. Instead of becoming egg or sperm cells, they form an abnormal mass in one or more parts of your brain. Without treatment, the cells can spread to other parts of your body.
Medical experts don’t know what causes this to happen in the first place.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a germinoma diagnosed?
Tests to diagnose a germinoma include:
Imaging tests
. A
brain MRI
can show tumors in your brain or spine.
Tests to check for
tumor markers
. Your healthcare provider may check the levels of
alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP) or
human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG) in your blood and cerebrospinal fluid. These numbers can help distinguish germinomas from other types of germ cell tumors.
Biopsy
. A provider may remove a sample of the germinoma to test it in a lab for
cancer
cells. Usually, you only need a biopsy if the other tests don’t provide enough information for a diagnosis.
In children, germinomas can take some time to diagnose because some of the signs — like trouble concentrating or sluggishness — are more commonly related to
mental health conditions
. No matter the cause, the sooner your child is diagnosed, the sooner they can get the treatment they need.
Staging
Your healthcare provider will
stage
the germinoma to determine the extent of the cancer spread. They’ll classify it as either localized (M0) or disseminated/
metastatic
(M+). Localized means that the germinoma hasn’t spread. Disseminated/metastatic means that it has.
These classifications help providers plan treatment.
Management and Treatment
How are germinomas treated?
Most germinomas are curable with
radiation therapy
. This treatment directs X-rays toward the germinoma to destroy the tumor. But radiation therapy can cause unpleasant short-term and long-term
side effects
. It may also increase the risk of developing a different cancer in the future.
For this reason,
radiation oncologists
plan treatment carefully. The goal is to give the maximum dosage needed to get rid of tumors while reducing the risk of side effects. In some cases, providers recommend
chemotherapy
treatment to shrink tumors before radiation. That way, they can treat the germinoma using a lower radiation dose.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a germinoma?
The outlook for germinomas is excellent. The 10-year
survival rate
for people with germinomas treated with radiation therapy is
more than 90%
. Tumors rarely come back. When they do, more rounds of radiation therapy often get rid of them for good.
Still, everyone’s journey is different. Ask your healthcare provider how your diagnosis and treatment will impact your outlook.
Advertisement
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
With germinomas, one of the best things you can do is to work closely with your healthcare provider to manage side effects. Radiation therapy and chemotherapy are effective germinoma treatments. But this doesn’t mean they won’t take a physical or emotional toll.
No one can predict your unique response to treatment. Still, your provider can guide you on side effects people commonly experience. Understanding the possibilities can help you feel prepared.
If you’re supporting a child through
cancer treatment
, take steps to communicate what’s going on at an age-appropriate level. Be present for your child. Rally your support network, too. Take advantage of the resources you need to be a strong caregiver for your child.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your healthcare provider if you’re experiencing frequent headaches, having vision issues or noticing other symptoms that may be signs of a brain tumor. Schedule an appointment if you’re noticing these signs in your child.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask include:
What stage is the germinoma, and where is it located?
What treatments do you recommend?
How can I manage short-term treatment side effects?
What long-term side effects should I be on the lookout for?
How often will I need follow-up visits?
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When most people hear the word “cancer,” panic can set in. This is especially the case when a tumor is in an organ that’s as essential as your body’s supercomputer — your brain. But take comfort in knowing that germinomas are usually curable with radiation. This doesn’t mean that treatment won’t be difficult or pose the risk of side effects. Follow-up appointments will still be essential to catch tumors that grow back. But with treatment, most people emerge from germinoma treatment cancer-free. Ask your healthcare provider what your diagnosis means for your outlook.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/30/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials