Nocardiosis: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nocardiosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nocardiosis
Nocardiosis is an infection caused by Nocardia bacteria. You can breathe the bacteria into your lungs or get it in a wound in your skin. It can also spread to other parts of your body. Symptoms include coughing, shortness of breath, chest pain, skin ulcers and more. People with weakened immune systems are at a higher risk of Nocardiosis. It can be fatal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Nocardiosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Nocardiosis?
Nocardiosis is a
bacterial infection
you can get in your lungs, skin and brain. You get it from breathing in
Nocardia
bacteria or getting it in your skin. Nocardiosis is rare, but it can be fatal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Nocardia
bacteria are common in the dirt (soil) around us. Most people can breathe in
Nocardia
without getting sick. But if you have a condition or take medication that weakens your immune system, you’re at a higher risk of nocardiosis. A
weakened immune system
means you can’t fight off
germs
as easily as others do.
How common is nocardiosis?
Nocardiosis is rare.
Experts estimate
that there are between 500 and 1,000 cases in the U.S. each year. About
1% to 4% of people
who receive heart or lung transplants get nocardiosis.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of nocardiosis?
Symptoms of nocardiosis depend on where in your body you’re infected. Symptoms of the most common types of infection (lung and skin) include:
Skin ulcers or sores
Bumps under your skin (nodules)
Cough
Chest pain
Shortness of breath
Fever
Unexplained weight loss
Night sweats
Fatigue, especially fatigue that gets worse over time
If nocardiosis spreads to your brain, symptoms include:
Headache
Nausea and vomiting
Weakness
Confusion
Seizures
What does a
Nocardia
skin infection look like?
If
Nocardia
bacteria infect your skin, you might get ulcers or sores. These could look like open wounds that are red or discolored, blistered, oozing or crusted. They could also look like bumps under your skin that are red, purple or darker than the surrounding skin. They can be painful.
Advertisement
What causes nocardiosis?
Nocardia
bacteria
cause nocardiosis. They live in soil in many parts of the world. You can breathe the bacteria into your lungs or get them in your skin. The infection can spread to other parts of your body from there.
How do you get nocardiosis?
You get nocardiosis from:
Breathing the bacteria in from dirt or dust
Contaminated medical equipment during surgery (this is rare)
Getting the
Nocardia
bacteria in a cut or break in your skin
Injuring yourself while working with dirt (like pricking your finger on a thorn) can force bacteria in. You can also get dirt or contaminated water in an existing cut or wound.
Is nocardiosis contagious?
No, nocardiosis isn’t contagious — it doesn’t spread from person to person.
What are the risk factors for nocardiosis?
You’re more likely to get nocardiosis if you have a weakened immune system, which means you can’t fight off germs as easily as other people. You’re at a higher risk for nocardiosis if you have:
Had a solid organ transplant, especially a
lung
or
heart transplant
Had a
stem cell transplant
, especially if you received stem cells from someone else (
allogenic stem cell transplant
)
Cancer
Diabetes
HIV
An
autoimmune disease
or another condition that requires you to take medications that weaken your immune system (
immunosuppressants
)
Chronic lung disease, like
COPD
What are the complications of nocardiosis?
Complications include:
Spreading to other parts of your body from your lungs — like your brain, blood, skin, eyes, kidneys, bone or muscles
Pneumonia
Pockets of pus in your lungs (lung abscess)
Sepsis
, a life-threatening reaction to infection
Respiratory failure
Organ failure
Diagnosis and Tests
How is nocardiosis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers usually diagnose nocardiosis by trying to grow (
culturing
)
Nocardia
bacteria or
PCR testing
samples from your body. They might test:
Biopsies
of ulcers on your skin
Sputum (
mucus
coughed up from your lungs)
Samples from bronchial alveolar lavage (fluid collected from your lungs during a
bronchoscopy
)
Biopsy from brain
abscesses
They might also use
chest X-rays
or a
CT scan
to look for an infection in your lungs.
Management and Treatment
Can nocardiosis be cured?
Nocardiosis can be cured if treated right away. Healthcare providers treat nocardiosis with
antibiotics
. Your provider may prescribe combinations of antibiotics to get rid of the infection.
You might also need
supplemental oxygen
or
a ventilator
if you’re having trouble breathing.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have nocardiosis?
If you have nocardiosis, you’ll need to take antibiotics for six to 12 months. Some people have to take medications for longer than a year to make sure the infection doesn’t come back. It’s important to take any medications as prescribed by your provider, even if you feel better. You may need to stay in the hospital if you’re very sick.
Advertisement
What is the mortality rate of nocardiosis?
Studies suggest
that the mortality (death) rate for nocardiosis is between 15% and 40%, and some sources estimate that it’s even higher in certain circumstances. But this depends on many factors, like how severe or widespread the infection is and whether you have a weakened immune system.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of nocardiosis. If you have a health condition or take medications that can weaken your immune system, it’s important to talk to your provider about how to protect yourself from getting sick and when to seek medical care.
What questions should I ask my provider?
It might be helpful to ask your provider:
What everyday things can I do to take care of myself?
What symptoms should I look out for?
When should I go to the ER?
When should I follow up with you?
How do I take my medication?
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the ER if you have signs of serious illness, including:
Chest pain
Difficulty breathing
Confusion or altered mental state
Seizures
A wound that won’t heal or is getting bigger
Large bubbles or blisters in your skin that are red, brown, dark green or black
Foul-smelling fluid draining from blisters
Prevention
Can nocardiosis be prevented?
You can reduce your risk of nocardiosis by:
Wearing gloves and a mask if you have to work with dirt or dust
Wearing clothing that covers your skin to prevent cuts or wounds
Bandaging any cuts or open wounds in your skin
Washing your hands
frequently, especially after being outdoors or working with dirt and dust.
Treating injuries right away
by washing them with soap and water and covering them. If the wound is very deep, won’t stop bleeding or has dirt or debris that doesn’t wash out, seek immediate medical attention.
Advertisement
If you’re an organ transplant recipient, your provider might prescribe antibiotics to help prevent infections.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Nocardiosis is a rare but potentially fatal infection. If you have a weakened immune system or you’ll be receiving a transplant, it’s important to talk to your provider about the best way to prevent infections. You can also be prepared to recognize symptoms if they come up, so you can get treatment as soon as possible.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment