Palpation Purpose & Technique
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Palpation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Palpation
When healthcare providers use palpation, that technique turns their sense of touch into one of the most powerful medical tools around. Palpation lets them see with their hands, guiding the way they diagnose and treat health conditions. That’s what makes it such a common and important part of all facets of medical care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
When providers use their hands to feel your body for specific features or changes, that’s palpation.
What Is Palpation?
Palpation is when a healthcare professional uses their hands to feel part of your body. They can use palpation to feel for normal body functions. But they can also feel for changes or differences that point to a disease. Providers also use palpation to guide treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare professionals learn early on that their hands are essential diagnostic tools. They can use their hands to palpate and narrow down the location of pain or an injury. They can also feel things like:
Flexibility
Pulse
or heartbeat
Skin moisture
Stability of bones and joints
Structures under your skin
Swelling
Temperature
Texture
Tissue consistency or changes
Healthcare professionals commonly learn anatomy “landmarks.” They can feel for and use those landmarks as reference points. One example is how a provider can palpate your arm or hand to feel for a vein. That lets them know where to insert an intravenous (IV) line so it goes into that
vein
.
Palpation is a vital part of good medical care. If you’re worried or nervous about your provider touching you, don’t hesitate to tell them that upfront. They can answer any questions you might have that might set your mind at ease. If you still aren’t comfortable being touched, you can tell your provider that. You have every right to say no.
What does palpation feel like?
Palpation can take many forms depending on the body part your provider palpates. Some examples include:
Using their fingertips to feel for tiny differences or changes, like bumps on your skin or lumps under your skin
Using one or both hands to feel for tissue or structure changes in a limb, like an arm or a leg, or in an extremity, like a hand or foot
Applying gentle pressure to feel for something beneath the surface, like feeling your belly to assess the organs inside
Placing their hand flat on a body part to feel its temperature
Finding your pulse with their fingertips
Feeling underneath your jaw for swelling from
inflamed lymph nodes
Using their fingers or palms to gently press on various points, trying to localize a painful area
Advertisement
Palpation can take many more forms, depending on:
The body part your provider palpates
What they’re looking for
If they find something that doesn’t feel as expected
If you have questions about what your provider will palpate for or how they’ll do it, ask them. Your provider can tell you more about what they’ll do and why. They can also reassure you if you’re worried or anxious.
When is palpation used?
Palpation is a standard part of many parts of modern medicine. Some examples of common times when healthcare providers use it include, but aren’t limited to, the following:
At
child developmental milestone
and wellness visits
Digital rectal exams
During
first aid
Neurological exams
Pelvic exams
Physical exams
Prostate exams
Sports physicals
When drawing
blood
for
blood tests
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Long before X-rays or MRIs existed, healthcare providers learned that their sense of touch was a powerful diagnostic tool. And your healthcare provider’s hands can still outperform even the fanciest gadgets available today. That’s because human fingertips can feel things at the microscopic level, much smaller than what our eyes can see.
If you have questions or concerns about how or why your healthcare provider might use palpation during your medical care, let them know upfront. They can tell you more about how and why they might use palpation. They can also offer options that could ease your worries and make the process easier for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider