Platelet Disorders: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Platelet Disorders
Advertisement
Advertisement
Platelet Disorders
Platelet disorders are conditions that impact how many platelets you have and how they work. They include thrombocytosis (high platelets), thrombocytopenia (low platelets) and platelet dysfunction (platelets that aren’t working as they should). While symptoms are usually mild, severe types can impact how your body forms clots to stop bleeding.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What are platelet disorders?
Platelet disorders are conditions that impact how many platelets you have or how they work.
Platelets
are cells that bind together to form clots if you’re injured. They’re like your body’s natural bandage that stops bleeding. But platelet disorders can cause issues with platelet function.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Types of platelet disorders
There are three main types of platelet disorders:
Thrombocytosis
. You have too many platelets in your blood.
Thrombocytopenia
. You have too few platelets in your blood.
Platelet dysfunction
. You have a normal amount of platelets, but they don’t work as expected.
Most platelet disorders cause mild symptoms or no symptoms at all. But in some cases, they can increase your bleeding risk. This is especially the case with low platelets and platelet dysfunction. They can occasionally increase your risk of dangerous clots, especially if your platelet counts are high.
A healthcare provider can explain potential risks and recommend treatments based on your situation.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of platelet disorders?
Symptoms of platelet disorders include:
Signs of bleeding beneath your skin (like
bruises
, also known as
purpura
, and pinpoint-sized spots called
petechiae
)
Heavy
periods
or
nosebleeds
Bleeding gums
Blood in your
poop
or
pee
Feeling weak,
dizzy
or lightheaded
Abnormal
blood clots
What causes platelet disorders?
Platelet disorder causes vary. Sometimes, they result from an underlying condition or a medication you’re taking. Other times, they happen because of a condition you inherit from a biological parent.
High platelets
High platelets can occasionally happen if you have a
mutation
in certain
genes
that causes your body to overproduce platelets. This is called
essential thrombocythemia
. More commonly, your body makes too many platelets in response to something else. This is called reactive thrombocytosis. Causes include:
Advertisement
Iron-deficiency anemia
Inflammatory conditions (including
cancer
and infections)
Injuries
Certain medications
Low platelets
Your platelets may be low because your body just isn’t making enough of them. Low counts can happen when a condition destroys platelets or your
spleen
traps too many. Usually, your spleen stores about one-third of your platelets. Causes include:
Autoimmune diseases
, including
immune thrombocytopenia
Blood cancers
(where your
bone marrow
becomes filled with malignant cells)
Blood disorders
, including
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
(TPP)
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC)
Infections
Treatments, including certain medicines and
cancer therapies
Platelet dysfunction
Some conditions and medications can impact platelet function even if your levels are normal. Platelet dysfunction can result from conditions you’re born with (inherited) and those that you develop (acquire) later in life:
Inherited conditions
.
Bernard Soulier syndrome
,
Glanzman thrombasthenia
,
Von Willebrand disease
, and
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
are rare disorders that cause platelet dysfunction.
Acquired conditions
.
Kidney failure
,
liver disease
and
lupus
are just a few examples of conditions that can cause issues with how your platelets work.
Medications
.
SSRI antidepressants
or
NSAIDs
, like
aspirin
, are the most common causes of platelet dysfunction.
Risk factors of platelet disorders
Several factors can increase your risk of a platelet disorder, including:
Age
. You may be at increased risk of a specific type of platelet disorder depending on your age.
Sex
. Platelet disorders can affect anyone, but symptoms are most common in
women
due to
menstruation
and other causes of bleeding, like childbirth.
Family history
. Some inherited platelet disorders can be transmitted to offspring.
Medical conditions
. Problems with platelets can result from autoimmune diseases, infections, kidney and liver disease, cancer and many other conditions.
Cancer treatments
.
Chemotherapy
and
radiation therapy
can lower your platelet count.
Medications
.
Antibiotics
and
antiseizure medicines
are a couple of the medication types that can impact your platelets.
Lifestyle
. Drinking a lot of alcohol and using tobacco products can affect platelet production.
What are the complications of this condition?
Complications of platelet disorders include:
Hemorrhage
Heavy menstrual periods
(menorrhagia)
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Deep vein thrombosis
or
pulmonary embolism
(in essential thrombocytosis)
Heart attack
Working with a healthcare provider to find the right treatment plan can often prevent complications from happening.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are platelet disorders diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
to check for signs of a platelet disorder. They’ll ask about your symptoms and medical history, including which medicines you’re taking. They’ll do
blood tests
to check your platelets. Tests include:
Advertisement
Complete blood count
(CBC)
. This blood test includes a
platelet count
. It counts how many platelets are in your blood.
Peripheral blood smear
(PBS)
. During this test, a provider views your platelets beneath a microscope to see if they look normal.
Platelet function tests
. These tests show how effectively your platelets form clots.
You may need more tests to determine what’s causing a platelet disorder. Your provider may order a:
Bone marrow biopsy
. This test checks for abnormal cells (signs of a blood disorder or cancer).
Genetic test
. This test detects variants associated with genetic conditions that cause platelet disorders.
Management and Treatment
How are platelet disorders treated?
Treatment for platelet disorders depends on what’s causing it. For chronic platelet disorders, you need to work with a
hematologist
(blood specialist) to make sure your platelets are at safe levels.
Treatments include:
Watchful waiting
. If your symptoms are mild, you may not need treatment. Instead, your provider may monitor your platelets by doing regular blood tests.
Medications
. If your platelet count is excessively high due to essential thrombocytosis or another blood cancer, such as myeloproliferative disease, you may need medication to lower your platelet count.
Platelet depletion
. Very rarely, you may need a type of
apheresis
to remove excess platelets from your blood.
Platelet transfusion
. You may need a
platelet transfusion
if your platelet counts are severely low.
Plasma therapy
. You may need a
plasma exchange
if you have a disease called TTP. The goal of this treatment is to replace a missing part of your blood called ADAMTS13.
Advertisement
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Your experience depends on the type of platelet disorder you have and what’s causing it. Often, platelet counts return to normal once you get treated for the condition causing it. Or your condition may not pose risks unless you’re hurt. In that case, you may need to take steps to reduce your chances of injury. Your care team may need to take extra care to prevent bleeding during surgeries.
With more serious conditions, you may need to take medications regularly. You may need routine treatments and tests to ensure you have the correct number of healthy platelets.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
The best thing you can do if you’re living with a platelet disorder is to understand how to reduce your risk of bleeding or dangerous clots. It’s important to know:
Which activities to avoid
. Some platelet disorders increase your risk of severe bleeding if you’re injured. You may need to avoid activities (like contact sports) where injuries are common.
How to tend a wound
. Knowing how to apply pressure to a wound to stop bleeding is important if you’re at risk of blood loss. Your healthcare provider can teach you.
Which medications to take (and avoid)
. You may need to take medications regularly to manage a platelet disorder. You may need to steer clear of medicines that can inhibit platelet function and increase your bleeding risk.
Which supplements to avoid
. Some supplements can increase your bleeding risk if you have a platelet disorder. Ask your healthcare provider which ones to avoid.
How to communicate with your providers
. Your healthcare providers need to know if you’re planning a procedure associated with bleeding, such as oral or other surgery.
Advertisement
Ask your hematologist or the provider who’s managing your condition to advise you on these things.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if you’re noticing signs of a platelet disorder, like excessive and persistent bruising. Take note of bruises larger than a half dollar that you do not recall getting, like from an injury.
Seek emergency care if you’re experiencing signs of severe blood loss or a blood clot (like a stroke or heart attack).
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask include:
How serious is my condition?
Is it curable?
What treatments will help?
How often will you need to check my platelets?
What can I do to prevent harmful bleeding or blood clots?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Several conditions and even some treatments can impact your platelets. It’s important not to assume the worst if you learn your counts are abnormal. Still, it
is
important to learn what’s causing these issues so you know what you’re dealing with. Contact a healthcare provider if you’re noticing signs of a platelet disorder. They can recommend treatments to return your counts to normal or help manage your condition.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials