Symbrachydactyly: What It Is, Types & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Symbrachydactyly (Short, Joined Fingers)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Symbrachydactyly (Short, Joined Fingers)
Symbrachydactyly affects how your baby’s hands develop. It’s a congenital hand difference that’s present at birth. Babies with this condition have short or webbed fingers. They may be missing fingers or thumbs. The condition doesn’t affect their overall development. Treatment may include surgery, physical therapy and occupational therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Symbrachydactyly?
Symptoms and Causes
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Symbrachydactyly?
In symbrachydactyly, one of your baby’s hands is smaller than the other. The fingers on that hand are short or small.
Symbrachydactyly is a rare
congenital hand difference
. “Congenital” means the condition is present when your baby is born. If your baby has symbrachydactyly, one of their hands is smaller than the other one. The fingers on that hand are small or
short
. They may be missing fingers or their thumb.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The condition happens during
fetal development
. It’s not an inherited disorder that runs in families. Symbrachydactyly (pronounced “sim-brak-ih-DAK-tuh-lee”) causes physical differences in your child’s
hand
. It doesn’t affect their
development
as they grow up.
Symbrachydactyly types
There are four types of symbrachydactyly. The types vary based on how the condition affects your child’s hand. The types are:
Short-finger symbrachydactyly (type 1):
Your child has all or most of their thumb and fingers on the affected hand. Their fingers will be noticeably shorter than the fingers on their other hand. They may be missing bones in their fingers.
Oligodactyly symbrachydactyly (type 2):
Your child’s hand has a thumb and pinkie finger but no other fingers. Providers may refer to this as an atypical cleft hand.
Monodactylic symbrachydactyly (type 3):
Your child has a fully developed thumb on the affected hand. They may have four partially developed fingers.
Peromelic symbrachydactyly (type 4:)
Your child doesn’t have a thumb or fingers on the affected hand.
Symptoms and Causes
Symbrachydactyly symptoms
Your child’s symptoms may vary depending on the type of symbrachydactyly that they have. For example, your child’s forearm may be shorter than their other forearm. But all children with this condition have fingers that are shorter than usual. They often have missing fingers and thumbs.
Advertisement
Symbrachydactyly causes
There’s no known cause of symbrachydactyly. Some experts think it may happen during development when blood stops flowing to a fetus’s arm. Arm
bones
start as small buds or bumps that extend from a fetus’s body. The buds or bumps need a steady flow of blood to grow and become a fully formed arm and hand. Without blood flow, a fetus’s arm, fingers or thumb may not develop normally.
How doctors diagnose symbrachydactyly
A
pediatrician
will examine your baby’s hand. They’ll identify specific issues with your baby’s hand or fingers. They’ll use that information to diagnose the type of symbrachydactyly that your baby has. Your child’s pediatrician may do
X-rays
of your child’s hand. The X-ray results will help them plan treatment.
Your child’s
pediatrician
may classify your child’s condition as being mild, moderate or severe:
Mild symbrachydactyly
means your child has slightly short fingers. They may have small amounts of webbing (skin) that connects their fingers. Their hand or forearm may be shorter than their other hand or forearm.
Moderate symbrachydactyly
is when most or all the finger bones in your child’s hand are missing. Their fingers appear as small stumps. Their thumb may be shorter than usual.
Severe symbrachydactyly
means your child’s hand is missing fingers. They may have a partial thumb or no thumb.
Management and Treatment
Treatment for symbrachydactyly
The goal of symbrachydactyly treatment is to help your child use their hand as much as possible. Your child may have surgery to fix issues that make their hands look different. Other treatment options are:
Physical therapy
to strengthen your child’s arm and hand and help them move their hand more easily
Occupational therapy
to help your child learn ways to manage daily activities
Splints
to support their hand
Protheses
to replace missing fingers and thumbs
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has symbrachydactyly?
This condition won’t affect your child’s overall growth and development. But having symbrachydactyly makes them different from other children. And having a child with this condition can make you different from other parents. You and your child may feel like you’re on your own to manage how symbrachydactyly changes your lives.
If that’s your situation, ask your child’s care team about support groups for children with congenital hand differences. Those connections may help you and your child feel less isolated.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Every child is unique. If your child has symbrachydactyly, they’re unique in ways that are different from other children. They have very short fingers or are missing fingers and their thumb, and may need surgery and other treatment.
Advertisement
They may also need extra support as they grow up and learn to live with symbrachydactyly. Your child’s care team will understand the unique challenges this condition often creates. They’ll recommend treatments that are right for your child. Just as important, they’ll be there for you and your child from diagnosis and beyond.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/10/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment