Mesothelioma: Types, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Mesothelioma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mesothelioma
Mesothelioma is a rare cancer that most commonly starts in the lining around your lungs. It can also start in the lining or sac around your abdomen, heart or testicles. Symptoms include shortness of breath, cough, night sweats, chest pain and digestive issues. Treatments include immunotherapy, chemotherapy, radiation, targeted therapy and surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Mesothelioma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Mesothelioma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Mesothelioma?
Symptoms of mesothelioma depend on where in your body it is. Symptoms might be vague or similar to other conditions.
Mesothelioma is a rare cancer that can form in the lining around your lungs (
pleura
) or abdominal organs (
peritoneum
). Rarely, mesothelioma affects the sac around your heart (
pericardium
) or lining around your testicles (tunica vaginalis).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Mesothelioma starts in your mesothelium, a type of tissue that makes up a lining that surrounds and protects certain organs. It often creates multiple tumors that can sometimes combine into a sheet over the affected organs, making it hard to treat.
Types of mesothelioma
The most common type of mesothelioma is
pleural mesothelioma
, which affects the lining of your
lungs
. Other types include:
Peritoneal mesothelioma
. This affects the lining of your abdominal and pelvic cavities. It’s the second most common type of mesothelioma.
Pericardial mesothelioma
. This affects the sac around your
heart
. It’s extremely rare.
Mesothelioma of the tunica vaginalis testis (paratesticular mesothelioma)
. This affects the lining around your
testicles
. It’s also extremely rare.
Sometimes,
solitary fibrous tumors
are called “benign mesothelioma,” but they’re not really related to cancerous (malignant) mesothelioma.
You might also hear mesothelioma described as epithelioid, sarcomatoid or biphasic (a mix of both). This describes the shape and other characteristics of the cancerous cells. The type of mesothelioma you have might affect your treatment options and prognosis (outlook).
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of mesothelioma
Symptoms of mesothelioma depend on where it is in your body. They include:
Advertisement
Fever
Night sweats
Fatigue
Unintended weight loss
Chest or abdominal pain
Respiratory symptoms, like worsening
shortness of breath
(dyspnea), cough and
difficulty swallowing
(dysphagia)
Digestive symptoms, like
diarrhea
,
loss of appetite
,
nausea
and
vomiting
Cardiovascular symptoms, like
low blood pressure
and
abnormal heart rhythms
Swelling
, lumps or pain in your
scrotum
or groin
Mesothelioma causes
Asbestos exposure
is the most common cause of mesothelioma. Asbestos is a naturally occurring mineral once commonly used in many industries, including construction, shipbuilding and the automotive industry. It has needlelike fibers that can damage your tissues if you breathe them in or swallow them. Mesothelioma doesn’t show up right away — it can take decades for cancer to develop after asbestos exposure.
But developing cancer can depend on many factors — most people exposed to asbestos don’t get mesothelioma. And people with mesothelioma don’t always have a history of asbestos exposure.
Risk factors
Having a job that exposed you to asbestos is a risk factor for mesothelioma. These could include:
Construction and building demolition
Shipbuilding
Mining
Military service
Milling
Auto repair
Other risk factors include:
Radiation exposure
. This includes
radiation treatments
(especially to your chest) for a previous cancer or working at a job that exposes you to radiation.
Exposure to erionite
. Erionite, an asbestos-like mineral, was once used in road construction.
Genetics
. An inherited
change
in the
BAP1
gene can make you more likely to get certain cancers, including mesothelioma.
Biological sex
. More males than females get mesothelioma.
Complications of mesothelioma
Mesothelioma can spread (
metastasize
) to other parts of your body. It can also cause fluid to build up around your lungs (
pleural effusion
) or heart (
pericardial effusion
) or in your abdomen (
ascites
).
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose mesothelioma
Based on your symptoms and health history, your provider might get the following tests to diagnose or rule out mesothelioma:
Blood tests
Lung function tests
Imaging tests, including
chest X-rays
and
CT scans
PET (positron emission tomography) scans
to determine if there are tumors in other parts of your body
Draining fluid from your pleural or abdominal cavity (
thoracentesis
or
paracentesis
) to look for cancer cells (
cytology
)
Biopsy
Management and Treatment
How is mesothelioma treated?
Typically, no single treatment can cure mesothelioma on its own. Treatment options for mesothelioma depend on the kind you have. Options could include:
Surgery
. Surgery could include extrapleural
pneumonectomy
(EPP), pleurectomy with decortication (which removes your pleura and the tumor),
cytoreduction
or
pericardiectomy
.
Immunotherapy
.
These treatments train your
immune system
so it’s better able to identify and destroy cancer cells.
Chemotherapy
. Providers usually give
chemotherapy
drugs through an IV, which travels through your bloodstream to kill cancer cells. They apply some forms of chemotherapy to the tumor more directly, like
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC)
.
Targeted therapies
. You might have genetic changes in your tumor cells that
targeted therapies
can treat.
Radiation therapy
.
Radiation uses high-energy X-rays to destroy cancer cells.
Clinical trials
. Your provider might recommend clinical trials of medications that researchers are still testing for effectiveness.
Palliative care
.
Your provider may recommend
palliative care
to help you manage cancer symptoms and treatment side effects. Types of palliative care could include pain management and procedures to drain fluid from around your organs.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your provider if you notice symptoms like shortness of breath, persistent cough or changes in your bathroom habits. It might seem scary to investigate your symptoms, but getting treated early is always better than waiting.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Mesothelioma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the survival rate for mesothelioma?
Survival rates for mesothelioma depend on the kind you have. For example, the five-year relative survival rate for the most common type, pleural mesothelioma, is between 7% and 24%. In general, peritoneal mesothelioma survival rates are higher than those of other types.
Keep in mind that these numbers are based on people diagnosed at least five years ago. They may not reflect what you can expect with new treatments or other factors of your specific situation. Ask your provider what to expect.
Is mesothelioma 100% fatal?
No, mesothelioma isn’t fatal for everyone. But it’s an aggressive cancer that’s rarely caught in early stages, when it’s more treatable.
Prevention
Can mesothelioma be prevented?
Cancer is rarely completely preventable. You can reduce your risk of mesothelioma by avoiding asbestos. Take precautions for proper handling and disposal if you have to work with it or around it.
If you had a job that exposed you to asbestos in the past, talk to your provider about whether they have recommendations for monitoring or screening for potential health issues.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A mesothelioma diagnosis can come with a lot of worry and uncertainty. It’s natural to want to know what lies ahead and a clear path to follow. It might be helpful to find support groups and other resources that can offer support and help you understand your options. Have honest conversations with your provider about your specific situation, your concerns and what to expect.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
No matter if you need drug therapy, radiation or surgery (or all three), our mesothelioma treatment focuses on your needs and goals.
Get Mesothelioma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment