Spondyloarthritis (Spondyloarthropathy): Types & Treatments
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Spondyloarthritis (Spondyloarthropathy)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Spondyloarthritis (Spondyloarthropathy)
Spondyloarthritis is a progressive inflammatory disease that typically causes lower back pain and stiffness. Other common symptoms include heel pain, swollen fingers and eye inflammation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is spondyloarthritis?
Spondyloarthritis (SpA) means
arthritis
of the
spine
(
spondyl-
). Arthritis is pain and stiffness in your
joints
. Spondyloarthritis affects the joints connected to your spine — the facet joints between your vertebrae and the sacroiliac joints that connect your spine to your pelvis.
Lower back pain
is the most common symptom. But spondyloarthritis can also affect other joints and cause other symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Spondyloarthritis isn’t one condition but a group of conditions with common features. They begin with arthritis of the spine, but they don’t end there. Healthcare providers also describe these conditions as spondyloarthropathy, which means disease (
-pathy
) in the joints (
arthro-
) of the spine. These conditions are distinct from
osteoarthritis
and
rheumatoid arthritis
, which can also affect the joints in your spine.
Some key features of spondyloarthritis (spondyloarthropathy) are:
It’s rheumatic.
Spondyloarthritis is a rheumatic disease, which means it’s an inflammatory type of arthritis. Chronic
inflammation
causes the symptoms of pain and swelling in your joints. Unlike osteoarthritis, which is a product of wear and tear on your joints,
inflammatory arthritis
is usually a type of
autoimmune disease
. That means your
immune system
causes the constant inflammation in your joints — and often causes it in other places in your body, too.
It’s not RA
. Despite being a type of rheumatic arthritis, it’s not the most famous type, which is rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We know this because people with spondyloarthritis don’t test positive for
rheumatoid factor
, the
antibody
that’s typical of RA. This is why healthcare providers sometimes refer to spondyloarthritis as “seronegative spondyloarthropathy.” “Seronegative” means the
blood test
for RA is negative. There’s no known SpA antibody.
Enthesitis
. Inflammation in your entheses (enthesitis) is a hallmark of spondyloarthritis that healthcare providers will look for during diagnosis. Entheses are fibrous connective tissues that act as the “joints” where your tendons and ligaments insert into your bones. Spondylarthritis can cause enthesitis in different places in your body. Heels and knees are common sites.
A gene called
HLA-B27
. Between 80% and 95% of people with spondyloarthritis who are of northern European descent have a gene called
HLA-B27
. It isn’t as common in people of other ethnicities who have spondyloarthritis. And the gene alone doesn’t cause the disease. But it’s common enough that your healthcare provider might test for it to help make your diagnosis.
Advertisement
How common is spondylarthritis?
Although it’s not as well known, spondyloarthritis is actually more common than rheumatoid arthritis. An estimated 0.5% to 2% of the population worldwide has some form of spondyloarthropathy.
What are the different types of spondyloarthritis (spondyloarthropathy)?
Several distinct diseases fall under the general heading of spondylarthritis. Healthcare providers separate them into two main categories: axial spondyloarthritis and peripheral spondyloarthritis.
Axial spondyloarthritis
Axial spondyloarthritis
is spondyloarthritis that mainly affects the joints in your
axial skeleton
: your neck, chest and spine. As it progresses, it may involve other joints and even organs.
Ankylosing spondylitis
is a severe form of axial spondyloarthritis that causes visible changes to the bones in your spine, called ankylosis. It’s the most common type of spondyloarthritis overall.
Peripheral spondyloarthritis
Peripheral spondyloarthritis affects your peripheral joints and entheses first — the ones on the outside of your axial skeleton (like your limbs). As it progresses, it may or may not go on to affect your spine.
Peripheral spondyloarthritis also typically involves inflammation in other organs. Different types tend to affect different organs — like your eyes, skin or bowels — but symptoms can overlap. Types include:
Psoriatic arthritis
. Psoriatic arthritis is arthritis that occurs together with
psoriasis
, an autoimmune skin condition that causes an inflammatory
skin rash
. It most often affects the small joints in your hands and feet, causing painful swelling in your fingers and toes.
Enteropathic arthritis
. Enteropathic arthritis is arthritis that occurs together with
inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD). Enteropathic means that it’s related to your intestines.
Reactive arthritis
. Reactive arthritis is an autoimmune reaction to an
infection in your intestines
or
urinary tract
. It may affect your eyes, skin, bladder, genitals or bowels. It’s typically temporary, but it can last up to 12 months, and some people develop chronic arthritis.
Undifferentiated spondyloarthritis
Undifferentiated spondyloarthritis is the diagnosis when your symptoms fit the profile of spondyloarthritis in general, but they don’t quite fit the profile of any specific subtype.
Juvenile spondyloarthritis
Juvenile spondyloarthritis is spondyloarthritis that develops during childhood — usually before age 16. Children may develop a specific type of spondyloarthritis or symptoms from many types.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of spondyloarthritis?
Symptoms of different types of spondyloarthritis often overlap. While some symptoms are more characteristic of certain types of spondyloarthritis than others, all symptoms can occur with any type.
Symptoms may include:
Lower
back pain
that may spread to your butt (
sacroiliitis
).
Stiffness that’s worse in the morning and gets better with movement.
Mid- and upper back pain, musculoskeletal chest pain or
neck pain
.
Gradual curvature of the spine.
Pain and stiffness in the joints of your limbs — hips, shoulders, knees, elbows, wrists or ankles.
Severely swollen fingers or toes (
“sausage fingers” or dactylitis
).
Gastrointestinal symptoms, like
abdominal pain
and
diarrhea
.
Pain and inflammation in your
urinary tract
.
An itchy, flakey skin rash (psoriasis).
Nail pitting (nail psoriasis)
.
Fatigue
.
Loss of appetite
.
Eye inflammation (uveitis)
.
Mouth sores.
Heel pain
(due to enthesitis).
Bone spurs
.
Advertisement
Symptoms of spondyloarthritis tend to appear earlier than other types of arthritis — usually before the age of 45. They begin slowly and may pile on gradually. In most cases, symptoms continue indefinitely.
What causes spondyloarthritis?
Chronic inflammation in your joints and other tissues causes the symptoms of spondyloarthritis. Your immune system generates the chronic inflammation automatically. This is called autoimmune disease.
Researchers don’t entirely understand why autoimmune diseases occur, but there seem to be several factors involved. Many autoimmune conditions, including spondyloarthritis, seem to be partly genetic.
Genes in the HLA (human leukocyte antigen) family are often involved in inflammatory arthritis. These genes encode a protein that your immune system uses to distinguish your own cells from harmful ones.
Certain variations in these genes may not work as well as others. When your immune system can’t properly distinguish between your cells and foreign ones, it may mistakenly attack your cells.
What triggers spondyloarthritis?
Genetics may play a part in spondyloarthritis, but they don’t cause it alone. While many people with spondyloarthritis carry the
HLA-B27
gene, most people who carry it don’t get spondyloarthritis.
Something else must trigger the process. Researchers have many theories about what those triggers might be. Some of these include severe infections, environmental toxins, smoking and alcohol use.
Advertisement
One theory is that spondyloarthritis might be linked to
dysbiosis
in your
gut microbiome
. People with SpA tend to have less diversity in their gut, which makes it easier for harmful microbes to take over.
Gut dysbiosis can weaken your immune system by making you more susceptible to infections and triggering chronic inflammation in your gut. Your mix of gut microbiota is partly inherited at birth.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is spondyloarthritis diagnosed?
Spondyloarthritis can be tricky to diagnose, especially if you don’t have a recognizable combination of symptoms. Some people only have joint pain and stiffness, which has many other possible causes.
A healthcare provider will start by asking you about your symptoms and check for any related symptoms you might not have mentioned. They’ll also ask about your health history and family health history.
They’ll physically examine your back or other joints and test your range of motion. They’ll take
X-rays
to look for evidence of arthritis or enthesitis, but evidence won’t always be visible in images.
They might order a blood test to check for signs of inflammation or autoimmune disease. They might also test you for the
HLA-B27
gene. These tests can help to distinguish SpA from other diseases.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What treatment is available for spondyloarthritis (spondyloarthropathy)?
Treatment depends on your specific symptoms. Healthcare providers take a stepwise approach to treatment, starting with
exercise
and over-the-counter (OTC)
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
.
If these don’t do enough to manage your pain and inflammation, your provider might suggest:
Periodic
cortisone shots
for more localized pain relief.
Traditional or biologic
DMARDs (disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs)
.
Some specific types of spondyloarthritis, like psoriatic arthritis and enteropathic arthritis, have other treatments that specifically relate to the underlying condition (psoriasis or inflammatory bowel disease).
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How serious is spondyloarthritis?
When inflammatory arthritis is severe and lasts a long time, it can cause some serious complications. But they’re usually the type of complications that affect your quality of life rather than your life expectancy.
For example, you may lose mobility in your joints and may become more prone to
bone fractures
. But not everyone develops severe symptoms, and treatment can affect how the disease progresses.
How fast does spondyloarthritis progress?
How spondyloarthritis progresses is different from person to person. For some, it’s slow and easy to control with treatment. Others can develop ankylosing spondylitis with spinal fusion in just a few years.
How severe your inflammation is affects how quickly spondyloarthritis progresses. Being consistent with your treatment can help manage the inflammation and may prevent complications from developing.
Living With
How should I take care of myself while living with spondyloarthritis?
Regular exercise is crucial for anyone living with arthritis to maintain your mobility as much as possible. Many healthcare providers will tell you it’s more important and more effective than any medication.
If you aren’t sure what type of exercise would be best for you, ask your healthcare provider. Many providers also recommend formal
physical therapy
to address specific joints or problem areas.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Spondyloarthritis is a family of related conditions that are both similar and different. While healthcare providers recognize them by their similarities, each type — and each person’s disease — is also unique.
For most people, spondyloarthritis is lifelong, but how much it affects your life can vary. Your healthcare provider will be your partner in managing your symptoms and predicting what you can personally expect.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/14/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment