Toddler Developmental Milestones (Age 1 to 3 Years Milestones)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Toddler Milestones
Advertisement
Advertisement
Toddler Milestones
Your child becomes a toddler on their first birthday, and that stage lasts until their third birthday. As they grow, they’ll learn and develop new milestone skills and abilities. Those milestones can help you track your child’s development. Your child’s provider can also use them to guide you and your child along the way.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Toddler milestones are behaviors or abilities that most children can do between their first and third birthdays. Parents and healthcare providers — like
pediatricians
— can look for these signs to track your child’s development.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Tracking what your child can do can help detect specific needs and medical conditions early, often when they’re easier to treat. Your child’s pediatrician will ask you about them at
well-child visits
, and you can also bring them up if you have concerns or questions.
Experts group
child developmental milestones
into four areas:
Motor
: Movement and coordination — like crawling, walking and picking things up with their hands — and control of body movements
Cognitive
: Thinking, learning and problem-solving skills
Language and communication
: Understanding others and expressing themselves through speech, writing or gestures
Social and emotional
: Managing emotions, developing relationships and interacting with others
Toddler milestone abilities by age
Children have five developmental stages. A toddler is in the second stage, between ages 1 and 3. They’ve generally finished
baby development milestones
. And once they pass the toddler milestones, they’ll transition to the preschool stage.
About 3 in 4 children can do the activities listed below. But toddlers grow and learn at their own pace. Not all toddlers will master all the skills listed before their third birthday.
15-month-old milestones
Most 15-month-old children can:
Stand and take a few steps without help
Use their fingers to pick up food to feed themselves
Clap their hands to show excitement
Show you objects they like
Copy simple actions of other children during play
Show affection with hugs, kisses or cuddling (to a toy or to you)
Try to say one or two simple words besides “mama” or “dada”
Look at familiar objects when you name them
Follow directions that include both words and gestures (like giving you something when you ask for it and holding your hand out)
Point to objects to ask for them or to ask you for help
Try to use objects or tools correctly, like a book or a cup
Advertisement
18-month-old milestones
At 18 months old, most children can:
Explore a short distance from you but check back to make sure you’re nearby
Point to show you things they find interesting
Sit with you long enough to look at a few pages in a book
Participate in being dressed, like holding out their arm for you to put a sleeve on
Try to use three or more words besides “mama” and “dada”
Imitate household tasks like sweeping or wiping surfaces
Follow simple directions given with words only
Play with toys the way their designers intended, like pushing a toy car
Walk without needing support from an object or person
Scribble with a crayon
Drink from a cup without a lid with occasional spills
Pick up food and feed themselves using their fingers
Try to feed themselves using a spoon or fork, but it may be messy
Climb on furniture like a chair or sofa without needing help
Walk up steps one step at a time while holding your hand
2-year-old milestones
Most 2-year-old children can:
Recognize and respond to others’ emotions, like taking a moment or looking sad when they see someone crying
Look to see your emotions when you react to a situation
Point to items in a book when asked
Say two-word phrases
Point to at least two body parts when asked, like their hands or feet
Use gestures to communicate, aside from simple ones like pointing or waving
Use both hands at the same time (like holding and grabbing)
Use their fingers more precisely, like to work buttons, switches or knobs on a toy
Play with multiple toys at once
Run
Use their feet to kick while playing, like kicking a ball
Eat with a spoon or fork, and not be as messy
Walk down steps one step at a time, holding your hand
30-month-old milestones
By 30 months old, most children can:
Play alongside other children
Say things to get your attention to watch them play
Follow simple, established routines, like cleaning up their toys or getting ready for bed
Have a vocabulary of about 50 words
Use sentences made of at least two words
Name things you point at, like in a book
Use tools to solve simple problems, like using a stool to get to something normally out of reach
Follow two-step instructions, like putting something down and coming to sit next to you
Identify at least one color when asked to point to it
Use their hands to manipulate objects, like turning a doorknob or opening the lid on a container
Jump off the ground with both feet
Take off some clothes, like an open jacket, without help
Turn book pages one by one while you read to them
What if my child can’t do some of these yet?
Not all toddlers reach every milestone at the same time, and that’s okay. Children grow and develop at their own pace. If you have any concerns about what your child can or can’t do, talk to their pediatrician or other provider. They can screen for medical conditions or
developmental delays
and let you know what steps, if any, are needed.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Toddlerhood is an incredible time of growth, exploration and discovery — for both you and your child. It’s normal to have questions or wonder if your child is hitting milestones on time. Every child develops a little differently, and small delays aren’t always a cause for concern.
Advertisement
If you ever feel unsure, your pediatrician is here to help. They’re here to listen, guide and support you every step of the way — so you can feel confident in how your child is growing and thriving.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us