Prostate Cancer: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Prostate Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Prostate Cancer
Prostate cancer starts in the prostate gland, part of the male reproductive system. It usually grows slowly, and many people don’t need treatment right away. But some types can spread quickly and are harder to treat. Early diagnosis improves the chances of long-term survival.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Prostate Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Prostate Cancer?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Prostate Cancer?
Most prostate cancers grow slowly inside the prostate gland.
Prostate cancer is cancer that develops in the
prostate
, a small, walnut-shaped gland located below the bladder and in front of the rectum in
males
. This tiny gland secretes fluid that mixes with semen, keeping sperm healthy for
conception
and pregnancy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Prostate cancer is a serious disease. And it’s common. For every 100 males, 13
will develop prostate cancer
at some point in their lives. Fortunately, most people get diagnosed before it spreads beyond their prostate glands. Treatment at this stage often eliminates the
cancer
. Still, approximately 35,770 people in the United States
die from prostate cancer
each year.
Types of prostate cancer
If you’re diagnosed with prostate cancer, it’s most likely an
adenocarcinoma
. Adenocarcinomas start in the cells of glands that secrete fluid, like your prostate. Rarely, prostate cancer forms from other types of cells.
Less common types of prostate cancers include:
Small cell carcinomas
Transitional cell carcinomas
Neuroendocrine tumors
Sarcomas
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of prostate cancer
Early-stage prostate cancer rarely causes symptoms. But as prostate cancer progresses, you may start to notice changes. Contact your healthcare provider if you have any of these symptoms of prostate cancer:
Frequent, sometimes urgent,
need to pee
, especially at night
Weak urine flow
or flow that starts and stops
Pain or burning when you pee (
dysuria
)
Loss of bladder control (
urinary incontinence
)
Loss of bowel control (
fecal incontinence
)
Painful ejaculation and
erectile dysfunction (ED)
Blood in semen
or pee
Pain in your low back, hip or chest
Advertisement
Prostate cancer causes
Experts aren’t sure what causes cells in your prostate to become cancer cells. As with cancer in general, prostate cancer forms when cells divide faster than usual. While normal cells eventually die, cancer cells don’t. Instead, they multiply and grow into a lump called a
tumor
. As the cells continue to multiply, parts of the tumor can break off and spread to other parts of your body (
metastasize
).
Luckily, prostate cancer usually grows slowly. Most tumors are diagnosed before the cancer has spread beyond your prostate. Prostate cancer is highly treatable at this stage.
Risk factors
The most common risk factors for prostate cancer include:
Age
. Your risk increases as you get older. You’re more likely to get diagnosed if you’re over 50. About 60% of prostate cancers occur in people older than 65.
Race and ethnicity
. Your risk is higher if you’re Black or of African ancestry, especially for aggressive cancers and those diagnosed before age 50.
Family history of prostate cancer
. You’re
two to three times
more likely to get prostate cancer if a close family member has it.
Genetics
. You’re at a greater risk if you have
Lynch syndrome
or if you inherited mutated (changed) genes associated with increased
breast cancer
risk (
BRCA1
and
BRCA2
).
Some studies have identified other prostate cancer risk factors, but the evidence is mixed. Other potential risk factors include:
Smoking
Prostatitis
Having a BMI greater than 30 (having
obesity
)
Sexually transmitted infections
(STIs)
Exposure to
Agent Orange
(a chemical used during the Vietnam War)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Doctors use screening tests, physical exams, scans and, sometimes, a biopsy to diagnose prostate cancer. Most people start screening at age 55, or earlier if they’re at a higher risk. Screening usually stops after age 70. If the results show something unusual, you may need more tests. But if your doctor thinks the tumor is slow-growing and not likely to cause problems, they may wait before doing more tests. Faster-growing cancers or those that have spread outside the prostate usually need a biopsy to confirm the diagnosis.
Tests that are used
Screening tests can show whether you have signs of prostate cancer that require more testing:
Digital rectal exam
.
Your provider inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into your rectum and feels your prostate gland. Bumps or hard areas may mean cancer.
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test
. The prostate gland makes a protein called prostate-specific antigen (PSA). High PSA levels may indicate cancer. Levels also rise if you have benign conditions, such as benign prostate hyperplasia or prostatitis.
Imaging
. An
MRI
or a
transrectal ultrasound
can show images of your prostate gland, including suspicious areas that may be cancer. Imaging results can help your provider decide whether to perform a biopsy.
Biopsy
.
During a
needle biopsy
, a healthcare provider removes a tissue sample to check for cancer. This is the only way to confirm prostate cancer and know how aggressive it is. Genetic testing of the sample may help guide treatment.
Advertisement
What are the grades and stages of prostate cancer?
Healthcare providers use the
Gleason score
and
cancer staging
to determine how serious the cancer is and the types of treatments you need.
Gleason score
The Gleason score allows your provider to rate how abnormal your cancer cells are. The more abnormal cells you have, the higher your Gleason score. The Gleason score allows your provider to determine the grade of your cancer, or its potential to be aggressive.
Staging prostate cancer
Cancer staging allows your provider to determine how advanced your cancer is, or how much it’s spread. Cancer may be in your prostate gland only (local), invading nearby structures (regional) or spreading to other organs (metastasized). Prostate cancer most commonly spreads to your bones and lymph nodes. It can also develop in your liver, brain, lungs and other organs.
Management and Treatment
How is prostate cancer treated?
Your treatment depends on multiple factors, including your overall condition, if the cancer’s spread and how fast it’s spreading. Depending on your treatments, you may work with various healthcare providers, including
urologists
,
radiation oncologists
and medical
oncologists
. Most prostate cancers diagnosed in the early stages can be cured with treatment.
Specific medications and procedures
Surveillance
If your cancer is slow-growing and hasn’t spread, your doctor may monitor it instead of treating it right away.
Advertisement
Active surveillance
. You’ll get regular screenings, scans and biopsies — every one to three years — to track cancer growth. It’s best for early, low-risk cancer with no symptoms. Treatment starts if the cancer gets worse.
Watchful waiting
. This method is used for people who are older or have other health issues. Testing is less frequent. Care focuses on easing symptoms rather than removing the cancer.
Surgery
A radical
prostatectomy
removes a diseased prostate gland. It can often successfully eliminate prostate cancers that haven’t spread. Your provider can recommend the best removal method if they believe you’d benefit from this surgery.
Open radical prostatectomy
. Your provider makes a single cut (incision) into your abdomen and removes your prostate gland. This technique isn’t as common as less-invasive methods.
Robotic radical prostatectomy
. Robotic radical prostatectomy allows your provider to perform surgery through several tiny incisions. They operate a robot system via a console.
Radiation therapy
You may receive
radiation therapy
as a standalone treatment for prostate cancer or in combination with other treatments. Radiation can also provide symptom relief.
Brachytherapy
.
This involves placing radioactive seeds inside your prostate. It kills cancer cells while preserving surrounding healthy tissue.
External beam radiation therapy
(EBRT)
. A machine delivers strong X-rays at the tumor. Advanced types — like
IMRT
— can target the cancer while sparing healthy tissue.
Advertisement
Systemic therapies
If cancer spreads outside your prostate, your oncologist may recommend systemic treatments. These therapies travel through your body to destroy cancer cells or stop them from growing.
Hormone therapy
.
Testosterone
helps prostate cancer grow. In hormone therapy, medication blocks or lowers testosterone. Some people may have their testicles removed (
orchiectomy
) to stop its production.
Chemotherapy
. This treatment uses drugs to kill cancer cells. It may be used alone or with hormone therapy for advanced cancer. You may receive chemotherapy alone or with hormone therapy if the cancer has spread beyond your prostate.
Immunotherapy
. This boosts your immune system so it can better find and fight cancer cells. It’s often used for advanced or recurring cancer (cancer that goes away but then returns).
Targeted therapy
. These therapies focus on the
genetic mutations
that cause cancer. They work best for tumors with
BRCA
mutations.
Focal therapy
Focal therapy
is a newer form of treatment that destroys tumors inside your prostate. Your healthcare provider may recommend this treatment if the cancer is low risk and hasn’t spread. Many of these treatments are still considered experimental.
High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU)
. High-intensity sound waves generate powerful heat to kill cancer cells within your prostate.
Cryotherapy
. Cold gases freeze cancer cells in your prostate, eliminating the tumor.
Laser ablation
. Intense heat directed at the tumor kills cancer cells within your prostate, destroying the tumor.
Photodynamic therapy
. Medications make cancer cells more sensitive to certain wavelengths of light. A healthcare provider exposes cancer cells to these light wavelengths, killing the cancer cells.
What are the side effects of prostate cancer treatment?
Potential side effects include:
Incontinence
. You may leak urine when coughing or laughing. Or you may feel an urgent need to pee even when your bladder isn’t full. This usually improves within six to 12 months without treatment.
Erectile dysfunction (ED)
. Surgery and other treatments can affect erections.
Sex might be different
for a year or two. Medications like sildenafil (Viagra®) or tadalafil (Cialis®) can help by increasing blood flow to your penis.
Infertility
. Treatments can affect your sperm production or ejaculation. If you want children, consider
banking sperm
before treatment. Afterward, sperm can be extracted and implanted into your partner’s uterus.
Let your cancer care team know if you have side effects. Often, they can recommend medicines and procedures that can help.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you have prostate cancer, you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
Has the cancer spread outside of my prostate gland?
What’s the best treatment for the stage of prostate cancer I have?
What are the treatment risks and side effects?
Is my family at risk for developing prostate cancer? If so, should we get genetic tests?
What kind of follow-up care do I need after treatment?
Should I look out for signs of complications?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Prostate Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have prostate cancer?
You have an excellent outlook when prostate cancer is found early. Almost everyone —
99%
— diagnosed before it spreads lives at least five years after diagnosis. In many cases, treatment can eliminate cancers that stay in the prostate. Survival rates aren’t as good if the cancer spreads — 32% of people with metastatic prostate cancer are alive five years after diagnosis.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning you have prostate cancer can bring up a lot of emotions — and questions. The good news is that when it’s found early, prostate cancer is often highly treatable. Many people go on to live full, cancer-free lives for years after treatment. Still, some cases can be more aggressive and spread more quickly. Your cancer care team will help you understand your options and guide you through each decision — from screening to treatment — with support that’s tailored to your needs and goals.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A prostate cancer diagnosis can change your life. At Cleveland Clinic, we can help you feel like yourself again with expert treatment and support.
Prostate Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment