Blood Cancer: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Blood Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Blood Cancer
Blood cancer endangers an essential life force: your blood cells. These cells give you energy, help you fight infection and keep you from bleeding too much. When faulty DNA causes your blood cells to become cancerous, the cancer puts all these important functions at risk. Fortunately, there are many effective and safe ways to treat blood cancer.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Blood Cancer?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
What Is Blood Cancer?
Blood
cancer
affects how your body produces blood cells and how well those cells work. Most blood cancers start in your
bone marrow
. This is the soft, sponge-like material in the center of your bones. Your bone marrow makes
stem cells
that mature and become one of the following:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Red blood cells
, which carry oxygen throughout your body
White blood cells
, which fight infection
Platelets
, which control bleeding
Blood cancer happens when something disrupts how your body makes blood cells. The cancer cells can’t do the jobs normal blood cells do. Instead, the abnormal blood cells multiply unchecked and overwhelm the normal ones.
Like any type of cancer, blood cancer is a serious diagnosis. But the good news is that more and more people are surviving blood cancer.
Types of blood cancers
There are three main blood cancer types, each with several subtypes:
Leukemia
is the most common blood cancer in the U.S. and the most common form of
childhood cancer
. Leukemia cells start in your bone marrow and can spill out into your blood. They’re usually immature white blood cells.
Lymphoma
is cancer of your
lymphatic system
. Lymphoma cells start in white blood cells called
lymphocytes
. Lymphoma cells can form tumors in places like your
lymph nodes
. The most common subtypes are
Hodgkin
and
non-Hodgkin lymphoma
.
Myeloma
starts in your bone marrow and affects white blood cells called plasma cells. Multiple myeloma is the most common subtype.
Rarer forms of blood cancer include:
Myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPN)
. In this cancer, your bone marrow makes too many white blood cells, red blood cells or platelets.
Myelodysplastic syndromes
(MDS)
. With MDS, your bone marrow makes abnormal blood cells. Sometimes, the blood cells are abnormal because they don’t develop fully. Immature cells are called
blasts
.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of blood cancer
Blood cancer symptoms vary based on the type. The most common symptoms to look out for include:
Fatigue
Shortness of breath
Swollen lymph nodes
Frequent infections
Other symptoms include:
Bone pain
Drenching
night sweats
Enlarged liver
or
spleen
Joint pain
Persistent
fever
Unexplained weight loss
Unusual
bruising
or bleeding (warning signs include
tiny red skin spots
or
purplish skin patches
)
These symptoms can happen with noncancerous conditions, too. Having one or more of them doesn’t mean you have cancer. But you should contact a healthcare provider if symptoms last more than a few weeks.
Blood cancer causes
Blood cancer starts when blood cell
DNA
changes or
mutates
. Your DNA tells cells what to do. It tells blood cells when to grow, when to divide or multiply, and when to die.
When blood cell DNA gives faulty instructions, your body develops abnormal blood cells. These cells grow and multiply faster than normal. When that happens, normal blood cells become lost in a mass of abnormal cells that crowd out your normal ones.
Eventually, your bone marrow produces fewer normal cells. That means there aren’t enough normal blood cells doing their essential tasks.
Risk factors
Certain factors may play a role in increasing your blood cancer risk, including:
Age
. Your risk increases as you get older.
Sex
. Blood cancers are more common in
males
.
Smoking
. A
smoking
history or exposure to
secondhand smoke
may increase your risk.
Exposure to toxic chemicals
. Long-term exposure to benzene and formaldehyde can increase your risk. You’re more likely to encounter them if you work in an industry like manufacturing.
Previous cancer treatment
. Previous
chemotherapy
or
radiation therapy
may increase your risk of developing blood cancer.
Biological family history
. Some types of blood cancers may run in families. But most people who receive a diagnosis don’t have a family member with blood cancer.
Certain conditions
. Several
autoimmune diseases
, conditions that cause long-term
inflammation
and some
genetic disorders
are associated with increased blood cancer risk.
How to lower your risk
Blood cancers aren’t avoidable. Even someone with a clean bill of health can develop blood cancer. But you can lower your risk by steering clear of certain risk factors, like smoking.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider may begin by asking about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll also do a complete
physical exam
. You may need several kinds of tests depending on the cancer type your provider suspects you may have. Tests include:
Advertisement
Blood tests for cancer
. Tests include
complete blood counts
(CBC) to check for high or low blood cell levels. You may need a blood chemistry test to check for proteins in your blood that may be signs of blood cancer.
Imaging tests
. Imaging tests can help your provider detect signs of cancer in specific parts of your body. Types include
CT scans
,
MRIs
and
PET scans
.
Bone marrow biopsy
. Your provider may remove a sample of your bone marrow. They’ll analyze how many normal versus abnormal blood cells you have. They may also test your bone marrow sample for changes in your DNA that may drive cancer growth.
Management and Treatment
How are blood cancers treated?
Common treatments for blood cancer include:
Chemotherapy
. Chemotherapy is a primary blood cancer treatment. It kills cancer cells to either slow down the disease’s progress or eliminate the cancer. Healthcare providers use different
chemotherapy drug types
for different blood cancers.
Radiation therapy
. This treatment uses radiation to damage the DNA in abnormal cells so they can’t make copies. Providers may use radiation to ease symptoms (
palliative care
). They often combine radiation therapy with other treatments.
Immunotherapy
. This treatment makes your immune system better at fighting cancer. Some of the most commonly used immunotherapies for blood cancer are
monoclonal antibodies
and
CAR T-cell therapy
.
Targeted therapy
. These treatments target cancer cell weaknesses that relate to abnormal genetic mutations.
Autologous stem cell transplant
. Providers can collect bone marrow stem cells from your body before giving you high doses of chemotherapy. Once chemotherapy kills the cancer cells, they’ll give your healthy stem cells back to you. They’ll develop into healthy blood cells.
Allogeneic stem cell transplant
. Sometimes, damaged bone marrow needs to be replaced with healthy bone marrow. Providers identify a suitable bone marrow donor and use the donor’s cells to replace your damaged ones.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your healthcare provider will let you know what
signs or symptoms
to look out for after treatment. Every cancer treatment can cause side effects, including potentially serious ones. Your provider will explain how to manage some side effects at home. And they’ll let you know when you should be scheduling an appointment or seeking emergency care.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is blood cancer curable?
Yes. Often, the goal of blood cancer treatment is
curing
the condition. This means the cancer is gone, and it never comes back. When a cure isn’t possible, there are a growing number of treatments that may put some blood cancers into remission.
Remission
means the treatment has decreased cancer to the point that it’s undetectable.
What are the survival rates for blood cancer?
Survival rates
vary based on the type of blood cancer. But many people can expect to survive as long as someone without a blood cancer diagnosis. The five-year relative survival rates for blood cancers diagnosed in the U.S. are provided in the table below.
Blood Cancer Type
Five-Year Relative Survival Rate
Leukemia
67%
Hodgkin Lymphoma
88.9%
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
74.3%
Myeloma
61.1%
Blood Cancer Type
Leukemia
Five-Year Relative Survival Rate
67%
Hodgkin Lymphoma
Five-Year Relative Survival Rate
88.9%
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Five-Year Relative Survival Rate
74.3%
Myeloma
Five-Year Relative Survival Rate
61.1%
*Based on data taken from the National Cancer Institute. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program from 2014 to 2020.
Remember, though, that no one can predict your life expectancy. For example, certain blood cancer subtypes are more fatal than others. Also, survival rates don’t factor in new treatments that are helping people live longer. After all, the lymphoma survival rate has doubled over the past 40 years. And the five-year survival rate for leukemia has quadrupled over the past 40 years. More and more people are surviving blood cancer.
Advertisement
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Blood cancer and blood cancer treatment can take a toll on your overall health. Here are some suggestions that may help:
Eat nutritious, balanced meals
. Blood cancer and its treatment may dampen your appetite. If you’re having trouble eating, ask to speak with a dietitian. They’ll suggest ways to get the nutrition you need to stay strong.
Stay active
. It’s important to get exercise, but ask your healthcare provider what a safe level of activity is.
Make rest a priority
. Pay attention to your body and rest when you need to rest — not just when you feel like you can.
Protect yourself from infection
. Ask your healthcare provider for ways to keep from getting sick.
Attend to your emotional health
. Talking to a therapist or joining a support group can help you during this time. It can help you cope with life after cancer.
Living With
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Thanks to new treatments, more people than ever are living with blood cancer. And more people who’ve been diagnosed are in remission. This is great news. But blood cancer is still a serious illness, and learning you have a form of blood cancer is serious business. This is why it’s important to take advantage of every available resource. Understand every available treatment option. Have your provider explain how your diagnosis and treatment can impact your future.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials