Spitzoid Melanoma: Symptoms, Diagnosis, Staging & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Spitzoid Melanoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Spitzoid Melanoma
Spitzoid melanoma is a type of skin cancer that looks like a small mole or skin growth. It’s often reddish, pinkish or the same color as your skin. It may be difficult to tell a spitzoid melanoma apart from a noncancerous mole. Spitzoid melanoma is typically evenly colored and shaped.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is spitzoid melanoma?
Spitzoid melanoma is a type of skin cancer. Spitzoid melanoma can look like a pink or skin-colored mole, or it can have darker colors like brown or black. It most often grows on your arms, legs or face.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is the difference between a Spitz nevus and spitzoid melanoma?
Spitzoid melanoma and a Spitz nevus often look the same. However, a spitzoid melanoma is a type of cancer. Cancer cells grow uncontrollably and may spread to other parts of your body. A
Spitz nevus
is a type of noncancerous
mole
that’s often pink or red instead of brown or black.
Who does spitzoid melanoma affect?
Anyone can get spitzoid melanoma, but it’s most common in those who:
Have a family history of
skin cancer
.
Have fair skin.
Spend significant time in the
sun
.
All types of skin cancer occur more frequently in adults than in children. However, spitzoid melanoma is one of the most common types of
melanomas
in children.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of spitzoid melanoma?
Spitzoid melanoma looks can look like a small mole. It usually grows on your arms, legs or face. Unlike other types of melanomas, spitzoid melanoma is usually round and evenly colored. This type of cancer can occur in an existing mole. But it can look like a new mole, appearing where there was no previous mole.
What causes spitzoid melanoma?
Spitzoid melanoma occurs when irregular changes (mutations) in your DNA cause your cells to become cancerous and grow uncontrollably. The most common cause of this DNA mutation is
extended exposure to ultraviolet (UV) rays
, from either the sun or a tanning bed.
In rare cases, you may inherit a gene mutation that increases your risk of melanoma. For example, people with xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) have an inherited gene mutation that makes it harder for their bodies to repair DNA after UV exposure. This makes them much more likely to develop melanoma.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is spitzoid melanoma diagnosed?
A healthcare provider uses a
skin biopsy
to diagnose spitzoid melanoma. During a biopsy, your provider removes the skin growth. They send the biopsy sample to a lab where a
pathologist
evaluates it for signs of skin cancer.
What tests do healthcare providers use in spitzoid melanoma staging?
You may have more imaging tests to determine the cancer stage if your provider finds spitzoid melanoma. In cancer staging:
Stage 0
is cancer that only affects outer skin layers.
Stage 1
is cancer that’s grown under the surface layer and is still less than 1 millimeter thick.
Stage 2
is cancer that isn’t widespread but is larger than 1 millimeter thick.
Stage 3
is advanced cancer that’s spread to lymph nodes or other surrounding tissues.
Stage 4
is widespread cancer, affecting other distant body parts.
You may have more tests to determine the cancer stage, such as:
CT scans
.
MRIs
.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scans
.
Sentinel node biopsies
.
Ultrasounds
.
Management and Treatment
How is spitzoid melanoma treated?
Your treatment plan depends on the cancer stage and may include:
Surgery
is the most common treatment for spitzoid melanoma. Your provider removes the entire skin growth and a small amount of surrounding tissue. If the cancer is thick, they may also remove surrounding lymph nodes to see if the cancer has spread.
Radiation therapy
uses high radiation doses to shrink or destroy cancer cells. Your provider may use radiation if cancer has spread to parts of your body that can’t be treated with surgery. They may also recommend radiation to keep cancer from returning.
Immunotherapy
involves taking drugs that boost your body’s immune system. This helps your body fight cancer more effectively.
Targeted therapy
involves taking medicines that target cancer cells or the cells that help cancer grow. It may stop melanoma from spreading.
Chemotherapy
uses drugs that attack fast-growing cells, including cancer cells. It’s a less common treatment for skin cancers.
Is spitzoid melanoma aggressive?
Spitzoid melanoma is usually less aggressive than other types of melanomas, even though the moles may grow fairly rapidly. The sooner you detect any type of melanoma, the better your chances of successful treatment.
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for spitzoid melanoma?
The prognosis for spitzoid melanoma depends on several factors, including the cancer stage. One study found that children from birth to age 10 had a five-year survival rate of 88% for spitzoid melanoma that had spread to other body parts (
metastasized
). The prognosis is even better when you treat spitzoid melanoma before it has metastasized.
Prevention
How can I prevent spitzoid melanoma?
You can lower your risk of all skin cancers, including spitzoid melanoma, by
protecting your skin from UV exposure
. To protect your skin, you’ll need to:
Apply broad-spectrum, water-resistant sunscreen with at least 30 SPF every day.
Avoid tanning beds completely. Using a tanning bed under age 35 increases your melanoma risk by up to 75%.
Check your skin monthly for new growths or changes.
Minimize outdoor time between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., when the sun’s rays are strongest.
Schedule yearly skin checks with a skin specialist (
dermatologist
).
Wear long sleeves, pants and a wide-brimmed hat to decrease skin exposure to the sun.
Living With
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you have spitzoid melanoma or think you could, you may also want to ask your healthcare provider:
Advertisement
What’s the most likely cause of spitzoid melanoma?
What are the early signs of spitzoid melanoma?
What tests do I need to diagnose spitzoid melanoma?
What are the treatment options for spitzoid melanoma?
What can I do to prevent spitzoid melanoma from coming back?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Spitzoid melanoma is a type of skin cancer. It looks like a small, even mole. It’s often pinkish, reddish or the same color as your skin, although it may be brown or black like traditional moles. Unlike other types of melanomas, spitzoid melanoma is often symmetrical and evenly colored. Your healthcare provider will likely recommend surgery to remove the skin growth if you have spitzoid melanoma. The earlier you detect spitzoid melanoma, the better your chances of a positive outcome.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/11/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment