Fetal Macrosomia: Risk Factors, Complications & Management
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Fetal Macrosomia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Fetal Macrosomia
Fetal macrosomia means your newborn is larger than average. It’s also called “large for gestational age.” Certain factors can increase the risk of having a big baby, like diabetes and obesity. Delivering a baby with fetal macrosomia can cause complications. But most births are uncomplicated.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Fetal Macrosomia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Fetal Macrosomia?
Fetal macrosomia means your baby is large at birth. Some healthcare providers consider a large weight to be 8 pounds and 13 ounces (4,000 grams) or more. Some think it’s 9 pounds and 14 ounces (4,500 grams) or more. There’s no agreement among the scientific community on the exact definition of fetal macrosomia.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Another phrase you may hear is “large for gestational age” (LGA). This means your baby’s weight at birth is above the 90th percentile for the week in
pregnancy
that you delivered them. In other words, your baby is bigger than 9 out of 10 babies who are born at the same gestational age.
Fetal macrosomia can be unpredictable. Babies can be born larger than average with or without any known risk factors. It’s hard to know if a baby will be bigger than normal. Some babies are large even when there aren’t any clear reasons But if you have risk factors, your
pregnancy care provider
will talk with you about how it might affect your
delivery
.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of fetal macrosomia
There aren’t any symptoms of fetal macrosomia. It’s hard to know the exact size of the fetus until it’s born. Most of the
pregnancy discomforts
you feel are the same, no matter how big the fetus is.
Fetal macrosomia causes
There’s no single cause of fetal macrosomia. But several factors can increase your risk of having a big baby.
Diabetes
during pregnancy is a significant risk factor. This could be
gestational diabetes
or preexisting diabetes, like
Type 1
or
Type 2.
Your blood provides nutrients to the fetus through the
placenta
, including sugar (glucose). So, if you have
high blood sugar
, the fetus has it, too. In response, the fetus releases
insulin
and
growth hormone
.
Advertisement
These
hormones
can lead to the fetus having more
body fat
and an overall larger size. Newborns with fetal macrosomia due to maternal diabetes also tend to have larger shoulders. This can increase the risk of
shoulder dystocia
— when one or both of your baby’s shoulders get stuck in your
pelvis
during
vaginal delivery
.
Other risk factors for fetal macrosomia include:
Obesity
before pregnancy
: If you have obesity, you’re 4 to 12 times more likely to have a baby with fetal macrosomia.
Excessive
weight gain during pregnancy
: The fetus may receive excess nutrients, leading to a larger size.
Previous babies with macrosomia
: If you’ve had a baby with macrosomia before, you’re 5 to 10 times more likely to have another large baby.
Having had multiple births
: If you’ve given birth to three or more children, you’re more likely to have large babies in your next births.
If you were bigger than 8 pounds at birth
: You’re twice as likely to give birth to a baby weighing more than 8 pounds and 13 ounces if you were over 8 pounds at birth.
Going two weeks past your
due date
: Being pregnant for more than 42 weeks increases the chance of macrosomia due to the continuous supply of nutrients to the fetus.
Being tall
:
Women
in the 80th percentile or higher for height are more likely to have a baby with fetal macrosomia.
It’s important to note that you could have none of these risk factors and still have a large baby. Many things contribute to your baby’s growth and size.
Complications
Having a large baby can increase the risk of certain complications during childbirth, including:
Abnormal changes in the
fetus’s heart rate
during labor (
fetal distress
)
Heavy bleeding or
postpartum hemorrhage
Longer labor
, especially during the pushing phase
Shoulder dystocia
Uterine rupture
Vaginal tears
After birth, a newborn with fetal macrosomia is at risk of the following complications:
Breathing problems
High red blood cell count
Jaundice
Low blood sugar
Your healthcare team will act quickly to manage any of these complications.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose fetal macrosomia
The only way to diagnose macrosomia is by weighing your newborn.
Your healthcare provider may suspect it during your pregnancy based on
fundal height
measurements and risk factors. They may recommend an
ultrasound
to take a closer look. Still, ultrasounds aren’t very precise at estimating fetal size.
An ultrasound can only estimate a fetus’s weight within about 10%. For example, if the ultrasound estimates the fetus is 9 pounds, that’s the “best guess.” The fetus could actually weigh somewhere between 8 and 10 pounds.
Advertisement
Your provider will combine information from your ultrasound with your pregnancy history to suggest the safest type of delivery. Don’t hesitate to ask questions or voice any concerns.
Management and Treatment
How is fetal macrosomia managed?
Your healthcare provider will discuss the risks of a vaginal delivery with you. In some cases, they may recommend a
C-section
to reduce the chances of a complication.
Delivering your baby early doesn’t seem to reduce complications. So, providers don’t recommend scheduling a delivery before 39 weeks unless there’s a medical need.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect?
Most deliveries of babies with macrosomia are uncomplicated. Still, issues could arise. Your baby may need to spend time in the
NICU
if they develop breathing problems or low blood sugar. Know that your baby’s care is in good hands if this happens.
If you deliver a large baby, your healthcare provider may recommend tests to screen you for undiagnosed diabetes. They’ll also monitor you more carefully during any future pregnancies.
Studies show that fetal macrosomia may have long-term effects on infants. These include obesity,
Type 2 diabetes
and
cardiovascular disease
later in life. But these conditions have many other causes and risk factors.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
Many factors contribute to
fetal growth
. So, you can’t completely prevent fetal macrosomia. But some steps you can take to reduce the risk include:
Advertisement
Getting regular
prenatal care
and screenings
: Frequent visits allow your healthcare provider to track your health and the fetus’s growth. It’s also important to do the
glucose tolerance test
to screen for gestational diabetes.
Exercising during pregnancy
: Aerobic and strength-training exercises during pregnancy can help reduce the risk of macrosomia. Discuss what types of physical activity are safe for you with your provider.
Managing diabetes
: If you have gestational diabetes, eating
low-glycemic foods
can help manage it and reduce the risk of macrosomia. If you have preexisting diabetes, keeping your blood sugar
in range
as much as possible can help reduce the risk of having a big baby.
Managing obesity
: Several strategies can help you reach a healthy weight before pregnancy. These include eating changes, exercise, weight loss medications and/or
bariatric surgery
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have certain risk factors, like diabetes or obesity, you’ve likely already heard that you could have a big baby (fetal macrosomia). Try not to worry too much — you can’t totally control how much your baby will grow. The best thing you can do is manage your risk factors. Lean on your healthcare team for guidance. And look to your loved ones for support.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Trying to choose where to give birth? Learn why Cleveland Clinic is the best choice to help you through each step of the labor and delivery process.
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment