Shingles Vaccine: What To Know
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Shingles Vaccine
Advertisement
Advertisement
Shingles Vaccine
The shingles vaccine is a series of two shots that helps prevent shingles and its complications. It’s recommended for adults 50 and older and for people 19 and older with compromised immune systems.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is the shingles vaccine?
The shingles vaccine is an injection (shot) that can reduce your risk of getting
shingles
. Shingles is a painful rash you can develop decades after having chickenpox. The shot can also reduce your risk of
postherpetic neuralgia
(PHN), chronic pain after a shingles infection, if you do get shingles.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In the U.S.,
Shingrix
™ (recombinant zoster vaccine) is currently the only shingles shot. In the past, you may have received
Zostavax
®, which is no longer available in the U.S.
Who should get the shingles vaccine?
In the U.S., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends adults age 50 and older get two doses of the shingles vaccine, two to six months apart. You should also get vaccinated if you’re 19 or older and have a
compromised immune system
.
You should get the shingles vaccine even if you:
Have had shingles
. If you’ve had shingles in the past, you should get the vaccine to help prevent getting shingles again. Wait until the shingles rash is gone before getting your first shot.
Received the old shingles vaccine (Zostavax)
. If you got Zostavax in the past, you should get the new shingles vaccine, Shingrix, to be protected.
If you’re not sure if you’ve had
chickenpox
, talk to your provider about what they recommend. They may want to do titer testing, a
blood test
that measures the presence and amount of certain
antibodies
that you have. This can tell you if you’ve had chickenpox before.
Who shouldn’t get the shingles vaccine?
You shouldn’t get the shingles vaccine if you:
Have had a severe
allergic reaction
to the shingles vaccine in the past
Have tested negative for immunity to the
varicella-zoster virus
with a titer test, meaning you’ve never had chickenpox (you should get the
chickenpox vaccine
instead)
Advertisement
You should wait to get the shingles vaccine if you:
Currently have shingles
Are sick
Are
pregnant
or breastfeeding
Treatment Details
How is the shingles vaccine given?
A healthcare provider will give you a shot in your upper arm. You’ll get a second dose two to six months later.
How long does the shingles vaccine last?
You should have a high level of protection for at least seven years after the Shingrix vaccine. There are currently no boosters after you’ve had the first two shots.
What side effects can the shingles vaccine cause?
Temporary side effects of shingles shots may include:
Pain or soreness at the injection site
Redness or swelling at the injection site
Tiredness (
fatigue
)
Headache
Fever
Abdominal pain
Nausea
Severe reactions are extremely rare. Call 911 or your local emergency services number, or go to the emergency room if you develop signs of an
allergic reaction
, including:
Hives
Swelling of your face and throat
Difficulty breathing
Rapid heartbeat
Dizziness
Weakness
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
How long after I’ve received the shingles vaccine am I contagious?
You’re not contagious after getting the Shingrix vaccine. The old vaccine, Zostavax, used a weakened form of the live varicella-zoster virus, so it was possible to spread a form of the virus to people around you.
Shingrix isn’t a live vaccine. It uses only a small part of the virus that can’t infect you or anyone else.
Can you get shingles after you’ve been vaccinated?
The shingles vaccine is highly effective. But some people can still get shingles after getting the shot. People who do usually have milder symptoms and a shorter illness. You’ll also be less likely to develop complications from shingles, including postherpetic neuralgia.
Can you get shingles if you’ve had the chickenpox vaccine?
Some people get shingles years after they received the chickenpox vaccine. But it’s much more common to get shingles after having chickenpox.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting shots isn’t anyone’s favorite thing to do. But it’s worth it to avoid the pain of shingles — and its long-lasting complications. Talk to your healthcare provider about when they recommend getting the shingles vaccination.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider