Burns: Symptoms, Degrees, How To Treat & Healing
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Burns
Advertisement
Advertisement
Burns
Most burns happen because of something that’s too hot for you to handle. But burns can also happen when something’s too cold, with friction, chemicals and even from the sun. Knowing how to recognize and treat burns is important. And knowing when to get expert medical care for them can be lifesaving.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What are burns?
Burns are a type of injury that happens when something — usually something hot — damages tissues of your body. They’re more severe when they’re deeper and cover a larger part of your body’s surface area.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Burns are extremely common and usually unintentional. Worldwide, about 10 million people experience burns, and about 180,000 die from them each year. In the U.S., about 486,000 people receive medical care for burns each year.
Types of burns
There are five types of burns:
Thermal burns (hot or cold)
. These involve cell damage from extreme temperatures.
Electrical burns
. These happen when electrical energy overloads your cells. Electricity also generates heat and causes thermal damage.
Friction burns
. These burns happen when something rubs against your body hard enough to generate heat. The amount of force needed for these burns usually causes other types of damage, too.
Radiation burns
. This happens when different forms of radiation damage your cells, which then break down and die.
Chemical burns
. These happen when chemicals, usually ones that are acidic (acids) or alkaline (bases), try to react with your cells and destroy them.
Degrees of burns
Burns can cause varying levels of damage to your skin, and are more severe the deeper the damage goes.
Experts determine how severe a burn is partly by how deep it goes. The older system of rating burns by degrees is no longer in widespread use. Instead, experts use the following system:
Superficial (similar to
first-degree
)
. These only damage the
epidermis
, the top layer of
skin
. These are minor and always self-treatable.
Partial-thickness (similar to second-degree)
. These go deeper, damaging the outer two layers of your skin. They can blister, cause color or texture changes more than just simple redness and be painful.
Full-thickness (similar to third-degree)
. These burns go through all skin layers and can reach all the way to the fatty tissue underneath the
dermis
. Full-thickness burns destroy nerve endings, so they don’t hurt.
Advertisement
Burns can extend even deeper and damage muscles, nerves, bones and other deep tissues. These aren’t as common, and experts sometimes call these fourth-degree burns.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of burns?
Common symptoms of burns include:
Pain
. Burns can hurt a lot, especially when they’re in sensitive places like on your hands or face. And while full-thickness burns don’t hurt, the area around them may.
Skin appearance or texture changes
. Superficial burns can cause peeling, while partial-thickness burns can cause blistering. Deeper, more severe burns can make your skin leathery and stiff.
Skin color changes
. Superficial burns can cause red skin (or red-tinged skin if your skin is naturally darker). Partial-thickness burns can make your skin blister. Full-thickness burns can char your skin black or make it look ashen and gray. Burned skin can also have a different color while it heals.
What causes burns?
Burns can happen in many ways, including:
Touching something too hot or cold, like a hot stove or dry ice.
Contact with very hot air (like air from an open flame or an electric hair dryer) or very cold air (like severe wind chill that causes
frostbite
on exposed skin).
Contact with very hot liquids (like boiling water) or very cold liquids (like liquid nitrogen).
Conducting electrical current through your body from things like downed power lines, damaged power cables/cords, lightning and automobile batteries.
Falling on paved surfaces, which can cause road rash.
Moving against rougher fabrics — like in clothing, upholstery, carpets — with a lot of force and/or for an extended time.
Staying in the sun too long without adequate protection.
Receiving medical treatments like radiation therapy.
Contact with chemicals like those found in cleaning products and construction supplies.
What complications can burns lead to?
Burns can cause many complications, ranging from minor to life-threatening. Some of the most common complications include:
Infections
. Damaged skin can’t keep
germs
out, which is part of why burns are prone to
infections
.
Scarring
. Deeper burns may not heal easily and may form scar tissue rather than regenerate normal skin.
Swelling (edema)
. It’s common for people with burns to experience some swelling (different from blisters). Severe burns can cause swelling in parts of your body away from the burn, too.
More severe complications can happen when burns are deeper and cover more of your body’s surface area. Some of these serious or dangerous complications can include:
Dehydration
and
shock
from fluid and blood loss
Compartment syndrome
from swelling that cuts off blood circulation
Trouble breathing
from burn-related damage or complications
Hypothermia
because damaged skin affects how your body regulates its temperature
Organ damage and
failure
as your
kidneys
and
liver
try to filter damaged tissue from your blood
Digestion and metabolism issues either due to the burn or from other complications
Sepsis
, an overwhelming, life-threatening immune reaction to spreading infections
Blood clot formation leading to
deep vein thrombosis
Advertisement
The complications that are more likely in your case can vary depending on many factors. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about what to expect in your case.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are burns diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can diagnose burns by examining the injury and by asking questions about what happened. If you’re unable to answer, they may rely on input from first responders or others who were there.
Lab and imaging tests don’t usually help diagnose burns but can help catch complications before they become severe.
Blood
and
urine tests
are especially important for finding signs of organ damage or infections. And
CT scans
and
magnetic resonance imaging
may help detect deeper tissue damage in some cases, but these aren’t usually necessary.
Management and Treatment
How are burns treated?
Treating burns depends on how deep they go and how much of your body’s surface area they cover. Superficial burns are always minor and you can treat them yourself. When deciding how to treat a burn or if it needs medical care, remember the following Dos and Don’ts:
Do:
Stop or remove the source of the burn immediately (like taking off clothing soaked in hot liquid to limit the burn’s severity).
Run cool water over the burn (except with certain causes of chemical burns).
Keep the burned area clean and protected when possible.
Get medical attention for partial-thickness burns that are larger than you can cover with your hand, or for any full-thickness burn.
Advertisement
Don’t:
Use home remedies like bleach or butter on any burn.
Apply ointments or creams on any burn that might be partial- or full-thickness.
Use ice on burns (this can actually make the burn worse).
Break burn blisters (this can increase your risk of an infection).
You can treat pain with over-the-counter medications like acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or ibuprofen (Advil® or Motrin®). Talk to a healthcare provider if you have any concerns about whether you can take these.
Treatments for burns that are larger and more severe
You always need professional medical care for partial-thickness burns that are too large to cover with your hand. You also always need professional care for all full-thickness burns.
Professional care can include the following treatments:
Treatments for pain
. These range from over-the-counter or prescribed medications to treatments like nerve blocks.
Cleaning and debriding
. This removes debris and dead or dying tissue.
Dressing/protection
. Bandages temporarily protect burns from debris, germs and more.
Surgery
. This can help burns heal and reduce scarring.
Skin grafts
. Your tissues can use these like a preset framework, speeding up healing.
Wound care
. Burns may need specialized care to heal properly. This may include removing damaged tissue (debridement),
hyperbaric oxygen therapy
, dressing management and more.
Therapy
.
Physical
and
occupational therapy
care can help you recover from serious physical injuries from a burn.
Mental health care
. This can help with
anxiety
,
depression
or injury-related
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
.
Advertisement
The treatments that might benefit you specifically can vary. Your healthcare provider can offer information tailored to your situation, preferences and needs.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a burn?
What you can expect from a burn depends on how severe and large the burn is.
Superficial burns usually heal within a few days without any scarring.
Partial-thickness burns can take up to three weeks to heal. Scars are usually faint and fade over time, especially with shallower burns.
Full-thickness burns take more than three weeks to heal. The extended healing time means they scar heavily without proper care. That’s why they always need medical attention.
Many other factors can affect what you should expect from a burn and during your recovery. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about what to expect and the outlook for your specific case.
Prevention
Are burns preventable?
Yes, experts estimate that up to 90% of burns are preventable. Some key ways to prevent burns include:
Teach children about fire and supervise them
. Children should learn not to play with fire or electricity, and you should make sure they aren’t unattended around potential burn sources.
Reduce the risk of scalds
. Use travel mugs and keep open containers of hot liquids away from counter or tabletop edges. Set your water heater to 120 degrees Fahrenheit (49 degrees Celsius). Feel bathwater before putting children in and don’t let young children bathe unsupervised.
Cook safely
. Use proper protective items like oven mitts and don’t improvise with towels. Make sure stovetops or ovens are off when you’re done. Be sure to angle handles away from you so children can’t grab them and they can’t snag on your clothes. And keep children and pets out of the kitchen during meal prep.
Unplug heated devices when not using them
.
That includes devices like curling irons, hair straighteners, clothing irons, etc.
Use caution with electricity
. Don’t overload power strips or outlets. Make sure to cover power outlets so children can’t hurt themselves. Keep electrical devices away from water sources like sinks, bathtubs or showers. And don’t use devices, cables or power cords with exposed wiring.
Use sunscreen
. Choose products with an SPF of at least 50 and reapply at least every two hours.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider or seek care?
Seek medical care if:
The burn isn’t getting better within a few days or looks worse
Pain medications like acetaminophen or ibuprofen don’t help
The pain is worse than you’d expect based on how the burn looks
When should I go to the hospital?
Call 911 or your local emergency services number, or seek immediate medical attention with the following:
A partial-thickness or full-thickness burn that’s on your eyes, ears, face, hands, feet or around your genitals
If the burn starts oozing fluid or has a foul smell to it
If you have symptoms of an infection like a fever, swelling around the burn, dizziness or the skin around the burn is warmer to the touch
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Some questions you can ask your healthcare provider include:
How long should it take my burn to heal?
Will my burn need additional treatments?
What can I do to help my burn heal?
What activities should I avoid?
What symptoms mean I need to call your office or go to the hospital?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe your hand slipped while you were handling something hot in the kitchen, or you dropped a hot beverage and spilled some of it on yourself. Burns are painful and unpleasant, but you can do several things to aid your recovery.
The best thing you can do when it comes to burns is limit the complications they can cause. That means you shouldn’t hesitate to get medical care for burns that are deeper and larger. That way, you can recover and move forward with experience in preventing similar future burns.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider