Patellar Instability: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Patellar Instability
Advertisement
Advertisement
Patellar Instability
Patellar instability means your patella (kneecap) slips out of the femoral groove in your thighbone. An unstable kneecap can lead to a dislocated knee. Physical therapy and leg braces can help. Some people have chronic (ongoing) patellar instability. This condition increases the risk of patellar dislocation, ACL tears and arthritis in your knee.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knee Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is patellar instability?
Patellar instability (also known as knee instability or patellofemoral instability) means your kneecap (
patella
) is unstable when your knee moves. It occurs when your patella comes out of the groove at the end of your thighbone (
femur
) that holds it in place.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Normally, when you bend and straighten your knee, your kneecap moves up and down in a V-shaped notch called the trochlear groove. With patellar instability, your kneecap doesn’t track in the groove the way it should.
You use your knees constantly throughout the day. They help you stand, sit, walk, run and move. This makes them more prone to problems like patellar instability.
An unstable kneecap can lead to a
dislocated kneecap
. You may have a complete dislocation or a partial dislocation (
subluxation
).
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of patellar instability?
When your kneecap slips out of the trochlear groove, your knee may buckle. Your knee and leg may not be able to support your weight or keep you standing upright. You may not be able to straighten your knee or walk.
Other signs of patellar instability include:
Knee pain
, stiffness and swelling
Cracking or popping sounds in your knee when you climb stairs or bend your knee
Feeling like your kneecap is catching on tissue or moving from side to side
What causes patellar instability?
Causes of patellar instability include:
Shallow or uneven trochlear groove
Loose
knee ligaments
or extremely flexible
joints
Sharp blow to your kneecap during a fall,
sports injury
or another accident
What are the risk factors for patellar instability?
Anyone can develop patellar instability.
Women
tend to have looser ligaments that make them more prone to patellar instability.
Advertisement
You may have a higher risk if you play high-impact sports, like football, or participate in activities that require a lot of quick pivoting, like basketball, cheerleading or soccer.
Certain health conditions can cause loose connective tissue that contributes to patellar instability. These include:
Cerebral palsy
Down syndrome
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
What are the complications of patellar instability?
Without treatment, recurrent (recurring) patellar instability can lead to:
Kneecap dislocation
Limited functioning of your knee
Chronic pain
Runner’s knee
Severe
knee arthritis
Diagnosis and Tests
How is patellar instability diagnosed?
Even if your kneecap moves back into place on its own, you should see your healthcare provider for a diagnosis and potential treatment. Your provider will ask how the injury occurred or what you were doing when your kneecap moved out of the groove. They’ll also perform a
physical exam
to assess your symptoms. They’ll look at the appearance of your knee, check for tenderness and evaluate your range of motion. They may ask you to walk or straighten and bend your knee.
What tests will be done to diagnose patellar instability?
To diagnose the condition, your healthcare provider may request imaging tests, including:
Knee X-rays
to see if your kneecap is out of place and check for
broken bones
MRI
to check for injuries like
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears
,
meniscal tears
or loose bone fragments
CT scan
to check the alignment of your
knee joint
Management and Treatment
What are nonsurgical treatments for patellar instability?
If your kneecap doesn’t move back to the trochlear groove on its own, seek medical attention. A healthcare provider will gently push your kneecap back into place. This process (closed reduction) can be uncomfortable. You may receive
pain medicine
, but you shouldn’t need
anesthesia
.
Your provider may recommend:
A
knee brace
to immobilize your knee and keep your kneecap in place — you may need to wear a brace for several weeks and use
crutches
during this time
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
to ease pain and swelling
Physical therapy
to strengthen muscles that hold your kneecap in place and improve your range of motion
What are surgical treatments for patellar instability?
If you have chronic patellar instability, your healthcare provider may recommend surgery. Most knee surgeries take place
arthroscopically
. The procedure uses small cuts (incisions) and a tiny camera (arthroscope). Recovery can take six to 12 months.
If an injury caused patellar instability, you may have loose
cartilage
or bone fragments in your knee. Your provider will surgically remove them.
Surgical options include:
Medial patellofemoral ligament (MPFL) repair
to strengthen and repair the ligaments that hold your kneecap in place
MPFL reconstruction
to replace a damaged ligament with a hamstring tendon taken from a donor or elsewhere in your body
Knee osteotomy
(tibial tubercle transfer) to realign your shinbone, thighbone, kneecap and connective tissues — this open surgical procedure requires a larger incision and longer recovery than arthroscopic surgery
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knee Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for people with patellar instability?
Most people feel better without surgery by wearing a brace and doing physical therapy exercises. If the kneecap remains unstable (chronic patellar instability) or you completely dislocate the kneecap, you may need surgery.
Prevention
How can I prevent patellar instability?
An unstable kneecap can damage the connective tissue around your knee. That damage increases your risk for further injury.
Physical therapy exercises can strengthen the muscles and connective tissue that keep your kneecap in the femoral groove. Cycling is also a good knee strengthener. Your provider may recommend wearing a knee brace during certain activities.
Living With
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You should call your provider if you experience:
An inability to bend or straighten your knee, put weight on your leg or walk
Pain or limited range of motion in your knee that interferes with daily life
Unusual redness or swelling in your knee joint
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
What caused patellar instability?
What treatments can help?
Can physical therapy or other exercises help?
Would I benefit from surgery?
Additional Common Questions
Why can I move my kneecap up and down?
When you straighten or bend your leg, you normally pull your patella up and down through the trochlear groove. If you have patellar instability, it means the tendons and ligaments that hold your kneecap in place are already loose and unstable. A previous injury or another preexisting anatomical condition might cause this. An unstable kneecap will dislocate more easily.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If it feels like your kneecap keeps popping out of place or your knee feels loose, you likely have patellar instability. This common condition can lead to a dislocated kneecap. Even if you’re able to pop your kneecap back into place, it’s not a bad idea to have it checked out by your healthcare provider, especially if it keeps happening. Your provider can assess your condition and help determine if you need treatment to prevent long-term complications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Knee pain can keep you from doing the things you love. Cleveland Clinic experts can craft a treatment plan to get you back to the regular pace of your life.
Knee Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/20/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment