Autoimmune Encephalitis: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Autoimmune Encephalitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Autoimmune Encephalitis
Autoimmune encephalitis (AE) happens when your immune system attacks the proteins of nerve cells, causing inflammation in your brain. There are several types, which can cause different symptoms. AE is treatable with immunosuppressant medications. If you have a tumor, treating it can also help treat AE.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
What is autoimmune encephalitis?
Autoimmune encephalitis (AE) represents a group of conditions that cause
inflammation
in your
brain
. It happens when your
immune system
mistakenly attacks the proteins of healthy nerve cells and
neurotransmitters
. This leads to symptoms like
memory loss
,
seizures
and
psychosis
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of autoimmune encephalitis?
Autoimmune encephalitis can cause a wide range of symptoms because of the various types. Symptoms typically develop and evolve over weeks to months.
Possible symptoms of AE include:
Progressive decline in thinking (cognitive) abilities
Memory issues
Confusion
Seizures (which often don’t respond to
antiseizure medication
)
Abnormal movements
, like repetitive movements of your mouth and face,
muscle twitches
and an exaggerated startle response
Issues with using language (
aphasia
)
Problems with balance or coordination (
ataxia
)
Psychosis, which can involve
hallucinations
,
delusions
and
paranoia
It’s important to get medical help right away if you develop these symptoms.
What are the possible complications of autoimmune encephalitis?
Complications can include:
Cognitive impairment
Prolonged seizures (
status epilepticus
)
Coma
Death
What causes autoimmune encephalitis?
Researchers think autoimmune encephalitis happens when your immune system develops
antibodies
to specific proteins on the surface of nerve cells or within nerve cells. These antibodies block the necessary protein, causing inflammation.
Like many other autoimmune conditions, researchers don’t know why your immune system attacks healthy cells. In some cases, AE happens alongside
cancer
. Healthcare providers call this paraneoplastic AE. Other cases are linked to infections, like the
herpes simplex
virus. But many people have no known trigger for AE.
Advertisement
What are the risk factors for autoimmune encephalitis?
You’re more likely to develop autoimmune encephalitis if you:
Have had or develop cancer, especially
small cell lung cancer
,
thymoma
and
ovarian cancer
Had treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors (a cancer treatment)
Had infectious encephalitis
It’s also possible to develop AE without any of these risk factors.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is autoimmune encephalitis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose autoimmune encephalitis based on the presence of symptoms in a certain timeframe. They also rely on test results that show inflammation in your brain.
Given the large number of conditions that can look like AE, you may need several tests. Diagnosis can sometimes take many weeks. Tests and exams providers use to diagnose AE include:
Physical exam
and a detailed medical history
Neurological exam
Cognitive tests
Blood tests
Brain imaging, like a
brain MRI
Spinal tap
for cerebrospinal fluid analysis
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Your provider may also recommend other tests to rule out other conditions.
Management and Treatment
How is autoimmune encephalitis treated?
The main treatment goals for autoimmune encephalitis include
immunosuppression
and tumor removal (if applicable).
First-line therapy works to decrease brain inflammation. It includes:
Corticosteroids
IV immunoglobulins
Plasmapheresis
If this therapy isn’t effective, the next treatment options include:
Rituximab
(a
monoclonal antibody
injection)
Cyclophosphamide
(a chemotherapy medication)
If you have a tumor, your healthcare team will recommend surgically removing it and/or
chemotherapy
. This helps speed up the improvement of AE.
Symptom management
You may need additional medications to manage the symptoms of AE, including:
Antiseizure medications to reduce or prevent seizures
Medications that manage anxiety and depression, like
antidepressants
and
anxiolytics
Antipsychotic medications
if you’re experiencing psychosis
Physical therapy
,
occupational therapy
and/or
speech therapy
may also be very helpful to improve your recovery.
How treatable is autoimmune encephalitis?
The effectiveness of treatment for AE varies from case to case. Some people with AE respond very quickly to the first medications they receive — within days. Others will need treatment that lasts for weeks or months.
It can be difficult for healthcare providers to predict how your body will respond to treatment. Know that they’ll carefully monitor your progress and keep you updated.
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with autoimmune encephalitis?
In general, getting treatment early in the course of autoimmune encephalitis tends to decrease your risk of long-term complications and relapse.
But AE affects everyone differently — and other coexisting conditions like cancer may affect your prognosis (outlook). Your healthcare team will be able to give you a better idea of what to expect.
Advertisement
Is autoimmune encephalitis lifelong?
Autoimmune encephalitis generally responds well to treatment and goes away. But this can take a long time for some people. AE can also relapse (come back), especially if you have cancer that’s not responding to treatment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Autoimmune encephalitis is a serious condition that needs immediate medical attention. There are several types. So, symptoms vary and diagnosis may take a while. Know that your healthcare team will work together to diagnose it and start treatment as soon as possible.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment