Polio: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Polio
Advertisement
Advertisement
Polio
Polio (poliomyelitis) is a disease that can cause flu-like symptoms, brain inflammation and paralysis. Poliovirus causes it . It spreads from person to person through contact with poop or respiratory droplets. Most people have no symptoms or mild symptoms, but some have permanent paralysis. Vaccination is the best way to prevent polio.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Polio?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Polio?
Polio is a disease that can infect your throat and intestines. It’s also called poliomyelitis and poliovirus infection. It can cause
flu-like symptoms
and
paralysis
. You get polio from poliovirus, a
germ
that spreads easily from person to person.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most people don’t feel sick or only have mild symptoms. But in some cases, it spreads to your brain and spinal cord. This may paralyze the muscles that you use to breathe, speak, swallow and move your limbs.
Polio hasn’t been completely wiped out, but childhood vaccines have gotten rid of it in most places. In the early 1900s, polio paralyzed and killed thousands of people. Thanks to vaccines, cases have dropped a lot in the last 70 years. But if polio exists anywhere, it can spread again — especially if fewer people get
vaccinated
.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of polio
Polio symptoms range from none to severe. Most people don’t feel sick. If symptoms do appear, they may start mild — like the flu — but sometimes get worse. Some people recover quickly. Others develop nervous system problems. Here’s a list of symptom, from the mild to severe:
Flu-like symptoms
: Fever, fatigue, sore throat, headache
Digestive issues:
Nausea
and
vomiting
,
diarrhea
,
constipation
,
stomach pain
Signs of brain and spinal cord swelling: Severe headache,
sensitivity to light
or touch,
neck stiffness
Nervous system effects: Pain or pins-and-needles feeling in your arms and legs (
paresthesia
),
muscle spasms
, weakness or paralysis that can affect movement, breathing, swallowing or speaking
Advertisement
Polio causes
Polio is caused by a
virus
called poliovirus. It spreads easily from person to person through contact with poop or respiratory droplets from coughing and sneezing. It also spreads through contaminated food or water.
You can get polio by:
Not washing your hands after going to the bathroom or touching poop
Drinking or swallowing dirty water
Swimming in contaminated water, including pools
Eating foods that have touched contaminated water
Touching surfaces with the virus on them
Being in close contact with someone who has polio, even if they don’t have symptoms
Risk factors
Anyone can get poliomyelitis, but some people are at a higher risk. Young children are more likely to get sick if they haven’t been fully vaccinated. Teens and adults can get it, too, if they haven’t been vaccinated or had polio before. You’re more at risk if you live in or travel to places where polio still spreads.
Complications
Most people recover from polio without lasting problems. But in some cases, the virus can cause serious complications. It can affect your brain, nerves or muscles — even years later. Rarely, it can lead to breathing failure or death. Complications of polio include:
Paralysis in your arms, legs or breathing muscles
Swelling in your brain (
encephalitis
) or around your brain and spinal cord (
meningitis
)
Post-polio syndrome
— new weakness, pain and fatigue years after recovery
Death, often from breathing muscles becoming paralyzed
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose polio
A healthcare provider diagnoses polio by checking your symptoms and testing body fluids. Be sure to tell them if you’ve traveled anywhere recently.
Your provider may collect samples to test for polio or other infections:
Spit (
saliva
) from your throat
Poop (
stool
)
Blood
Spinal fluid (
lumbar puncture
)
Polio symptoms can look a lot like the flu, so your provider may test for other illnesses, too.
Management and Treatment
Is there a cure?
There’s no cure for polio, and no medicine can make it go away faster.
Physical therapy
might help weakened or paralyzed muscles. If the infection affects your breathing, you may need a machine to help you breathe (
ventilator
).
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you’ve been exposed to polio and feel sick, or if you have questions about the vaccine.
You might ask:
How should I take care of myself at home?
When should I follow up?
What signs mean I should go to the hospital?
Am I contagious? For how long?
Is it safe to go to work or school?
How can I avoid spreading it?
When will I feel better?
Could I have long-term problems?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What happens if you get polio?
Most people with polio feel sick for a few days to a week. But some get worse over time. You might feel better, then have new symptoms days or weeks later.
Can you fully recover?
Yes, most people recover fully. But some have lasting muscle weakness or paralysis. If you had polio as a kid, you may develop post-polio syndrome as an adult.
Advertisement
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
To feel better, you can:
Drink fluids like water and broth
Use heat packs for sore muscles
Take over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers (ask your child’s doctor before giving them any)
Follow your provider’s advice about physical therapy and exercise
Get lots of rest
Prevention
Can polio be prevented?
The best way to reduce your risk of polio is to get
vaccinated
— usually in
childhood
. If you didn’t get vaccinated as a child or don’t know if you did, ask your healthcare provider about your options.
You can also lower your risk by:
Washing your hands often, especially after using the bathroom or changing diapers
Drinking and cooking with bottled water if clean water isn’t available
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Polio is rare today, but it hasn’t been fully wiped out. The best way to stay protected — especially if you’re traveling — is to make sure you’re up to date on your vaccines. If you’re unsure, talk to your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment