Myotonia: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Myotonia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Myotonia
Myotonia happens when your muscles don’t relax as they should after they contract. It can impact muscles throughout your body and may cause other symptoms depending on the type of myotonia. Treatments include medication, physical therapy and avoiding triggers.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Movement Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is myotonia?
Myotonia is a symptom in which your
muscles
can’t relax after they contract. For example, you might not be able to let go of someone’s hand after you shake it. Or you may have trouble standing up. There are several types of myotonia. All types happen because of a
genetic change
. With each type, a different
gene
is affected.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The genetic changes that cause myotonia can affect other organs throughout your body. Depending on the type of myotonia, this could include your:
Heart
Lungs
Digestive tract
Brain
Eyes
Having an unexplained symptom like muscle tightness can be alarming. You may worry about how much worse it’ll get and how it’ll affect your life. The best thing you can do is see a healthcare provider. Given the rarity of myotonia, it may take time to find the correct diagnosis. But your provider can ease your concerns and answer your questions along the way.
Types of myotonia
Healthcare providers classify disorders with myotonia as dystrophic or non-dystrophic. Both of these disorders affect the electrical process that regulates muscle contraction. Dystrophic myotonia also affects the muscle structure itself. “Dystrophy” means “the deterioration of tissue.”
Dystrophic myotonia
(DM) is a type of
muscular dystrophy
that causes muscle weakness and loss (
atrophy
) over time. Types of DM include:
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) — the most common form
Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2)
Types of non-dystrophic myotonia include:
Andersen-Tawil syndrome
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis
type 1 and type 2
Myotonia congenita
— the most common form
Paramyotonia congenita
Sodium channel myotonia
Advertisement
Non-dystrophic myotonias don’t affect the structure of muscle tissue.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of myotonia?
The main symptom of myotonia is not being able to relax a muscle after it contracts. Myotonia symptoms can arise in infancy, childhood or adulthood. It depends on the specific type. Other common symptoms include:
Atypical appearance of your muscles, like an increase (hypertrophy) or decrease (hypotonia) in muscle size
Fatigue
Muscle pain
Muscle weakness
Muscle stiffness
that gets better with activity (warm-up phenomenon)
Each type of dystrophic myotonia has specific symptoms. Examples include:
Abdominal pain
,
constipation
,
diarrhea
,
acid reflux
and
bloating
Atypical facial features (facial dysmorphisms)
Cataracts
that cause
blurred vision
Insulin resistance
that causes high blood sugar (
hyperglycemia
)
Intellectual disability
Irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia) or problems with the electrical signals in your heart
Male pattern baldness (androgenic alopecia)
Sleep apnea
If you have hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, you may have
paralysis
(loss of muscle strength) episodes that last from one to four hours. If you have hypokalemic periodic paralysis, you may have muscle weakness at night or early in the morning that lasts from hours to days.
What causes myotonia?
Myotonia happens due to a specific change in one of your genes. More specifically, the gene changes affect the ion channels that are responsible for regulating your muscles’ activity.
Each type of myotonia results from a different gene change. For example, myotonic dystrophy type 1 happens because of an issue with the
DMPK
gene. Myotonia congenita happens due to an issue with the
CLCN1
gene. You may inherit a genetic change from one or both of your biological parents, or you can develop it randomly.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is myotonia diagnosed?
To start the diagnostic process, your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and family health history. They’ll rule out more common conditions that may explain your symptoms, like
hypothyroidism
, before suggesting tests for myotonia. Tests to diagnose myotonia include:
Creatine kinase (CK) blood test
. Creatine kinase is an
enzyme
that mainly exists in your muscles. Myotonia typically causes high CK levels.
Electromyography (EMG)
. This test evaluates the health and function of your skeletal muscles and the nerves that control them.
Genetic tests
. These tests can often identify genetic changes that cause various forms of myotonia.
Potassium blood test
. Your provider may use this test to check for hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (
high potassium
) or hypokalemic periodic paralysis (
low potassium
).
Short exercise test
. During this test, you’ll contract your muscles at measured intervals while a provider monitors how your nerves and muscles respond.
Advertisement
Due to the rarity of myotonia, it may take time before you get a proper diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for myotonia?
Treatments for myotonia are specific to each type and the symptoms you have. Together, you and your healthcare provider will tailor a treatment plan to meet your needs. Don’t hesitate to ask questions.
In general,
physical therapy
may be a part of your treatment. A
physical therapist
can help you develop an exercise plan that helps avoid known or possible triggers while allowing you to engage in physical activity as much as possible.
Occupational therapists
can also help you find new ways of doing everyday tasks and may recommend certain adaptive or mobility aids.
Dystrophic myotonia treatments
Treatment of dystrophic myotonias depends on the symptoms. You’ll need regular tests that monitor the health of the organs affected by the type of dystrophic myotonia you have.
The main medication healthcare providers prescribe is
mexiletine
. It’s actually an
antiarrhythmic
medication, but it can also help with muscle cramps and stiffness. Mexiletine may also help in some forms of non-dystrophic myotonia.
Non-dystrophic myotonia treatment
Other than medication, treatment of non-dystrophic myotonias may include avoiding triggers, like:
Avoiding exposure to cold temperatures
Limiting intense exercise
Advertisement
Periodic paralysis treatment
Treatment of periodic paralysis typically involves managing potassium levels and avoiding triggers. Your provider may recommend avoiding:
Extended rest after exercise
High-
carbohydrate
meals
Eating meals at irregular times
Irregular periods of sleep
Working overnight
If you have hypokalemic periodic paralysis, your provider may recommend eating
foods high in potassium
, like bananas, beans, dried fruits, mangos and papayas.
If you have hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, you may need to avoid eating foods that have a lot of potassium.
If these measures aren’t enough to manage your symptoms, your provider may prescribe a medication, typically either
dichlorphenamide
or
acetazolamide
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Movement Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with myotonia?
If you have myotonia, your prognosis (outlook) can vary depending on several factors, like:
The type of myotonia you have
The severity of your symptoms
How your body responds to treatment
Your overall health and age
Your healthcare provider will be able to give you a better idea of what to expect given your unique circumstances. But in general:
Non-dystrophic myotonias typically have a good prognosis, but this can vary based on your symptom severity.
The prognosis of dystrophic myotonias depends on how severely other body systems are affected. Myotonic dystrophy type 1 and 2 can potentially shorten your lifespan.
Periodic paralyses can worsen with age and lead to permanent severe muscle issues (
myopathy
).
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Myotonia is a chronic (long-term) condition. So, you’ll need to see your healthcare provider throughout your life to monitor your symptoms and how well your treatment is working.
It’s important to note that myotonia disorders may affect your reaction to
anesthesia
. You should contact your provider if you have a surgery planned and notify the
anesthesiologist
who’ll be taking care of you during surgery.
Prevention
Can I prevent myotonia?
Myotonia happens due to genetic changes, so you can’t do anything to prevent it. If you have a biological family history of myotonia or have it yourself and are planning to have biological children, consider meeting with a
genetic counselor
. They can go over your risk of having or passing on the condition.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a diagnosis of a rare condition can be shocking and even isolating. Myotonia affects each person differently, so you may have a lot of questions. Your healthcare team will be by your side throughout your diagnosis and treatment journey. Lean on them — and loved ones — for support.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parkinson’s disease, essential tremor and dystonia are common movement disorders. And Cleveland Clinic has the expert care and support you need to manage them.
Movement Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment