Pseudoaneurysm: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pseudoaneurysm
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pseudoaneurysm
A pseudoaneurysm is a pooling of blood that develops from an injury to your artery or, rarely, your heart. The most common type is a femoral pseudoaneurysm (in the groin area). This is a possible complication of catheter-based procedures. Pseudoaneurysms also affect other arteries, like those in your chest and belly. They’re usually treatable.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Pseudoaneurysm?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Pseudoaneurysm?
A pseudoaneurysm (also called a false aneurysm) is contained bleeding from an injury to your
artery
. It looks like a round bulge that sticks out from one side of your artery. The blood collects within a “wall” that keeps it from leaking into nearby tissues.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You might wonder what’s “pseudo,” or false, about this condition. A pseudoaneurysm is very real — and it can be serious if its wall ruptures. But it’s “false” in the sense that it doesn’t involve all three layers of your artery wall. A “true”
aneurysm
involves all three layers. Those layers, together, serve as the aneurysm’s wall.
A pseudoaneurysm, on the other hand, only uses one or two layers of your artery wall for its own wall. The rest of its wall is made of tissue that forms when the artery is injured. Its wall is weaker than an aneurysm’s wall.
Some pseudoaneurysms are harmless and go away on their own. Others are more serious. If they rupture, they can cause severe complications or death. It’s important to know the causes and symptoms so you can seek medical care when needed.
Types of pseudoaneurysms
Healthcare providers divide these false aneurysms into different types based on their location. Here are some examples:
Femoral pseudoaneurysms
: This is the most common type. It affects your
femoral artery
, which is in your groin. It usually occurs as a complication of a medical procedure, like an
angiogram
, that involves putting a catheter into your artery. (Still, it’s a rare complication.)
Aortic pseudoaneurysms
: This type occurs in a large artery called your
aorta
. Causes include blunt trauma to your chest, infections and complications from heart surgery.
Visceral pseudoaneurysms
: This type is very rare. It occurs in an artery that supplies blood to internal organs like your intestines,
spleen
or
liver
. Causes include pancreatitis and complications from medical procedures.
Left ventricular pseudoaneurysms
: While most pseudoaneurysms form in arteries, this type forms in your
heart
. It’s a rare complication of a
heart attack
. Heart muscle ruptures, causing blood to pool between your heart’s outer wall and the sac that surrounds it.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a false aneurysm
Pseudoaneurysm symptoms include:
A painful or throbbing lump underneath your skin
Tenderness when you touch the area
Bruising or skin changes
Numbness or tingling (if the bulge presses on a nerve)
Symptoms of left ventricular and aortic pseudoaneurysms are different. They include:
Chest pain
Shortness of breath
Irregular heartbeat
Symptoms of
heart failure
Pseudoaneurysm causes
Pseudoaneurysms can develop if there’s damage to an artery. The most common causes of such damage include:
Complications from surgeries or
catheter-based procedures
Traumatic injury
Pancreatitis
(for visceral pseudoaneurysms)
Injuries to your arteries can also cause
hematomas
. But a hematoma is a pooling of blood that doesn’t have walls around it, as a pseudoaneurysm does. Think of a hematoma like a bruise.
Complications of this condition
Without treatment, this can lead to:
Nerve pain
Deep vein thrombosis
(DVT)
Gangrene
Rupture and internal
bleeding
Some pseudoaneurysms — especially those that form in your heart — can be fatal. Early diagnosis and treatment can be lifesaving.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose pseudoaneurysms
Your provider will discuss your symptoms and give you a physical exam. The size and location of the pseudoaneurysm determine what they look for and the tests they use.
For example, if your provider suspects a femoral pseudoaneurysm, they’ll check for:
Swelling in the affected area
A lump under your skin
Tenderness at the site
Changes in skin color or texture that signal blood flow problems
Turbulent blood flow (bruit, pronounced “broo-EE”) that your provider can hear through a
stethoscope
Your provider may also perform a
duplex ultrasound
. This is a common method for checking blood flow in your arteries and veins. This painless test can also check the size and location of the pseudoaneurysm.
If your provider suspects a left ventricular or aortic pseudoaneurysm, they’ll do imaging tests. These help your provider see any issues. Possible tests include:
Chest X-ray
Echocardiogram
Heart CT scan
Management and Treatment
How is a pseudoaneurysm treated?
Treatment for a pseudoaneurysm depends on its location and size. Options include:
Observation
: This means your provider keeps a close eye on the situation. Observation may be suitable for a small femoral pseudoaneurysm. The problem may go away on its own within a few weeks. If it doesn’t go away, you’ll need treatment.
Ultrasound-guided thrombin injection
: Your provider injects a substance called thrombin into the pseudoaneurysm. This causes the pooled blood to clot (and stay there), taking care of the problem. Your provider uses
ultrasound
to confirm the injection worked.
Ultrasound-guided compression
: Your provider puts pressure on the pseudoaneurysm to stop blood from flowing into it. They may put a compression bandage on the area and/or use a device to apply pressure on your skin. They use ultrasound to view the process.
Surgery
: For femoral pseudoaneurysms, surgery is a last resort if other treatments don’t work. Surgery is often a first-choice treatment for visceral, aortic and left ventricular pseudoaneurysms.
Advertisement
Your provider will tell you which treatment is best for your case. They’ll also explain the benefits and risks.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call your healthcare provider if:
You have any symptoms of a pseudoaneurysm or feel something isn’t right
You recently had an endovascular procedure (a procedure with a catheter) and develop worsening pain, lightheadedness/dizziness or significant swelling in the area
Call 911 (or your local emergency service number) if you have a known pseudoaneurysm and develop sudden, significant pain in your chest, back or abdomen.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
A pseudoaneurysm is dangerous if it ruptures. It can cause internal bleeding and, possibly, death. But when caught early and treated, pseudoaneurysms are easily manageable. You may need follow-up visits with your provider after treatment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning you have a pseudoaneurysm can be scary and unexpected. But with quick treatment, there’s a good chance you can recover and carry on with life as normal. The key is getting diagnosed early when symptoms first start.
If you’re having a catheter-based procedure, talk to your provider beforehand about the risks. Pseudoaneurysms are rare complications of such procedures, but they can happen. Knowing what your provider can do to lower the risk — or treat a pseudoaneurysm if it happens — may help put your mind at ease.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Vascular disease may affect your life in big and small ways. Cleveland Clinic’s specialists treat the many types of vascular disease so you can focus on living.
Vascular Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment