Anabolic Steroids: What They Are, Uses, Side Effects & Risks
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Anabolic Steroids
Advertisement
Advertisement
Anabolic Steroids
Anabolic steroids have legitimate medical purposes. Healthcare providers prescribe them for certain conditions, such as male hypogonadism and certain types of breast cancer. But anabolic steroid misuse is common. People often misuse these drugs to build lean muscle mass. Misusing anabolic steroids can be harmful to your health.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What are anabolic steroids?
Anabolic steroids are medications that are manufactured forms of
testosterone
. The technical term for these compounds is “anabolic-androgenic steroids” (AAS). “Anabolic” refers to tissue building (mainly muscle), and “androgenic” refers to a group of sex
hormones
called
androgens
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Testosterone is the main androgen. It stimulates the development of male characteristics. Levels of testosterone are naturally much higher in
men
than in women.
Healthcare providers mainly prescribe anabolic steroids to treat
low testosterone (male hypogonadism)
. But they use it for other conditions as well, such as to stimulate muscle growth for people with certain cancers or
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
.
Some athletes, bodybuilders and others misuse these drugs in an attempt to enhance performance and/or improve their physical appearance. Anabolic steroids are the most common appearance- and performance-enhancing drugs (APEDs). Anabolic steroid misuse is common. Approximately 3 to 4 million people in the United States use anabolic steroids for nonmedical purposes.
Anabolic steroids come in several different forms, including:
Pills.
Injections.
Creams or topical gels.
Skin patches.
Implantable pellets.
List of anabolic steroids
There are several prescription anabolic steroids, including:
Danazol
(Danocrine®).
Fluoxymesterone
(Androxy®, Halotestin®).
Mesterolone (Proviron®).
Methyltestosterone
(Android®, Methitest®, Testred®, Virilon®).
Nandrolone Deconoate (Deca-Durabolin®).
Nandrolone Phenpropionate (Durabalin®).
Oxandrolone
(Oxandrin®).
Oxymetholone
(Anadrol®).
Testosterone buccal system (Striant®).
Testosterone capsules
(Jatenzo®).
Testosterone injection
(Andro-L.A.®, Aveed®, Delatestryl®, Depo-Testosterone®, Virilon® Xyosted®).
Testosterone nasal gel
(Natesto®).
Testosterone patches
(Androderm®, Testoderm®).
Testosterone skin solution
(Axiron®).
Testosterone subcutaneous pellets
(Testopel®).
Advertisement
What is the difference between steroids and anabolic steroids?
General steroids, called
corticosteroids
, are medications that reduce
inflammation
and the activity of your
immune system
. They’re manufactured drugs that closely resemble
cortisol
, a hormone that your
adrenal glands
produce naturally.
Anabolic steroids are manufactured drugs that closely resemble the hormone testosterone or other androgens.
Healthcare providers provide corticosteroids much more often than anabolic steroids.
What do anabolic steroids treat?
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved certain anabolic steroids for the treatment of the following conditions:
Primary male hypogonadism.
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (a form of hypogonadism that’s due to an issue with your
pituitary gland
or
hypothalamus
).
Delayed
puberty
in male children.
Gonadotropin
and
luteinizing hormone
-releasing hormone deficiency.
Certain types of
breast cancer
in women.
Endometriosis
.
Osteoporosis
.
Healthcare providers sometimes prescribe anabolic steroids for other conditions. This is considered an off-label, or non-FDA-approved, use of the medication. It’s legal and generally safe. Off-label uses include:
Bone marrow stimulation
in people with
leukemia
.
Aplastic anemia
.
Kidney failure
.
Growth failure.
Stimulation of appetite.
Stimulation of muscle mass for people with certain cancers or AIDS.
Treatment Details
How do anabolic steroids work?
Anabolic steroids (artificial androgens) work by activating androgen receptors in your body and mimicking the effects of natural androgens.
Prescription anabolic steroids work in different ways to treat conditions. For example:
For people who have naturally low testosterone levels, prescription anabolic steroids return their testosterone levels to a healthy range.
Anabolic steroids help treat estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancer by lowering your estrogen levels. The cells of this type of breast cancer have receptors that allow them to use estrogen to grow. Anabolic steroids can block the growth of cancer cells by lowering estrogen levels.
For people who have
muscle atrophy
due to cancer or AIDS, anabolic steroids increase the number of androgen receptors in
skeletal muscle
, which can lead to increased muscle size and strength.
Anabolic steroid misuse
The main reason people misuse anabolic steroids is to increase lean muscle mass when using them in conjunction with weight training.
Non-athlete weightlifters (bodybuilders) typically misuse them to improve their appearance. Anabolic steroid misuse is often associated with a form of
body dysmorphic disorder
called muscle dysmorphia.
For athletes, increasing muscle mass may also promote strength, which can improve strength-based sports performance.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the side effects of anabolic steroids?
Each type of prescription anabolic steroid and each brand has different possible side effects. It’s important to talk to your healthcare provider or a pharmacist about possible side effects of the specific medication you’re taking or thinking of taking.
In general, common side effects of prescription anabolic steroids include:
Acne
or oily skin.
Swelling in your ankles from mild
fluid retention
.
Stimulation of your
prostate
, which can cause urinary symptoms such as difficulty peeing.
Breast enlargement or tenderness in men.
Decrease in breast size in women.
Worsening of sleep
apnea
.
Smaller testicles.
Vaginal dryness
, burning, itching or
bleeding
.
Menstrual cycle
changes.
What are the side effects and complications of anabolic steroid misuse?
Misuse of anabolic steroids can cause a variety of side effects ranging from mild to harmful or even life-threatening. Most side effects are reversible if you stop taking the drugs, but others may be permanent.
Nonprescription doses are often 10 to 100 times higher than the doses healthcare providers prescribe to treat medical conditions. This is why the side effects are usually more severe than the side effects of prescribed anabolic steroid use.
Side effects and complications of anabolic steroid misuse for anyone include:
Advertisement
High blood pressure
.
Blood clots
.
Heart issues, including
heart attack
.
Stroke
.
Liver damage.
Short stature (if you’re an adolescent).
Severe acne and cysts.
Male-pattern baldness
.
Aggression.
Mania
.
Delusions
.
Major depressive disorder
.
Side effects and complications of anabolic steroid misuse in men include:
Decreased sperm production.
Enlarged breasts.
Decrease in testicle size.
Increased risk of
testicular cancer
.
Side effects and complications of anabolic steroid misuse in women include:
Voice deepening.
Decreased breast size.
Excessive body hair growth.
Can anabolic steroids be used safely?
Yes, if you take prescription anabolic steroids under the supervision of your healthcare provider for a medical reason, anabolic steroids are generally safe.
Misuse of anabolic steroids can be harmful to your health.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You should have regular appointments with your healthcare provider when taking an anabolic steroid to assess how well it’s working.
Otherwise, talk to your healthcare provider in the following situations:
If you develop bothersome side effects.
If your symptoms aren’t improving or if they’ve gotten worse.
If you’re thinking of stopping the medication.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Anabolic steroids are powerful medications that affect your hormone levels and body composition. Due to their possible health risks, it’s important to follow your healthcare provider’s instructions for taking the medication. Don’t take more than your daily recommended dose or share or sell them. Talk with your healthcare provider as soon as possible if you feel like you’re dependent on anabolic steroids.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/07/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes