Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (CRT)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy
Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT or biventricular pacing) is a procedure to implant a special type of pacemaker. This helps most people who have this procedure get both of their heart ventricles to contract at the same time. It can help people with heart failure have a better quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Heart Failure Treatments
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is CRT?
Procedure Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
What Is CRT?
Cardiac resynchronization therapy makes both ventricles contract together.
Cardiac resynchronization therapy (also called CRT or biventricular pacing) is a procedure that makes your
ventricles
beat together. You may need this if you have
heart failure
and your ventricles beat out of sync. When both ventricles (lower heart chambers) beat at the same time, it’s easier for your heart to pump blood.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In CRT, your healthcare provider puts a
biventricular pacemaker
in your chest. This is a
pacemaker
with an extra wire. Your cardiologist may suggest this option after you try medicine and lifestyle changes.
Heart resynchronization therapy is fairly common. People with a heart rhythm problem, like
left bundle branch block
, may have it. But it still comes with risks.
How does cardiac resynchronization therapy work?
Unlike other pacemakers that have one or two wires or leads, a CRT pacemaker (CRT-P) has three. One lead goes to each of your ventricles. The third goes to your right atrium, one of your heart’s upper chambers. (Your heart has two ventricles and two atria.)
With a cardiac resynchronization therapy device, three leads can send a signal. This makes your heart chambers work together and corrects your heart rhythm. Signals come from electrodes that a provider places in your heart muscle.
Procedure Details
How should I prepare for cardiac resynchronization therapy?
Your healthcare provider will:
Order imaging, like a
heart MRI
or an
echocardiogram
. This may happen days before you get your CRT device. You may also have blood tests.
Ask you to fast (not eat or drink) for at least six hours before the procedure.
Give you medicine so you won’t feel pain or be aware of what’s happening.
What happens during this procedure?
During cardiac resynchronization therapy, your healthcare provider will:
Advertisement
Insert three wires through your veins in your upper body or thigh.
Thread the wires through your veins to your heart.
Make a cut for the CRT device below your collarbone or in your belly.
Connect the wires to your CRT pacemaker.
Make sure the device works.
Implant the CRT device under your skin.
Stitch up your cut (incision).
This biventricular pacing procedure takes several hours.
What are the potential benefits and risks of heart resynchronization therapy?
CRT treatment may give you these benefits:
Help your heart pump more blood out to your body.
Make your heart more efficient.
Help improve symptoms like shortness of breath.
Cut down your risk of
abnormal heart rhythms
in your ventricles.
Help you live longer with heart failure.
Improve
mitral valve regurgitation
(a leak in your heart’s mitral valve).
Help you to be more physically active.
Possible complications of cardiac resynchronization therapy include:
Wires breaking or moving out of place
Infection
Bleeding
Blood clots
Allergic reaction
Heart attack
or another heart issue
Collapsed lung
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Heart Failure Treatments
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after this procedure?
After you receive a cardiac resynchronization therapy device:
You may need to stay a few hours or overnight in the hospital.
You’ll need someone to drive you home because you had anesthesia.
You’ll need to keep your left arm still for about 12 hours to help the leads stay in place.
You’ll get a card to keep with you that has details about the device you have.
A healthcare provider might check your leads with an X-ray or your heart rhythm with an
EKG
.
They may test your device to see if it can send data.
What is the recovery time?
After heart resynchronization therapy, you can go back to your normal activities in a few days. You shouldn’t drive or lift heavy things for a week or so.
Your CRT pacemaker should last for several years. It should improve your quality of life.
Cardiac rehab
can help you handle more physical activity after this procedure.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you get a fever weeks or months after getting a CRT pacemaker. It could mean you have an infection around your device.
You’ll have a follow-up visit a month after you get your CRT pacemaker. Then, you’ll see your provider once or twice a year.
Your provider will check your pacemaker remotely from their office. But they’ll still need to see you at times. They need to be sure your device, battery and wires are in good shape. They can also do testing to see if the device is helping your heart work better.
Additional Common Questions
Does cardiac resynchronization therapy work?
The success rate for the procedure itself is high. But researchers
estimate
that CRT doesn’t help 2 to 3 out of 10 people who receive it.
What is the difference between ICD and CRT?
An
ICD
(defibrillator) gets a fast rhythm back to normal. It helps people who have
dangerous heart rhythms
in their ventricles.
Cardiac resynchronization therapy uses a biventricular pacemaker (CRT-P) to make your ventricles work together.
Advertisement
Many people may need a biventricular pacemaker with an ICD (CRT-D) to correct all of these issues.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s normal to have questions about cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT). Talk with your healthcare provider about the benefits and risks of this procedure. Be sure to follow all instructions your provider gives you about your device so you can gain the most benefit from it.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic can diagnose and treat heart failure of any kind, at any stage, with advanced therapies and compassionate care.
Heart Failure Treatments
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment