Postpartum Rage: Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Postpartum Rage
Advertisement
Advertisement
Postpartum Rage
Postpartum rage is when you feel anger, frustration or lose your temper easily after having a baby.  Changes in hormone levels is one of the main causes. Lifestyle changes, changes to your body and other emotions play a role. Certain medications and counseling can treat it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is postpartum rage?
Postpartum rage (sometimes called postpartum anger) is a mood disruption that causes intense anger, aggression and agitation in the weeks and months after you give birth (postpartum means “after birth”). Some studies show postpartum anger can coincide with other postpartum conditions like
postpartum depression
and
postpartum anxiety
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Mental health and mood changes are common after childbirth. With so many changes in your hormones, health and daily life, it’s understandable that your mood can shift. Lack of sleep can make these changes even more pronounced. These mood changes are temporary — know that you aren’t alone and that help is available to you if you feel angry, irritable or frustrated.
Experts don’t fully understand why some people have uncontrolled anger after giving birth. Postpartum rage also isn’t an official diagnosis. But, healthcare providers recognize that it exists and can help you. It’s best to discuss your symptoms and emotions with a healthcare provider so they can determine the best way to support you.
If you have thoughts of harming yourself, your baby or others, dial 911 (or your local emergency services number) for immediate help. If you think a loved one is experiencing postpartum rage, offer your support or assist them in seeking medical help.
Is rage part of postpartum depression?
Postpartum rage and postpartum depression are different — but still closely related — issues. Postpartum rage is when you have outbursts of anger that you can’t control. You can also have symptoms of postpartum depression like sadness, guilt or loneliness, along with feelings like intense anger.
Advertisement
The important thing to know is that you can experience rage without feeling depressed. And having postpartum depression doesn’t mean you’ll also develop feelings of rage.
Postpartum rage isn’t well understood. Most experts don’t consider it a
mood disorder
as they do with postpartum depression. However, healthcare providers do recognize that rage and depression can coexist.
Who gets postpartum rage?
Postpartum rage can affect anyone who recently gave birth. It’s most common within the first six weeks to one year after you give birth. It may be more common in people with mental health conditions like bipolar disorder or in people who also have symptoms of postpartum depression.
How common is postpartum rage?
There aren’t many studies specific to postpartum rage. It’s often overlooked or considered a symptom of postpartum depression. However, postpartum mental health issues are fairly common. Almost 1 in 4 people will experience a postpartum mental health condition.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of postpartum rage?
Unlike the other common postpartum mental conditions like depression or
anxiety
, the key symptom with postpartum rage is anger. With depression, a person is likely sad or prone to crying. With anxiety, a person is more likely to be anxious or worried. However, these symptoms can all coexist. This means you can experience sadness, anger and anxiety all together.
Symptoms of postpartum rage vary. Some of the common symptoms include:
Lashing out or “flipping out” when you normally wouldn’t.
Feeling the urge to scream at others.
Punching objects (like your steering wheel) or slamming doors.
Dwelling on a situation or event for longer than you typically would.
Losing control of your temper.
Swearing, screaming or yelling more than usual.
Being extremely irritable, frustrated or “on edge.”
Feeling unable to cope with your emotions.
If you have postpartum rage, you’re likely to feel angry, irritable and frustrated. Some describe it as feeling like their blood is always boiling, or that they want to yell and punch their pillow to release frustration.
What causes postpartum rage?
Researchers are always learning more about postpartum or perinatal (this term relates to the weeks immediately before or after childbirth) mood disorders. There can be several causes of postpartum rage. Some of the causes include:
Severe drops in estrogen and progesterone levels.
Personal or family history of
depression
or anxiety.
Changes in your sleep patterns (especially lack of sleep).
Feeling new emotions related to caring for a baby.
Changes to your body, lifestyle or relationships.
Several studies found that societal or personal expectations of what parenting would be like can contribute to postpartum rage. Examples of this include feeling judged for your parenting choices, feeling like your expectations of parenthood don’t match reality or feeling like you’re struggling with the responsibilities of parenthood.
Advertisement
Why have I become so angry after having a baby?
If you feel angry after having a baby or lose your temper more easily, you’re not alone. Postpartum rage is common, and it often exists alongside postpartum depression or postpartum anxiety. It can also happen on its own.
So many changes are taking place in the weeks after childbirth and most of them are beyond your control. Talk to your healthcare provider about your feelings. Try not to feel shame or hide how you feel. Your provider is there to listen to you and provide treatment.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is postpartum rage diagnosed?
Postpartum rage isn’t an official diagnosis in the latest text revision of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(also known as the DSM-5-TR®). Healthcare providers often consider postpartum rage a symptom of perinatal mood and anxiety disorders (PMADs).
Pregnancy care providers typically ask screening questions about depression and anxiety after childbirth. These usually happen at your postpartum checkup, and providers can use your answers to determine if you might need additional help or resources. They’ll also ask you questions about how you’re doing and how you’re adjusting to life with a newborn. Please be honest with them — they’re there to help you and make sure you have the support you need. Your baby’s
pediatrician
may also ask you questions to determine if you have signs of depression, anxiety or anger.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is postpartum rage treated?
Don’t hesitate to talk to your pregnancy care provider or primary care physician about how you’re feeling. They can help determine the best treatment for you based on your symptoms. Some of the treatment options could include:
Medication
: Certain SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) or SNRIs (serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors) can help “take the edge off” so you have more control over your anger.
Psychotherapy
: Seeing a therapist to talk about how you can cope and how you’re feeling can be helpful.
Support groups
: Online or in-person support groups with other parents may help to validate your feelings and help you realize you’re not alone.
Lifestyle changes
: Making small changes in your daily life can help you feel more like yourself. Examples could be getting a babysitter for a few hours a week so you can enjoy alone time or having your partner handle a feeding so you can get extra sleep.
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does postpartum rage last?
There isn’t an established timeline for when your symptoms will go away. It depends on the severity of your condition and how well you respond to treatment. One thing is for sure — postpartum mental health conditions are temporary. With support, treatment and time, you’ll feel better.
Advertisement
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk of postpartum rage?
Certain factors may increase your risk of postpartum anger. Some of these include:
A history of mental illness or depression.
Lack of support or help at home.
Having a child with a disability or health condition.
Having a difficult labor and delivery.
Difficulties caring for your baby due to breastfeeding struggles, colic, your baby refusing to sleep, etc.
Other life factors like going through a divorce, death of a loved one or losing a job.
You can’t prevent postpartum rage. But, you can be mindful of how you feel and allow yourself to seek help, especially if you have one of the above risk factors.
Living With
How do I cope with postpartum rage?
You’re not alone and it’s OK to feel the way you feel. Your healthcare provider can help find a treatment that works for you. Here are some things you can to do help yourself:
Talk to someone who will listen to you and support you — a therapist, friend or other loved one.
Try to prioritize self-care. As hard as it is with a new baby to care for, try to find time every day for yourself.
Get back to hobbies or other activities you enjoyed before having a baby.
Get help with household chores or errands. Don’t be afraid to ask for help or delegate.
Try to eat nutritious foods, exercise and take care of yourself.
Take time to understand your triggers or what sets you off. Doing so can help you manage this condition.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Seek help from your healthcare provider if you have symptoms of postpartum rage like intense anger or feeling like you have no control over your temper. Feeling a range of emotions is common after you have a baby, and you shouldn’t feel ashamed to ask for help or get treatment. Reach out to a mental health professional, your pregnancy care provider or your
primary care provider
and let them know how you’re feeling. They can direct you to the best option for support.
There are organizations to help you recover from postpartum mood disorders:
Postpartum Support International (PSI) offers a phone crisis line (800-944-4773) and text support (503-894-9453) for anyone that needs help during the postpartum period.
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is available 24/7 for people in a crisis who may consider taking their lives. Call 800-273-8255 or text “HELLO” to 741741.
Motherhood Understood is an online community of people who’ve had postpartum depression. They can help you find the support you need.
National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) offers support for people with mental illness. Someone is available to take your calls or texts five days a week. Call 1-800-950-NAMI (6264) or text “HelpLine” to 62640.
Additional Common Questions
Is postpartum rage the same as postpartum psychosis?
No, they aren’t the same.
Postpartum psychosis
is a serious mental health emergency. It affects a person’s sense of reality, causing
hallucinations
, delusions and paranoia. People with postpartum psychosis have a much higher risk of harming themselves, dying by suicide or harming their children. Postpartum rage is less severe than postpartum psychosis and doesn’t involve the same symptoms.
How is postpartum rage different than postpartum depression?
Postpartum depression affects up to 1 in 7 people who give birth. People with postpartum depression experience emotional highs and lows, frequent crying, fatigue, guilt, anxiety and may have trouble caring for their baby. People with postpartum rage typically feel emotions similar or related to anger. Emotions like frustration, irritability, easily losing your temper or wanting to scream are all common. Feelings like sadness or anxiety aren’t as common with postpartum rage, but are common with postpartum depression (which can happen alongside postpartum rage).
Can you become bipolar after pregnancy?
Healthcare providers can diagnose
bipolar disorder
at any time, including after childbirth. If you have unusual shifts in mood (from energetic highs to depressive lows, or vice versa) after you give birth, talk to your pregnancy care provider right away. People with postpartum mental health conditions may be at risk for bipolar disorder due to sleep disturbances and hormonal changes.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Rage is an intense feeling of anger. Feeling irritable, frustrated and angry in the weeks and months after having a baby can be a sign of postpartum rage. If you get angry over small things or feel the urge to scream or punch something, please contact a healthcare provider for help. It’s normal to have a wide range of emotions after you transition to life with a new baby. It’s a big change and it can be overwhelming. Remember, these feelings will pass and treatment is available to help you get back to feeling like yourself. Your provider’s job is to help you, not judge you.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/28/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment