Cervical Rib: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cervical Rib
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cervical Rib
A cervical rib is an extra bone in your neck that some people have at birth. Very few people have this rare bone and even fewer have symptoms from it. A cervical rib can cause pain or weakness in your arm, but treatments can help. A provider can remove a cervical rib because it doesn’t have a purpose.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cervical Neck Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
A cervical rib is an extra bone that few people are born with in their neck. There are four types of this bone.
What is a cervical rib?
A cervical rib is an extra
bone
you may have in your neck at birth. This rare bone doesn’t look like a typical rib in your chest. It can be more vertical or diagonal instead of horizontal like the ribs in your chest. It starts from the lowest bone in your neck and can extend to the first (top) rib in your chest. A cervical rib doesn’t do anything — it doesn’t have a function.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In most people, a cervical rib doesn’t cause issues. In others, it causes pain in their arm or difficulty using their hand to grip a pen, for example.
Types of cervical ribs
There are four cervical rib types:
Type 1
is a complete rib that reaches your first rib.
Type 2
is an incomplete rib with one end that doesn’t attach to anything.
Type 3
is an incomplete rib that attaches to a fibrous band.
Type 4
is a short bone that sticks out from the lowest vertebra in your
cervical spine
(in your neck).
How common is a cervical rib?
A cervical rib (cervical rib syndrome) is rare. Up to 1% of people have one (and sometimes two) cervical ribs at birth. Cervical ribs happen more in
females
.
Nearly
30% of people
who have
thoracic outlet syndrome
have cervical ribs.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms?
Cervical rib symptoms include:
Neck or arm pain.
A lump in your neck.
Tingling or numbness
in your hand or arm.
Weakness in your hand and forearm muscles.
Clawing
(bending) of your fingers except your thumb and index finger.
Most people don’t have symptoms of cervical rib. You’re more likely to have symptoms if you have bad
posture
or have experienced trauma to your upper body.
What causes a cervical rib?
Researchers think a mutation (change) in
HOX
genes
involved in skeletal development may cause cervical ribs. Cells in a
developing fetus
may form a bone in the wrong place and it becomes a cervical rib.
Advertisement
What are the complications of a cervical rib?
Cervical ribs can compress a
nerve
or your
subclavian artery
. A cervical rib can cause thoracic outlet syndrome, which can be dangerous without treatment.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a cervical rib diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can do a
physical exam
that includes an Adson test. If your cervical rib is compressing your subclavian artery, a provider can feel your extended arm’s
pulse
get weaker when you turn your head.
Most of the time, providers find cervical ribs when they’re looking for something else. Cervical ribs can show up on a
chest X-ray
or
cervical (neck) X-ray
.
Providers may use other tests to make a diagnosis, like:
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)
.
CT (computed tomography) scan
.
Nerve conduction studies
to see how well your nerves are working.
Electromyography (EMG)
to see how well your skeletal muscles and nerves are working.
Evoked potential tests
to see how well nerve signals are getting to your brain.
Management and Treatment
How is a cervical rib treated?
If you don’t have symptoms, you won’t need treatment.
If you have symptoms, treatments may include:
Physical therapy
.
This can treat a cervical rib’s compression of a nerve.
Medicines.
Muscle relaxers
or pain relievers can help with discomfort.
Cervical rib removal.
A provider can perform surgery if the rib is causing thoracic outlet syndrome. For better symptom prevention, a surgeon may also remove your first rib along with the cervical rib. Any surgery carries a risk of bleeding or infection. The average recovery time after surgery is about nine weeks.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cervical Neck Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a cervical rib?
If you have symptoms, they can get worse without treatment. You can also get
blood clots
in your subclavian artery or
brain
.
The outlook is good for people who have surgery to remove a cervical rib. Their affected arm works normally again and symptoms rarely return after surgery.
Prevention
Can a cervical rib be prevented?
No, you can’t prevent cervical ribs because they develop before birth.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Follow your provider’s instructions for getting medical treatment. If nonsurgical treatments don’t help you, ask your provider if surgery would be right for you.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If your cervical rib starts causing symptoms, contact your provider.
If you have surgery to treat a cervical rib, you’ll need follow-up appointments with your provider. They’ll want to see how well your body is healing and make sure you’re not having any issues. You may also need to do physical therapy for a number of weeks after your operation.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Questions to consider asking your healthcare provider include:
What type of cervical rib do I have?
Do I need treatment?
What’s the best treatment for me?
Are my future children at risk of inheriting a cervical rib?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Maybe you had no idea there was an extra bone in your neck, but you can’t ignore the pain in your arm. That pain isn’t normal and you don’t have to suffer with it. Talk to your healthcare provider about the best treatment for you. Be sure to ask questions if there’s anything you don’t understand about your condition or treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Everyday things like turning your head shouldn’t be a pain in the neck. Cleveland Clinic medical spine experts can find ways to ease your cervical neck pain.
Cervical Neck Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/08/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment