Short-Term Memory: What It Is, How It Works & Duration
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Short-Term Memory
Advertisement
Advertisement
Short-Term Memory
Short-term memory temporarily holds information you learned for a few seconds to minutes. These memories reside in your prefrontal cortex and can move into your long-term memory. You can easily access your short-term memory. Several conditions or factors can affect how well your short-term memory works.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cognitive Decline Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What Is Short-Term Memory?
Short-term memory is a temporary storage space that holds information you learned. You can easily access this limited amount of information for a few seconds to a few minutes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The main functions of your short-term memory are:
Attention:
To help you focus on something in your environment.
Recognition:
To connect or match new information to information that’s already in your brain.
Your short-term memory works closely with your
sensory memory
and your long-term memory. For example, it receives and processes information from your senses and can convert short-term memories into long-term memories.
You may hear a healthcare provider refer to this as primary memory or active memory.
How long does short-term memory last?
On average, you can hold five to seven items in your short-term memory, like the digits of a phone number or a license plate ID, for about 15 to 30 seconds.
Information from your short-term memory can transfer into your
long-term memory
. This is a permanent storage location in your brain. You can increase your short-term storage space or move things from short-term to long-term memory by using techniques like chunking (organizing it into groups) or rehearsing (repeating it).
What part of the brain controls short-term memory?
Your
prefrontal cortex
stores your short-term memories temporarily. This area of your
brain
is at the front of your
frontal lobe
, directly behind your forehead.
Your
hippocampus
also helps form short-term memories into long-term memories. The hippocampus sends those memories to long-term storage in your
cerebral cortex
.
Advertisement
What’s the difference: Working memory vs. short-term memory?
There are a lot of similarities between working memory and short-term memory. In fact, a lot of literature uses the terms interchangeably. Researchers coined an alternative term that combines both words (short-term working memory). But there is a slight difference between each one.
Working memory is the temporary storage of information that you can change (manipulate) to help with reasoning, learning and understanding.
Short-term memory is a temporary information storage space. You can’t manipulate the information that’s here.
Both working and short-term memories help you gather new information to store in your long-term memory and retrieve that material when you need it later.
What is short-term memory impairment?
Short-term memory impairment is damage to your short-term memory. It may make it
difficult for you to remember
recent information or events.
There are several possible causes. Some of the most common include:
Brain aneurysm
Brain tumors
Cancer treatments (
radiation
and
chemotherapy
)
Concussions
Infections
Medication side effects (
antiseizure medications
,
benzodiazepines
,
opioids
,
tricyclic antidepressants
)
Neurodegenerative conditions
Psychological conditions like
depression
or
PTSD
Stroke
Substance use disorder
Traumatic brain injury
Is there a short-term memory test?
If a healthcare provider suspects short-term memory impairment, they may offer a short-term memory recall test. Your provider will:
Show you a series of images or give you a list of numbers or words.
Wait a few seconds to minutes.
Ask you to recall the images, numbers or words you saw. You may need to recall them in order.
Your provider will calculate the results of this test by scoring how many responses you answered correctly. Positive test results mean that you were able to recall all or most of the items presented. Negative test results mean that it was challenging for you to recall this information.
A healthcare provider will let you know more about the next steps if they’re appropriate.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Your short-term memory is an essential part of your cognitive functioning. Even though it doesn’t last long, it has an important job. By the time you finish reading this sentence, your short-term memory has already removed the last sentence from its temporary storage space to make room for this one.
There are a lot of factors that can affect how well your short-term memory works. But taking care of your overall health — with the help of a healthcare provider — can help keep your brain healthy, too.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
It can be unsettling when your brain stops working like it used to. Cleveland Clinic’s cognitive decline experts help you manage the symptoms and provide support.
Cognitive Decline Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/12/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment