Typhlitis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Typhlitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Typhlitis
Typhlitis is inflammation in your cecum and other areas of your intestines. It can cause severe infections and is a serious condition. It typically affects people with weakened immune systems, specifically people who have neutropenia. You may develop typhlitis after receiving certain kinds of chemotherapy that affect your immune system.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is typhlitis?
Typhlitis (tuh-FLY-tis) is severe inflammation in your
digestive system
that may cause
bacterial
and
fungal infections
. This is a rare condition that can happen after intensive
chemotherapy
for certain blood cancers, like:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Multiple myeloma
Typhlitis can affect different parts of your intestines, including:
Your cecum, a part of your colon in your
large intestine
, which is where typhlitis is most likely to appear
Your ascending colon
Your ileum in your
small intestine
Healthcare providers may call this condition neutropenic enterocolitis, typhlenteritis or ileocecal syndrome.
People who have
HIV/AIDS
may develop typhlitis. It can also affect people who take
immunosuppressants
after stem cell (bone marrow) transplant or organ transplant.
The condition can be life-threatening. But early diagnosis and treatment may cure it.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of typhlitis?
Typhlitis symptoms can feel like a bad case of stomach flu. Common symptoms include:
Abdominal pain
and cramps
Distended (swollen) belly
Diarrhea
Fever
Nausea and vomiting
What causes typhlitis?
Researchers think a combination of factors triggers typhlitis. Those factors are:
Mucositis
. This is inflammation of the mucus membranes that line your large and small intestine.
Neutropenia
. Neutropenia is when you have low levels of
neutrophils
, a type of white blood cell that fights infection.
Weak
immune system
. Cancer treatments like chemotherapy and infections like HIV/AIDS can weaken your immune system.
Advertisement
Typhlitis starts when mucositis damages the lining of your intestine. That makes it easier for harmful
bacteria
and fungi to invade your intestine. Neutropenia and a weak immune system make it hard for your body to fend off infection. The result is severe infections that cause life-threatening complications like:
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Gastrointestinal perforation
Sepsis
and
septic shock
What’s the most common pathogen in typhlitis?
Research
shows several kinds of bacteria and fungi (pathogens) can cause typhlitis. Some common bacteria are:
Clostridium septicum
Enterococci
Gram-negative enterobacteria
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Staphylococcus aureus
Streptococcus
Common fungi are:
Aspergillus
Candida
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose typhlitis?
A healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
. They’ll ask questions about your medical history. For example, they’ll ask if you’re receiving treatment for cancer, had a stem cell or organ transplant, or have HIV/AIDS. They may order blood tests and imaging tests.
Blood tests
Your provider may order
blood tests
like:
Complete blood count (CBC)
Kidney function tests
Liver function tests
Prothrombin time test
Imaging tests
The most common test is
computed tomography (CT) scan
. This test shows if sections of your large intestine wall are unusually thick. Inflammation can make your intestinal wall thicker.
Management and Treatment
How is typhlitis treated?
There’s no standard treatment for typhlitis. In general, treatment focuses on managing the infection and supporting your immune system. But everyone’s situation is a bit different. You may need a different combination of treatments. Common typhlitis treatments are:
Antibiotics
Blood transfusion
Decompressive
laparotomy
to relieve pressure inside your abdomen
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF) to boost your neutrophil level
IV fluids
Total
parenteral nutrition
that delivers nutrients directly to your stomach so your digestive system can rest and heal
Your oncologist may make changes in your cancer treatment while you recover. You may need surgery if typhlitis causes bowel perforation.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the mortality rate?
Typhlitis is a serious illness that can be fatal. Once, nearly everyone with typhlitis died from complications like sepsis. Now, early diagnosis and treatment mean more people are recovering from typhlitis. A recent
study
showed more than 60% of people with fungal infections from typhlitis recovered after treatment.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Typhlitis symptoms may feel like other, more common issues with your gut. But typhlitis symptoms are more than an upset stomach. Don’t hesitate to contact your provider if you have symptoms like:
Advertisement
Fever
Nausea and vomiting
Severe abdominal pain and cramping
These symptoms don’t mean typhlitis has come back. But it’s always good to touch base when you notice concerning changes in your body.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may have typhlitis because you have a condition that affects your immune system or you’re receiving cancer treatment. Here are some questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
Do you know why I developed typhlitis?
Will it come back?
Will I need to stop cancer treatment?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Treatment for a serious illness like cancer or HIV/AIDS may feel like hurdles you’re getting over to get well. That goal may keep you going through challenges like treatment side effects. A new, serious health issue like typhlitis may feel like one more hurdle. There are treatments for typhlitis that may cure the condition.
Even so, you may feel discouraged. You may wonder how you’ll get over this new hurdle and get back into the race toward getting well. Your healthcare team understands how a new diagnosis can feel like a setback. They’ll answer your questions about typhlitis treatment and how it may affect your recovery.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have issues with your digestive system, you need a team of experts you can trust. Our gastroenterology specialists at Cleveland Clinic can help.
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us