Hemochromatosis (Iron Overload): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hemochromatosis (Iron Overload)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hemochromatosis (Iron Overload)
If you have hemochromatosis, your body absorbs and retains too much iron. With no natural way to get rid of it, your body stores it in your tissues and organs. Too much iron can become toxic and damage your organs, especially your heart, liver and pancreas. Treatment can help reduce your iron levels to prevent these complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hemochromatosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Hemochromatosis?
Hemochromatosis, also called iron overload, is a condition in which your body stores too much iron.
Hemochromatosis (HEE-mow-KROW-muh-TOW-sis) is a condition in which your body absorbs and retains too much iron. It’s also called iron overload. Your organs store the excess iron, which damages them over time. It especially damages your heart, liver and pancreas. Iron overload can become life-threatening without treatment. But fortunately, it is treatable.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of hemochromatosis
Common symptoms of hemochromatosis (iron overload) include:
Fatigue (feeling tired a lot)
Heart flutters (
arrhythmias
)
Joint pain
Low libido or erectile dysfunction
Pain in the knuckles of your index and middle fingers (“iron fist”)
Skin darkening (a gray or bronze tint)
Unexplained weight loss
Upper abdominal pain
These symptoms happen when iron builds up to levels that start to affect your organs. Although hemochromatosis usually starts at birth, it takes a long time for iron to build up. Most people don’t develop symptoms until their 40s or 50s. If you have a milder form of hemochromatosis, you might not ever notice it. Or symptoms might appear much later in life and resemble normal signs of aging.
Hemochromatosis causes
Most people with hemochromatosis
inherit it from their parents
. This is called hereditary hemochromatosis, or primary hemochromatosis. The cause is an
altered gene
that they pass on to you. It takes
two copies of the altered gene
— one from each parent — for you to develop hemochromatosis. If your parents each have only one copy, they likely won’t have the condition or know about the gene.
Changes in the
HFE
gene usually cause hereditary hemochromatosis. The two most common variants are
C282Y
and
H63D
. A less common form of the condition, called juvenile hemochromatosis, comes from changes in the
HJV
or
HAMP
genes. These changes cause iron to build up much more quickly, so symptoms appear sooner. Juvenile hemochromatosis typically appears between the ages of 15 and 30.
Advertisement
Secondary hemochromatosis
You can also develop hemochromatosis secondary to another medical condition or treatment. For example, if you have
anemia
, you can develop iron overload from frequent
blood transfusions
. If you have advanced
liver disease
, your liver may not be able to process iron properly, causing it to build up. Rarely, a developing fetus with preexisting liver disease can develop neonatal hemochromatosis.
Risk factors
Hereditary hemochromatosis is more common in white people with ancestors from Northern Europe. It’s less common in people of African American, Hispanic, Asian or Native American descent. You can find out if you have one or more copies of the altered
HFE
gene through
genetic testing
. If you’re planning a family, you and your partner may want to find out if you each
carry one of the genes
.
Risk factors for secondary hemochromatosis include:
Liver disease
Anemia
Heavy alcohol use
Complications of iron overload
Your body needs iron, but too much becomes toxic. Your body doesn’t have a built-in way to get rid of excess iron. So, it stashes it away in your tissues. As iron builds up, you may start to see it in your skin and feel it in your joints. It may also start to cause problems with your organs and glands, including your:
Adrenals
Gallbladder
Heart
Liver
Pancreas
Pituitary gland
Reproductive system
Spleen
Thyroid
Iron overload affects your heart, liver and pancreas the most. It can lead to serious complications like:
Chronic liver failure
Congestive heart failure
Diabetes (Type 3c)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
To find out if you have hemochromatosis, your healthcare provider will start by asking some questions. For example, they might ask:
If your biological parents ever had iron overload, liver disease or other related diseases
If you take iron supplements and/or vitamin C (which can increase your iron absorption)
How often you drink alcohol (which increases iron absorption and contributes to liver disease)
They’ll perform a physical exam to look for signs and symptoms of iron overload.
Other tests might include:
Blood tests to measure how much iron is in your blood and organs
Genetic testing
to see if you have the inherited form of hemochromatosis
Liver biopsy
, when a small needle removes a tiny bit of liver tissue for study under a microscope
An MRI to take detailed pictures of your organs
Management and Treatment
What is the best treatment for hemochromatosis?
Hemochromatosis treatment includes changes to your eating habits and other methods to help reduce iron levels in your body. These treatments can help prevent or delay further damage to your organs.
Advertisement
Dietary changes
: Your healthcare provider may ask you to stop taking certain dietary supplements, like iron and vitamin C. You may also need to stay away from
foods high in iron
or
high in vitamin C
. Limiting your alcohol consumption is also important to protect your liver.
Iron chelation therapy
: This prescription medication removes extra iron from your body. You can take it by mouth at home, or your healthcare provider may give it to you as an injection.
Therapeutic phlebotomy
: This procedure uses a needle to remove some of your blood. Since
red blood cells
contain much of your body’s iron, removing them reduces your iron levels. You may need to have blood drawn as often as once a week to start, and then every few months.
If another condition caused your hemochromatosis, you may need separate treatment for that condition. You may also need separate treatment for problems caused by hemochromatosis.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook with hemochromatosis?
The outlook for hemochromatosis depends on how soon you get a diagnosis and treatment. If hemochromatosis progresses for a long time without treatment, it can do real damage to your organs. Some damage may be irreversible. But with timely recognition and treatment, hemochromatosis is a manageable disease. You can live a typical, healthy life, and may even be able to reverse organ damage.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you remember Popeye, or having to eat spinach as a kid, you know that getting enough iron is a health goal. So, you might be surprised to learn that you can actually get too much. It usually takes a glitch in your genetic code for this to happen — and it typically takes decades. But iron overload can do real damage if it goes untreated. Regular checkups and blood tests can help catch it before that happens.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us