Type 1 Diabetes: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Type 1 Diabetes
Advertisement
Advertisement
Type 1 Diabetes
Type 1 diabetes is a chronic (lifelong) autoimmune disease that causes a lack of insulin, an essential hormone. It requires daily management with insulin injections and glucose monitoring. Both children and adults can be diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Type 1 Diabetes Management
Pediatric Type 1 Diabetes Management
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Type 1 Diabetes?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Type 1 Diabetes?
Learn what causes Type 1 diabetes and ways you can treat it.
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a lifelong autoimmune disease that prevents your pancreas from making
insulin
, a hormone. T1D was previously known as juvenile or insulin-dependent diabetes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you don’t have enough insulin, too much sugar builds up in your blood, causing hyperglycemia (high blood sugar). This can lead to serious health problems or even death if it’s not treated.
T1D is one of the most common chronic diseases that affects children in the U.S. But adults can develop it, too. In the U.S., over 1.7 million people live with it.
Receiving this diagnosis is a life-changing event. But many tools and technologies can help you manage T1D. Healthcare providers will be by your side, too.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Type 1 diabetes typically start mild and get more intense over time. See your healthcare provider as soon as possible if you or your child has these symptoms.
Symptoms of Type 1 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes symptoms include:
Excessive thirst
Peeing frequently, including frequent full diapers in infants and
bedwetting
in children
Extreme hunger
Unexplained weight loss
Fatigue
Blurred vision
Slow healing of cuts and sores
Vaginal yeast infections
Symptoms usually start mild and get worse over days, weeks or months. If you have these symptoms or notice them in your child or family member, see a healthcare provider as soon as possible. Ask to be tested for Type 1 diabetes.
Emergency signs of undiagnosed T1D from a complication called
DKA
include:
Fruity-smelling breath
Nausea and vomiting
Abdominal pain
Rapid breathing
Confusion and extreme tiredness
Go to the emergency room immediately if you have these symptoms. DKA is life-threatening.
Advertisement
Type 1 diabetes causes
Scientists don’t know the exact cause of Type 1 diabetes. It happens when your immune system mistakenly attacks the insulin-making cells in your pancreas. But they don’t know why this happens. The destruction ultimately results in a total lack of insulin.
Studies show that genetics likely play a role. The odds vary based on the genetic connection. Your risk of developing Type 1 diabetes is:
1 in 250 if you don’t have a biological family history of it
Between 1 in 25 and 1 in 100 if your biological mother has T1D
1 in 17 if your biological father has T1D
Between 1 in 10 and 1 in 4 if both parents have T1D
Certain factors, like a virus or environmental toxins, may trigger your immune system’s attack if you have a genetic predisposition for T1D.
Complications of this condition
Over time, continuous high blood sugar can damage many parts of your body. Potential complications of T1D include:
Eye problems, like
retinopathy
, macular edema,
cataracts
and
glaucoma
Foot problems
, including ulcers and infections that can lead to gangrene
Heart disease
High blood pressure
Kidney disease
Oral health problems
Neuropathy
(nerve damage)
Skin conditions
, like dry skin, bacterial and fungal infections and diabetes-related dermopathy
Stroke
Close to half of people with Type 1 diabetes will develop a serious complication over their lifetimes. But consistently keeping your glucose in range can help prevent these issues. If you reach the first 20 years after diagnosis without any complications, your prognosis (outlook) is usually good.
People with diabetes are also two to three times more likely to have
depression
and are 20% more likely to be diagnosed with
anxiety
than those without diabetes. Taking care of your mental health — and getting professional help when needed — is key.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Type 1 diabetes is usually easy to diagnose. Your healthcare provider will use the following tests:
Blood glucose test
: Blood glucose levels are often very high at diagnosis.
Glycosylated hemoglobin test (A1c)
: This measures your average blood sugar levels over three months.
Antibody test:
This blood test checks for autoantibodies to determine if you have Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes. The presence of certain autoantibodies means you have Type 1.
Your provider may do the following tests to check your overall health and for DKA:
Basic metabolic panel (blood test)
Urinalysis (to check for
ketones
)
Arterial blood gas test
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
You’ll need to take insulin several times a day to manage Type 1 diabetes. Keeping your blood sugar in range is key. Several factors affect your glucose level. So, T1D management is complex and highly individualized.
Advertisement
An
endocrinologist
and other diabetes specialists will help you set the framework for treatment. But T1D is mainly a self-managed disease. You’ll make several decisions every day to stay healthy.
The main components of management include:
Insulin therapy
Glucose (sugar) monitoring
Education
Insulin
There are several different types of insulin. They start working at varying speeds and last for different lengths of time. You may need to use more than one type.
You’ll have a background level of insulin (often called basal insulin or long-acting insulin). And you’ll need to give yourself specific amounts of it when you eat and to correct high blood sugar levels.
You can take insulin in the following ways:
Multiple daily injections (MDI)
: With each injection (shot), you use a syringe to draw a dose of insulin out of a vial. You give the shot in the fatty tissue under your skin.
Pen
:
Insulin pens are pre-filled with insulin. You inject doses into the fatty tissue under your skin.
Pump
: Insulin pumps deliver insulin continuously and on demand through a small tube inserted under your skin. They mimic the way your pancreas would naturally release insulin.
Rapid-acting inhaled insulin
: You inhale this insulin through your mouth (much like an asthma inhaler). Only one type of insulin is inhalable.
Advertisement
The amount of insulin you need from day to day will vary across your lifespan and under specific circumstances. For example, you typically need more insulin during puberty, pregnancy and when you’re taking a steroid medication.
Too much insulin at any given time can lead to
low blood sugar
. This needs treatment right away — often by eating or drinking sugar.
Glucose monitoring
You’ll need to monitor your glucose level closely throughout the day. You may use a blood glucose meter and/or
continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
.
Your healthcare provider will give you a target glucose level range or
time in range (TIR)
to aim for. The right range for you depends on a variety of factors.
Some CGMs and insulin pumps can pair together to create a hybrid closed-loop system. The pump automatically gives you insulin based on your glucose level to keep it in range. But this system isn’t totally automatic. You still have to provide input to the pump in certain situations.
Education
Type 1 diabetes and glucose management are very complex. Because of this, you and your family will need to learn a lot. Most of the education will be right after diagnosis. But you’ll likely learn more as you continue to live with T1D. Especially as your body or life changes.
Advertisement
A team of healthcare providers will help you understand all the aspects of T1D. Education topics include:
Nutrition and
meal planning
: Nutrients like
carbs
, protein and fat affect your blood sugar in different ways. Carb counting is especially important.
Physical activity
: Exercise affects your blood sugar in different ways. You’ll learn how to plan accordingly to stay in range.
Detecting and treating low blood sugar
: You’ll learn the signs and symptoms of low blood sugar and how to treat it.
Treating high blood sugar
: How much insulin you give for high blood sugar can vary depending on the underlying cause of it.
Sick day planning
: Illness can increase your risk of DKA. Your provider will give you tips on how to adjust your insulin doses when you’re sick.
Diabetes technology
: Many options are available for insulin therapy and glucose monitoring. A provider can help you understand your options and how to use the tools and devices.
Diabetes management at school or work
: Going to school or work with diabetes can take extra care and planning.
Overall health
: Diabetes can lead to complications that affect many parts of your body. You’ll learn about the importance of going to routine appointments for things like eye and oral health.
Is there a cure for Type 1 diabetes?
There’s currently no cure for Type 1 diabetes. But scientists are working on ways to prevent or slow down the progression of the condition through studies like TrialNet.
T1D can run in families. So, your healthcare provider may be able to test your family members for the autoantibodies that cause the disease. Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet also offers this testing.
The presence of autoantibodies, even without diabetes symptoms, means you’re more likely to develop the condition. If someone has early signs of the autoantibodies, they may be able to take a medication that delays T1D. It’s called teplizumab. It can delay the development of T1D symptoms and the need for insulin injections. It’s an infusion you get once a day over several days.
Two types of transplants may “cure” T1D. But they come with significant risks, like surgery complications and health risks involved with taking
immunosuppressants
. Providers only approve them for a small number of people with T1D. The transplants include:
Islet cell transplant
: In 2023, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the use of pancreatic islet cell transplantation for people who have a difficult time managing T1D. These cells make insulin. This transplant may completely eliminate or significantly reduce your need for insulin injections.
Pancreas transplant
: You may qualify for a pancreas transplant if you also need a kidney transplant. You’d no longer have diabetes if it’s successful.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll need to see your endocrinologist multiple times a year throughout your life to adjust your management plan. Otherwise, reach out to your diabetes provider if you:
Have frequent high or low blood sugar episodes
Want to change your activity level or eating patterns
Want to try a different kind of diabetes therapy or device
Are getting a surgery or starting a new medication that may affect diabetes management
Are thinking about getting
pregnant
Have symptoms of any diabetes complications
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Type 1 Diabetes Management
Pediatric Type 1 Diabetes Management
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
With Type 1 diabetes, you must make countless decisions every day to stay healthy. It’s a complex condition that requires a lot of effort and planning. This can be tough. But it’s also very doable with the right diabetes technology, education and healthcare providers by your side. Getting support from your family and friends is a big help, as well.
You’ll need to prioritize both your physical and mental health to stay healthy in the long term. Maintaining in-range blood sugar levels is key to preventing serious complications.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a Type 1 diabetes diagnosis may drastically change the life you imagined. But it’s still possible to do what you love and live a healthy life with T1D. It’ll take extra planning, education and support. You’ll likely be very overwhelmed at first. After all, you’re manually doing the work of a body system that’s automatic for everyone else. But over time, you’ll get a better grasp on how to manage the condition. And you’ll become more in tune with your body. Lean on your village and healthcare providers for help. They want to see you thrive.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Type 1 diabetes can affect your life in many ways. At Cleveland Clinic, we can help develop a treatment plan that matches you and your goals.
Adult Type 1 Diabetes Management
Pediatric Type 1 Diabetes Management
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes