Hemovac Drain: What It Is, Care, Emptying, Removal
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Hemovac Drain
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hemovac Drain
A Hemovac drain removes fluid that can collect at the area in your body where you had surgery. Healthcare providers may insert the drain if you have abdominal surgery or other major surgery types. It consists of a tube that runs from the surgery site to a container. The drain uses negative pressure to pull out fluid. You empty the drain twice a day.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
A Hemovac drain helps reduce the risk of a surgical site infection. The drain works by pulling fluid from the surgery site.
What is a Hemovac drain?
A Hemovac drain is a device that removes fluid from surgical wounds. It consists of a thin tube that runs from the area of the surgical wound to a small container. The container creates suction that pulls fluid from the wound area.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Draining fluid from a surgical wound area reduces the risk of a surgical site infection. The drain stays in place after you go home. You wear the drain under your clothes. You may need to keep the drain in place for several days up to two weeks after your surgery.
Your surgeon or a care team member will remove the drain as part of your follow-up care. You’ll need to care for the drain until your surgeon or care team member removes it.
You may feel anxious about keeping the drain working like it should. Your care team will explain how to take care of the drain,
the incision
and your surgical wound.
When would I need a Hemovac drain?
Surgeons often use Hemovac drains to support recovery after procedures like:
Abdominal surgery, such as a
laparotomy
or
hernia repair surgery
Breast surgery, like
breast cancer surgery
, or cosmetic breast surgery, like
breast augmentation
Orthopedic procedures, like a total knee replacement or fixing a broken bone
Surgery to treat
pleural effusion
How does a Hemovac drain work?
A Hemovac drain is a type of closed drain. That means it uses negative pressure to pull fluid from a surgical wound. Negative pressure works by creating a difference in air pressure. The difference is how the tube pulls fluid from the surgical wound.
Advertisement
Hemovac drain containers have flexible sides and springs inside. You create negative pressure when you push on the drain sides, so they squeeze together. This creates a difference in air pressure so the tube in your surgical wound can pull fluid into the container.
How to care for a Hemovac drain
Your care team will show you how to care for the Hemovac drain and the area around the drain tube. They’ll also give you written directions to follow. Don’t hesitate to ask questions if you don’t understand any part of the process.
You’ll need to collect fluid from the drain twice a day. If possible, try to drain the Hemovac at the same time each day.
The first step is to collect the supplies you’ll need, including:
A measuring cup
Mild soap and water to clean the area around the drain tube
Gauze or a clean, soft cloth
A record sheet to log information about the fluid
The next step is simple but very important:
Wash your hands
. You may use an alcohol-based
hand sanitizer
to clean your hands. Clean hands reduce the risk of infection.
To empty the container, you:
Pull the drain stopper out of the container. The drain stopper is next to the tube carrying fluid from the surgical wound.
Empty fluid from the container into the measuring cup.
Write down the amount of fluid in the cup.
Write down the fluid color. The fluid will be red at first and then become light yellow as it starts to heal.
Pour the drainage fluid into the toilet or down the sink.
Push down on the container until it appears flat. This is how you re-establish suction, so the drain keeps pulling fluid out.
Replace the drain stopper.
Stop pushing down on the container.
Wash your hands again.
How to care for the Hemovac dressing and your skin
Your care team may tape gauze dressing over the spot where the tube enters your skin. You should change that dressing at least once day or if it gets wet. You’ll need to remove the dressing and clean the area around the drain tube after you empty the container. To do that, you:
Gently remove the gauze dressing.
Use mild soap and water to clean the skin up to 4 inches around the drain tube.
Always clean using a circular motion and moving away from the tube. That’s how you reduce the risk that
bacteria
on your skin will get into the spot where the tube comes out of your body.
Use clean water to rinse away soap.
Let the area dry.
Place clean gauze over the tube site.
Use surgical adhesive tape to keep the gauze in place.
When should I call a healthcare provider?
Call your care team or your surgeon if:
The fluid suddenly stops draining into the container
It suddenly changes color, like becoming red again or milky white
There’s redness or swelling where the tube comes out of your skin (these symptoms, along with drainage that becomes milky white, may be signs of an
infection
)
The tube in your skin comes loose
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between a Jackson-Pratt drain and a Hemovac drain?
Both drains use negative pressure to draw fluid from surgical wounds. The main difference is that a Hemovac drain can hold more fluid than a
Jackson-Pratt drain
. A Hemovac drain holds about 500 milliliters (mL). A Jackson-Pratt drain holds about 25 to 50 mL.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’ve had major surgery, taking care of a Hemovac drain may be part of your recovery. The drain is there to help your body heal. You may wonder if you’re up to the job. That’s a normal reaction. Your care team will understand if you need to double-check instructions with them. Don’t hesitate to ask if you’re not sure the drain is working properly.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sometimes you have surgery planned. Other times, it’s an emergency. No matter how you end up in the OR, Cleveland Clinic’s general surgery team is here for you.
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us