Pityriasis Alba: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pityriasis Alba
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pityriasis Alba
Pityriasis alba is a common childhood skin condition that causes patches of lighter skin. These patches may be dry, itchy and scaly. Children ages 3 to 16 most commonly get pityriasis alba. This condition usually goes away on its own by adulthood. If symptoms bother your child, treatment is available.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
Pityriasis alba causes small, raised patches of lighter skin on children.
What is pityriasis alba?
Pityriasis alba is a common
childhood skin condition
that causes raised, round or oval patches of lighter
skin
. These patches can be up to an inch in size.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The patches are cosmetic and only affect your child’s appearance. So, they don’t always need treatment. But treatment is available. The patches may come and go during childhood. This condition usually goes away completely before adulthood.
Pityriasis alba is harmless and it isn’t a sign of anything serious. But it’s still important to take your child to see their provider if you notice any changes to their skin.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of pityriasis alba?
Symptoms of pityriasis alba include a patch of skin that’s:
Lighter in color (less pigmented than the skin around it)
Round, oval or irregularly shaped
Flat or slightly elevated (higher than the skin around it)
Itchy
(occasionally)
Dry
Lightly scaled texture
The patches start as discolored (slightly lighter than your natural skin tone or red or pink) spots. They then become even lighter (almost white). Pityriasis alba patches are more noticeable if you have a darker skin tone.
Where will I have symptoms of pityriasis alba?
Your child may experience pityriasis alba patches on their:
Arms
Back
Chest
Face
Neck
What causes pityriasis alba?
The exact cause of pityriasis alba is unknown. Severe forms may be the result of a decreased amount of melanin.
Melanin
is a substance in your skin that gives your skin color. Research is ongoing to learn more about it.
The condition also seems to be related to:
Advertisement
Atopic dermatitis
Eczema
Pityriasis alba isn’t contagious and it doesn’t spread from person to person.
Is pityriasis alba a vitamin deficiency?
There isn’t enough evidence to suggest that a vitamin deficiency causes pityriasis alba.
What triggers pityriasis alba?
Sun exposure may make pityriasis alba skin patches more visible. This is because your surrounding skin may darken with continued sun exposure while these patches stay a lighter color. The patches are also more at risk of
sunburn
than the skin surrounding them.
What are the risk factors for pityriasis alba?
If your child has a biological family history of certain conditions, they may be more likely to develop pityriasis alba. These conditions include:
Asthma
Atopic dermatitis
Eczema
Hay fever (allergic rhinitis)
At what age does pityriasis alba occur?
Children usually get pityriasis alba. This condition is most common between ages 3 to 16. It usually goes away by the time kids reach adulthood. While rare, adults may develop it.
What are the complications of pityriasis alba?
Your child may occasionally experience itchy skin with pityriasis alba. If they scratch, they risk breaking open their skin. It might bleed and lead to
scarring
or an
infection
.
If your child experiences itchy skin on pityriasis alba patches, contact a healthcare provider for recommendations on how to relieve this symptom.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is pityriasis alba diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose pityriasis alba during a
physical examination
. During the exam, they’ll ask about your child’s symptoms and health history. Then, they’ll look at your child’s skin. The lighter patches of skin usually lead to an accurate diagnosis.
What tests diagnose pityriasis alba?
Tests aren’t common but may help rule out conditions with similar symptoms. Your child’s provider may offer the following:
KOH prep test
. A provider gently scrapes your child’s skin with a scalpel to get a skin sample. They’ll add potassium hydroxide (KOH) to a slide to examine the sample under a microscope. This helps make sure it’s not a fungal infection.
Skin biopsy
. This is done if the diagnosis isn’t clear by observation, and your provider is worried it may be serious. During a skin biopsy, a provider removes a small sample of your child’s skin to examine it under a microscope.
Wood’s lamp exam
. This test uses ultraviolet light to examine skin color differences. Pityriasis alba patches show blurrier borders and don’t glow under the light.
Management and Treatment
How do you treat pityriasis alba?
Treatment isn’t necessary for pityriasis alba, since it usually goes away on its own. But treatment options are available.
Your provider may recommend using topical
corticosteroids
. A common corticosteroid is mild
hydrocortisone
cream. If you use corticosteroids on your child’s face, make sure to avoid their eyes.
For rare but widespread cases, your child’s provider may consider:
Topical calcineurin inhibitors (TCIs)
. These are creams that
suppress your child’s immune system
(like
tacrolimus
ointment and
pimecrolimus
cream).
Topical vitamin D
. A common vitamin D ointment is
calcitriol
.
PUVA therapy (photochemotherapy)
. Your child’s provider puts medicine made from plants (psoralen gel or lotion) on pityriasis patches. Then, they expose their skin to long-wave ultraviolet radiation (UVA).
Targeted
phototherapy
. Your child’s provider uses focused ultraviolet light on areas of their affected skin.
Advertisement
At-home pityriasis alba treatments
The following may help your child manage pityriasis alba symptoms at home:
Using moisturizing creams or lotions daily
Applying
petroleum jelly
to the affected skin
In addition, you can protect your child’s skin from sun exposure, which can make their symptoms more noticeable, by:
Using broadband sunscreen with at least 30 SPF to prevent tanning and sunburn
Wearing long-sleeved shirts, long pants and a wide-brimmed hat when outside
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has pityriasis alba?
Pityriasis alba is a harmless skin condition. It will go away on its own. Sometimes, symptoms like itchy skin are bothersome. Or this condition may affect your child’s mental health if they feel like they look different from their peers.
A healthcare provider can offer treatment options that may clear these patches sooner, including creams or lotions that you can apply to your child’s skin at home. Make sure you follow the directions for use.
This condition doesn’t leave any lasting effects on your child’s skin. The color of their skin will return once the patches clear up.
How long does pityriasis alba last?
There isn’t a cure for pityriasis alba. Most cases go away on their own within a year. It can take several months to years for the patches on your child’s skin to go away completely. Skin patches may come and go but they often completely disappear before adulthood.
Advertisement
Living With
When should my child visit a healthcare provider?
Visit your child’s healthcare provider if you notice changes to their skin. Let their provider know if they’re scratching at their skin or you notice these patches make them feel self-conscious. Treatment options are available.
What questions should I ask my child’s healthcare provider?
If your child receives a pityriasis alba diagnosis, you may want to ask their provider:
Does my child need treatment? If so, what do you recommend?
Are there side effects of the treatment?
How often do I use a moisturizer on my child’s skin?
How do I prevent my child from scratching their skin?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
As a parent or caregiver, you may be worried about changes to your child’s skin. While pityriasis alba is harmless, it’s still important to get it checked out by a healthcare provider.
Sometimes, these patches can be itchy. Kids often don’t like the way they look and may even mention that they feel like they don’t fit in because they look different. A healthcare provider can help you and your child with these concerns. Treatment options are available if you need them. This condition will go away as your child grows.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/18/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment