Glucagon: What It Is, Function & Related Conditions
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Glucagon
Advertisement
Advertisement
Glucagon
Glucagon is a hormone that your pancreas makes to help regulate your blood glucose (sugar) levels. Glucagon increases your blood sugar level and prevents it from dropping too low, whereas insulin, another hormone, decreases blood sugar levels.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is glucagon?
Glucagon is a natural
hormone
your body makes that works with other hormones to control
glucose (sugar) levels
in your blood. Glucagon prevents your blood sugar from dropping too low. The alpha cells in your
pancreas
make glucagon and release it in response to:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A drop in blood sugar
Prolonged fasting
Physical activity
Protein-rich meals
Glucose is the main sugar in your blood. You get glucose from
carbohydrates
in the food and drinks you consume. This sugar is an important energy source and provides nutrients to your body’s organs,
muscles
and
nervous system
.
Your body normally has a complex system that makes sure your blood sugar is at a healthy level. If you have too much or too little glucose in your
blood
, it can cause certain symptoms and complications.
Glucagon injections and nasal sprays
There are also manufactured forms of glucagon you can take as an
injection
or
nasal powder
(dry nasal spray). People with
Type 1 diabetes
mainly use this form of glucagon in emergencies when they have very low blood sugar (
hypoglycemia
). The glucagon triggers your liver to release stored glucose, which then raises blood sugar.
What is the function of glucagon?
If you have a fully functioning pancreas, your body carefully regulates your blood glucose (sugar). It mainly does this with the hormones glucagon and
insulin
. When your blood glucose level trends lower or falls too low (hypoglycemia), your pancreas releases more glucagon. Glucagon helps blood glucose levels rise in multiple ways:
Glucagon triggers your
liver
to convert stored glucose (
glycogen
) into a usable form. Your liver then releases it into your bloodstream.
Glucagon can prevent your liver from taking in and storing glucose so that more glucose stays in your blood.
Glucagon helps your body make glucose from other sources, like
amino acids
.
Advertisement
If your blood glucose level trends higher, your pancreas releases insulin to bring it back into range.
What conditions are related to issues with glucagon function?
If you have
diabetes
, your body may not be able to release enough glucagon in response to decreasing blood glucose levels. Because of this, you’re more likely to develop frequent low or severely low blood sugars. This is especially true if you take medication that could cause low blood sugars, like insulin and
sulfonylureas
.
People with
Type 2 diabetes
may have glucagon levels that are relatively higher than what would be considered normal based on blood glucose levels. This can contribute to higher blood sugars.
Glucagon production issues outside of diabetes are uncommon, and some are rare. The following conditions can affect your glucagon function:
Pancreatitis
. If you develop diabetes from pancreatitis and take insulin for treatment, you could have a deficiency, too. You’d be at a higher risk of developing low blood sugars.
Glucagonoma
. This is a very rare pancreatic
tumor
that releases excess glucagon. It causes certain symptoms, including high blood sugar, a
skin rash
and
weight loss
.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia
(MEN)
. This is a rare genetic condition in which you have tumors in more than one of your
endocrine system
glands, which includes your pancreas.
Pancreatectomy
side effect
. If you need to have your pancreas partially or fully removed, you’ll lose some or all the cells that release glucagon and insulin.
What are the symptoms of glucagon-related conditions?
Depending on the situation and condition, you can experience low and/or high blood sugar from abnormal glucagon levels.
Symptoms of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)
Symptoms of low blood sugar include:
Shaking or trembling
Sweating and
chills
Dizziness
or lightheadedness
Faster
heart rate
Hunger
Confusion
or trouble concentrating
If you have these symptoms, it’s important to eat food with carbohydrates/sugar to bring your blood sugar levels up. If you experience these symptoms often, contact your healthcare provider.
Symptoms of high blood sugar (hyperglycemia)
High blood sugar
most often results from a lack of insulin, not a glucagon issue alone. But it’s possible to have elevated blood sugar levels from rare glucagon issues. Early signs and symptoms of high blood sugar include:
Increased thirst and/or hunger
Blurred
vision
Frequent urination
(peeing)
Headache
If you’re experiencing these symptoms, it’s important to see your healthcare provider.
What tests can check glucagon levels?
Your healthcare provider may order a glucagon blood test to measure your levels if you have certain symptoms. During the test, a provider will draw a blood sample from your vein using a needle. They’ll then send it to a lab for testing.
What are normal glucagon levels?
In general, the normal range of glucagon in your blood is 50 to 100 picograms per milliliter (pg/mL). A picogram is one-trillionth of a gram.
Advertisement
Normal glucagon value ranges can vary from lab to lab. They can also vary depending on the duration of
fasting
and your blood glucose level at the time of testing. Always compare your results to the reference range given on your blood lab report. Talk to your healthcare provider if you have questions.
When should I see a healthcare provider about my glucagon levels?
If you have diabetes and have frequent episodes of low or high blood sugar, it’s important to see your healthcare provider. Providers don’t typically measure glucagon levels in people with diabetes. But your provider may need to adjust your diabetes management to minimize both low and high blood sugar episodes.
While other glucagon issues are rare, if you’re having symptoms, it’s essential to figure out the cause. Reach out to your healthcare provider.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between glucagon and glycogen?
Glucagon and glycogen aren’t the same. Glycogen is a stored form of glucose (sugar). Your body primarily stores glycogen in your liver and muscles.
Glucagon is a hormone that triggers liver glycogen to convert back into glucose. It then enters your bloodstream so your body can use it for energy.
What is the function of glucagon during fasting?
Glucagon is essential during fasting to keep your blood sugar level from going low. This is because your body can’t rely on glucose (sugar) from food during fasting.
Advertisement
During prolonged fasting, glucagon triggers the formation of glucose from non-carbohydrate substances — like lipids, amino acids and proteins. This is called gluconeogenesis.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Glucagon is a “behind the scenes” type of hormone that helps keep your blood sugar in a healthy range. Issues with glucagon are rare unless you have diabetes. If you’re having frequent symptoms of low or high blood sugar, see your healthcare provider. They can find the cause of these episodes and recommend treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hormonal conditions can be tricky to find and complicated to treat. The experts in endocrinology at Cleveland Clinic are here to provide the best care.
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes