Pollen Allergy: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pollen Allergy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pollen Allergy
A pollen allergy causes symptoms like stuffy nose and coughing when a person breathes in pollen, a particle produced by certain plants, trees and grasses. Treatment involves medication, allergy shots or lifestyle changes to avoid pollen exposure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a pollen allergy?
A pollen allergy is a type of seasonal
allergy
triggered by pollen. Pollen is a powdery particle that flowering plants, trees, grass and weeds release to help fertilize other plants of the same species. It travels by floating through the air, but when it lands on surfaces it appears as a fine yellow dust. These tiny yellow particles can easily end up in your nose, eyes or lungs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you have a pollen allergy, your
immune system
thinks pollen is a dangerous intruder. It produces chemicals to fight off the pollen, and you experience an allergic reaction. Sneezing, congestion and puffy eyes are just a few of the symptoms people with pollen allergies may have. Medications can help you manage a pollen allergy.
Pollen allergies are typically seasonal and affect people when plants pollinate. Generally, trees pollinate in spring, followed by grass in summer and weeds in fall. In areas with warmer climates, symptoms of pollen allergies can begin as early as January or occur multiple times per year.
A pollen allergy is sometimes known as seasonal
allergic rhinitis
.
What are the types of pollen allergies?
There are three sources of pollen: trees, grass and weeds. Each of these plants pollinates at different times of the year, depending on where you live.
Tree pollen
Usually the first allergen to appear, tree pollen is most common in March through May, but can appear as early as January in warmer climates. Some of the species of trees that cause the most allergy symptoms are:
Birch.
Oak.
Cedar.
Grass pollen
Grass causes pollen allergy symptoms in late spring and summer. It can sometimes overlap with tree pollen and weed pollen seasons. Grass pollen is light, and the wind can easily carry it. This means the grass in your neighbor’s yard could cause your allergies.
Advertisement
Some of the most common types of grass that cause allergy symptoms are:
Bahia.
Bermuda.
Fescue.
Johnson.
Kentucky blue.
Weed pollen
Weed pollen, especially from ragweed, is the third source of pollen allergies. Weed pollen starts in the summer and ends in the fall. Ragweed, the most common weed allergen, grows in 49 states and can travel hundreds of miles through the air. This makes it especially hard to avoid. One plant can produce about 1 billion grains of pollen.
Other species of weeds that cause pollen allergies include:
Burning bush.
Cocklebur.
Lamb’s quarters.
How common is this condition?
Approximately 20 million people in the U.S. have seasonal allergies due to pollen.
Symptoms and Causes
How do you know if you’re allergic to pollen?
People with a pollen allergy may have the following symptoms:
Runny nose.
Stuffy nose or
nasal congestion
.
Sneezing.
Puffiness or swelling around your eyes.
Red or
watery eyes
.
Itchiness in your throat, eyes or nose.
Cough
or sore throat.
Allergic
asthma
, which is when pollen makes your asthma worsen.
Losing your sense smell or taste.
Most people experience symptoms from breathing in pollen as it travels through the air. But some people have a reaction from touching it or from pollen getting into their eyes.
Why do people get pollen allergies?
Pollen allergies happen because your body thinks pollen is a dangerous substance. Your immune system reacts to this danger by releasing chemicals like histamine to fight off the pollen. This is an allergic reaction.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is it diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will ask you about your medical history and symptoms. Some questions you can expect may include how long you’ve had symptoms or if symptoms happen during certain times of the year.
They can diagnose a pollen allergy using a
skin prick test
or a blood test.
Skin prick test:
An
allergist
will use a thin needle to prick your skin with a tiny amount of pollen. They then check to see if your skin reacts to it. Your skin will turn red, swell or become itchy if you’re allergic.
Specific IgE blood test:
This is a blood test that looks for a specific antibody your immune system produces against pollen.
Management and Treatment
What’s the best treatment for a pollen allergy?
The best treatment for pollen depends on how severe your allergy is and what works best for your body. What works for one person may not work for you. Your healthcare provider can recommend the best treatment to manage your pollen allergy.
Some possible treatments include:
Medications
There are several over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription
allergy medications
that improve people’s symptoms. These include:
Antihistamines
like cetirizine (Zyrtec®) or loratadine (Claritin®). These work by blocking histamine, which is the chemical your body produces in response to an allergen. They come in pill, liquid or nasal spray form.
Nasal sprays containing corticosteroids like fluticasone (Flonase®) work by reducing inflammation in your nasal passages.
Medications that combine antihistamines and decongestants like loratadine/pseudoephedrine (Claritin-D®) and fexofenadine/pseudoephedrine (Allegra-D®).
Medications to help manage asthma like inhaled or oral bronchodilators and inhaled steroids.
Leukotriene inhibitors
like montelukast (Singulair®). Available only with a prescription, these pills block leukotriene, which causes inflammation during an allergic reaction.
Decongestants to help clear your nose by shrinking your nasal passages. Some examples are pseudoephedrine (Sudafed®) or phenylephrine (Sudafed PE®). Don’t take decongestants for longer than five days as it can cause side effects in people with certain health conditions and become addictive. Decongestants come in pill, liquid or nasal spray form.
Advertisement
Remember, if over-the-counter medications don’t improve your symptoms, your healthcare provider can prescribe something stronger.
Allergy shots (immunotherapy)
Allergy shots work by changing your immune system’s response to an allergen over time. You receive a series of injections that contain pollen. The amount of pollen in the injection gradually increases, which builds up your tolerance. A healthcare provider gives you allergy shots.
Lifestyle changes
While it may not be possible to avoid pollen altogether, you can change your daily habits to try to minimize how much time you spend outside. For example, avoid being outside on a warm, windy spring day when pollen is high. Pollen tends to be highest early in the day and into early afternoon.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Prevention
Can you prevent a pollen allergy?
No, there’s nothing you can do to avoid getting a pollen allergy. The best way to prevent the symptom is by managing your allergies with medication or lifestyle changes.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
While you can’t cure a pollen allergy, taking the right medication and changing your habits to avoid pollen can help. Completely avoiding pollen and the outdoors can be tough. Some useful tips for dealing with a pollen allergy are:
Stay inside when pollen levels are highest or on windy days.
Close your windows and use air conditioning or fans to stay cool.
Avoid being outdoors in the morning and early afternoon when pollen levels tend to be higher.
Wear a dust mask when you’re outside. A hat and sunglasses can also help.
Use high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters in your home.
Remove and wash any clothes that have been outside immediately.
If you spend time outside, shower and wash your hair before getting into bed.
Take any allergy medications as your healthcare provider prescribes. Discuss any side effects with them and let them know if you’re finding relief from your symptoms.
Advertisement
How do I know if pollen is high?
Many websites and weather reports predict pollen levels. Just like a weather forecast, a pollen count is just an estimate. It can tell you whether the pollen in your area is high, moderate or low. While it can’t tell you specifically what type of pollen is causing your symptoms, it can be a good tool to help you figure out if high pollen is triggering your symptoms. Only a healthcare provider can pinpoint the specific pollen that’s making you sick.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you believe you have a pollen allergy. Only they can determine what type of pollen is causing your allergy. You may notice symptoms like congestion, coughing or watery eyes, especially when the seasons change. You don’t have to suffer with allergies. There are many treatments to help manage your symptoms.
Be sure to let your provider know of any medications you take or if you have any unwanted side effects from allergy medications.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Pollen allergies can be irritating and disruptive. While most people celebrate warmer weather and spring air, people with a pollen allergy know that this means they can expect a stuffy nose, coughing and itchy eyes. Your healthcare provider can diagnose a pollen allergy and recommend treatment like medication, allergy shots or lifestyle changes. With the right help, you can manage your symptoms and hopefully get back to enjoying the changing seasons.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergies can wreak havoc on your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our team of experts can help create a treatment plan that’ll help you breathe easier.
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/20/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment