Fungal Meningitis: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Fungal Meningitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Fungal Meningitis
Fungal meningitis is a fungal infection that spreads to the covering of your brain and spinal cord. Symptoms include headache, nausea, vomiting, confusion, stiff neck and more. Fungi like Cryptococcus, Blastomyces, Candida, Coccidioides and Histoplasma can cause it. People with weakened immune systems are most at risk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Fungal Meningitis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Fungal Meningitis?
Fungal meningitis is a
fungal infection
that causes inflammation around your brain and spinal cord. It can happen if you have a
weakened or suppressed immune system
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Meningitis can be fatal.
Go to an emergency room if you have symptoms like confusion, severe headache or stiff neck.
Many types of fungus can cause fungal meningitis. Some you breathe in from the soil around you. Others naturally live on your skin and can sometimes grow out of control. Meningitis isn’t contagious.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of fungal meningitis
Fungal meningitis symptoms can affect your thinking, vision and how you feel overall. They may come on slowly, over days or weeks. They include:
Headache
Stiff neck
Nausea or vomiting
Confusion or mental changes
Double vision
Drooping eyelid
Sensitivity to light
Seizures
Fungal meningitis causes
Fungal meningitis can happen when a fungal infection travels from one part of your body to your brain or spinal cord.
Cryptococcus
(C. neoformans
and
C. gattii)
fungi are the most common cause of fungal meningitis in people who have a compromised immune system.
Other causes include:
Blastomyces
Candida
Coccidioides
Histoplasma
Most of these fungi live in the soil in different parts of the U.S. They can infect you when you breathe them in. Most people who get an infection this way have a weakened immune system.
Candida
naturally lives on your body. Sometimes, you can get an infection inside your body that spreads to your brain and spinal cord. Rarely, you can get a fungal infection through surgery or while staying in the hospital.
Advertisement
Is fungal meningitis contagious?
No, fungal meningitis isn’t contagious. But some of the types of fungi that can lead to meningitis, like
Candida
, do spread from person to person. Just because you get a fungal infection doesn’t mean it will cause meningitis.
Risk factors
You’re at a higher risk for fungal meningitis if you have a weakened immune system. This includes preterm infants and people who:
Have HIV
Have cancer
Take certain medications for an autoimmune disease
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose fungal meningitis
Healthcare providers diagnose fungal meningitis by testing your blood and spinal fluid (
lumbar puncture
). This helps determine the cause of the swelling and how to treat it. They’ll also usually get images of the inside of your head, like a CT scan or MRI.
Management and Treatment
How is fungal meningitis treated?
Providers treat fungal meningitis with antifungal medications, given directly into a vein (IV) in the hospital. They may also give you corticosteroids to reduce inflammation.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have a weakened immune system, talk to your provider about how to prevent infections and what to do if you think you have one. Go to the ER if you have symptoms of fungal meningitis.
Outlook / Prognosis
Can you recover from fungal meningitis?
Yes. You may need to take antifungal medications for weeks or months to fully get rid of the infection. You’ll need treatment in the hospital for at least some of that time. If you have HIV, your provider may need to adjust your antiretroviral treatments.
Sometimes, symptoms can come back after treatment, especially if you have a weakened immune system.
What’s the survival rate for fungal meningitis?
Survival rates vary depending on the type of fungal infection, where you live and whether you have a weakened immune system. For example, experts estimate an
80% survival rate
for people with HIV and
Cryptococcus
meningitis in North America (including the U.S. and Canada), with treatment. But in parts of Africa, the survival rate is estimated to be around 30%.
The area of the world you live in greatly impacts the healthcare that’s available to you. This can impact survival rates.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
If you have a weakened immune system, you can take some steps to reduce your risk of fungal infections that can lead to fungal meningitis. These include:
Avoiding areas that expose you to dirt or dust
Closing your windows and staying inside during dust storms
Running high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters in your home
Wearing an N95 respirator mask during activities like gardening, digging or other yard work that can expose you to fungal spores
If your provider recommends it, you might also:
Get tested and treated for fungal infections before starting HIV treatment
Take antifungal treatment to prevent an infection if you’re at high risk
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having a weakened immune system means that some things have to be on your radar that aren’t on most other people’s — like fungal meningitis. Being aware of the symptoms and ways to prevent infection are the first steps in protecting your health. Don’t hesitate to talk to your provider about any concerns.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment