Cancer Treatment: Types, Options & What To Expect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Cancer Treatment
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cancer Treatment
Current cancer treatments are helping people live longer, fuller lives. Treatment options include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, hormone therapy, immunotherapy and targeted therapy, among others. Your healthcare provider will recommend treatments based on your unique diagnosis, including your cancer type, stage and treatment goals.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What is cancer treatment?
The general goal of cancer treatment is to stop or slow the progression of the disease. Better still, in some cases, the goal of treatment is to eliminate (
cure
) the
cancer
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In real-time, things are more complex. There are more than 100 types of cancer (not including subtypes). And each requires a unique treatment approach. No one can replace your healthcare provider’s guidance when it comes to explaining your options if you’ve just learned you have cancer. But a general understanding of the types of cancer treatments available and what’s involved may help.
What guides cancer treatment decisions?
Cancer specialists (
oncologists
) base treatment decisions on:
The type of cancer.
The cancer
stage
, or how advanced it is (the extent of the disease).
How “aggressive,” or fast-growing, the cancer is.
Your overall health and whether you can handle treatment (including your likely response to treatments).
Treatment goals, which may include getting rid of the cancer or helping you live longer and more comfortably (
palliative care
).
Understanding the rationale behind the treatment plan your healthcare provider recommends is just as important as understanding the plan itself.
What are the types of cancer treatment?
Healthcare providers may recommend one or (more commonly) a combination of cancer treatments, including:
Surgery.
Radiation therapy.
Chemotherapy.
Hormone therapy.
Immunotherapy.
Targeted therapy.
Ablation.
Bone marrow transplant.
Clinical trials.
Advertisement
Surgery
Usually, the goal of surgery is to remove all cancer cells and some of the surrounding healthy tissue (a margin). Afterward, a
pathologist
tests the healthy tissue to ensure no cancer cells remain.
Surgery is the most common treatment for cancer that hasn’t spread (metastasized). It’s also the most effective for sending cancer into remission (no signs or symptoms of cancer). But this depends on whether your surgeon can safely remove the entire
tumor
. For example, surgery may not be a safe option if a tumor is embedded inside a vital organ or tangled in major
blood vessels
. And surgery can’t get rid of
blood cancers
or cancers that have spread.
Radiation therapy
Radiation therapy
uses high doses of radiation to destroy
cancerous tumors
. The radiation causes cancer cells to break down and die. Types include:
External beam radiation therapy (EBRT)
: Uses a machine outside your body to direct radiation toward a tumor.
Internal radiation therapy
: Uses radioactive implants (often tiny pellets) on or near a tumor to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy can also be given intraoperatively (during surgery).
Hyperthermia therapy
: Uses heat to kill cancer cells and make tumors smaller. It can also make other cancer treatments more effective.
Healthcare providers sometimes use radiation treatment only. Or you may receive radiation in combination with other treatments, like chemotherapy. Often, people get this treatment after surgery to destroy any remaining cancer cells.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy
(or “chemo”) uses
chemotherapy drugs
to kill cancer cells. These drugs travel through your bloodstream, destroying fast-growing cells — like cancer cells — along the way. Less common types go directly into the part of your body with cancer cells. For example, surgeons sometimes inject chemo drugs directly into the body cavity with cancer or into the
artery
supplying a tumor.
Like radiation, you usually get chemo in combination with other treatments. You may get a single chemo drug or you may need different ones. Chemotherapy is one of the most common and effective treatments for cancer that has spread (metastasized), returned (recurred) or is likely to come back.
Hormone therapy
Hormone therapy
blocks or reduces
hormones
that fuel cancer cell growth. Some cancers grow more rapidly in the presence of sex hormones, like
androgens
or
estrogen
. If your healthcare provider suspects your cancer is responsive to hormones, they’ll check the cells for sites where hormones can bind (hormone receptors). If you have hormone receptor-positive (HR+) cancer, you may need this type of cancer treatment.
Advertisement
Providers treat some types of
prostate cancer
,
breast cancer
and gynecological cancers (
uterine
and
ovarian
cancers) with hormone therapy.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy
helps your
immune system
identify and destroy cancer cells. Healthy immune systems do a good job of identifying threats, like
germs
, and getting rid of them. Cancer cells thrive because they can hide from your immune system, so your immune system doesn’t attack the cancer cells. Immunotherapy can keep cancer cells from escaping your body’s natural defenses.
Healthcare providers most often use this in combination with other cancer therapies to treat advanced or
recurrent cancer
. Some of the most promising research into future cancer treatments involves testing and developing new immunotherapy treatments.
Targeted therapy
Targeted therapy
treatments interfere with specific processes that allow some cancer cells to thrive. Cancer cells develop and multiply because of
genetic mutations
(changes) in their DNA. The mutations often cause cancer cells to make abnormal proteins that spur cancer cell growth. Targeted therapy drugs home in on the specific proteins, preventing them from fueling cancer cell growth.
You may get this type of treatment if you have cancer cells with certain mutations. Scientists continue to develop new targeted therapies as they learn more about the mutations unique to various cancer types.
Advertisement
Ablation therapy
Ablation therapy
uses extreme hot or cold energy to kill cancer cells. Some types are called “surgery” because although there aren’t physical cuts, the methods allow providers to remove tissue with near-surgical precision. These include:
Cryoablation
: Uses intense cold to freeze and destroy cancer cells. It’s also called cryotherapy or cryosurgery.
Laser therapy
: Uses hot, high-powered light beams to cut out cancer cells. It’s also called laser surgery.
Electrosurgery
: Uses powerful electrical currents to remove cancer cells or destroy tissue. Examples include
fulguration
(radiofrequency ablation) and microwave ablation.
Healthcare providers most often use ablation to shrink tumors. This can relieve symptoms or help you live longer.
Hemopoietic stem cell (bone marrow) transplant
A
stem cell transplant
replaces immature blood cells that are (or could become) cancerous with healthy cells. There are two main types:
Autologous
: Uses healthy
stem cells
from your own body to replace cancerous or damaged ones.
Allogeneic
: Replaces your stem cells with those from a donor. The donor must have
blood
similar to yours, which means donors are usually close relatives.
Healthcare providers use stem cell transplants to treat blood cancers that haven’t responded to other treatments or that have returned after remission. You may need a transplant to replenish your blood cells after receiving treatments that destroy cancerous stem cells, like radiation and chemotherapy.
Advertisement
Clinical trials
A
clinical trial
is a study that tests the safety and effectiveness of new cancer treatments. Current treatment approaches and medications that are now considered best practice were once only available in clinical trials.
Your healthcare provider may recommend you take part in a clinical trial if standard therapies haven’t helped or aren’t an option. They may feel that a newer treatment may be more effective given emerging research about your cancer type.
Treatment Details
What happens during cancer treatment?
Cancer treatment usually involves a main treatment and additional ones. Here are some terms you may hear your provider use:
Primary treatment
: This is the main cancer treatment. The most common primary treatment for tumors that haven’t spread is surgery. But your primary treatment depends on lots of factors, including your cancer type and stage.
Adjuvant therapy
: This treatment is an additional therapy given after your primary treatment to help prevent or reduce the risk of cancer coming back.
Neoadjuvant therapy
: You receive neoadjuvant therapy before your primary treatment. It usually involves treatments like chemo and radiation that shrink tumors before surgery.
Your healthcare provider may use words like “local” or “systemic” to describe the cancer treatments you’ll need. Here’s what these words mean:
Local treatments
remove tumors or destroy cancer cells in a specific part of your body (“locally”).
Systemic treatments
destroy cancer cells that have broken off from the primary tumor (the place where the cancer starts) and spread. This includes advanced cancers that have spread to distant body parts (
metastatic cancer
).
How will I receive cancer treatment?
Cancer treatment may involve surgery or other procedures that target cancer cells:
Open surgery
: Major surgery that uses large cuts to access organs and body cavities.
Laparoscopy
: Minimally invasive surgery that uses smaller cuts than open surgery.
Precision technologies
: Radiation and ablation delivery methods that can deliver targeted energy that kills cancer cells while sparing nearby healthy tissue.
Cancer therapy also involves medicines that you may take:
Orally
: A pill, capsule, tablet or liquid you swallow.
Topically
: A cream you apply to your
skin
.
Intravenously (IV)
: Through a
vein
that allows the medicine to get released slowly into your bloodstream. This type is also called an infusion.
Injection
: A shot that goes directly into tissue.
How long will I need cancer treatment?
The duration of cancer treatment can be definite (with a clear endpoint) or indefinite (ongoing). Definite duration usually happens when the goal of treatment is to
cure
the cancer. Ongoing treatment usually involves cancers that aren’t curable. Sometimes, ongoing treatment is about providing symptom relief. Treatment may continue until you can’t tolerate the side effects, or the treatment stops working.
Cancer treatment may be a one-time surgery or it may require many treatments. The most common cancer treatments are a “course of treatment” that involves multiple treatment sessions.
For example, your oncologist may tell you that you need several “rounds” or “cycles” of chemo. This means you’ll have several treatment days followed by recovery days. This on-again/off-again schedule gives the medicine time to work while allowing your body time to heal.
Ask your healthcare provider what your course of treatment will involve, including how long before you’ll know if it’s working.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of cancer treatment?
Depending on your diagnosis, cancer treatment can save your life. Increasingly, oncologists are using the word “cure” to describe the outlook for some early-stage cancers (cancers that haven’t spread) after treatment. Many people with cancer are living past the five-year
survival
mark. This is an important milestone because most cancers that remain in
remission
for five years don’t return.
But even with the most advanced cancers, like metastatic cancers, treatment can provide benefits. These include relieving cancer-related symptoms and helping you live longer.
Your healthcare provider will explain the potential benefits of the cancer treatments they’re recommending for you.
What are the side effects of cancer treatment?
Healthcare providers often break up cancer treatments into cycles or sessions to allow your body time to heal. Still, these treatments work by killing cancer cells. In the process, cancer therapies can destroy healthy cells, too. And this sometimes leads to side effects.
Short-term side effects
The most common short-term cancer treatment side effects include:
Fatigue
: It’s common to feel exhausted during and after treatment.
Anemia
: Some cancer therapies cause your
red blood cell
levels to get too low (anemia). Anemia also leads to fatigue.
Nausea
and
vomiting
: Feeling queasy in your stomach is one of the most common cancer side effects, across cancer treatment types.
Pain
: You may experience pain in your
bones
,
nerves
, soft tissues or elsewhere.
Other short-term side effects include:
Hair loss
.
Diarrhea
.
Constipation
.
Mouth sores
.
Brittle fingernails
.
Headaches
.
Loss of appetite
.
Inflammation in your mouth and GI tract (
mucositis
).
Skin changes (
dryness
,
itchiness
,
rash
).
Problems with wounds healing or forming
clots
.
Susceptibility to infections or getting sick more often (being
immunocompromised
).
Long-term side effects
Usually, side effects end once you finish cancer treatment. But sometimes, they’re ongoing. Or side effects may not show up until days, weeks or months after treatment ends.
Potential long-term side effects of cancer treatment include:
Bone and joint problems
, like
joint pain
and bone weakening (
osteoporosis
).
Cognitive issues
, like trouble remembering and concentrating.
Digestive system problems
, like
trouble absorbing nutrients
.
Heart issues
, like high blood pressure (
hypertension
) or an irregular heartbeat (
arrhythmia
).
Mental health issues
, like
depression
and
post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD).
Nervous system problems
, like nerve degeneration (
neuropathy
).
Reproductive system issues
, like changes in sex drive, early
menopause
and
infertility
.
It’s important to know that not everyone experiences the same side effects, even when they get the same treatments. And not all cancer therapies carry the same risks. Your healthcare provider will advise you about potential side effects before you start treatment.
Recovery and Outlook
Is there anything I can do to make cancer treatment easier on me?
One of the best things you can do is to learn everything you can about your diagnosis — and ask
loved ones
to learn along with you. Don’t hold back if you have a question for your healthcare provider about your treatment. This includes how to plan for the changes to your everyday life that cancer treatment usually involves.
Now’s the time to take advantage of every resource you can, including your care team, family and friends. It’s an especially good idea to connect with others in cancer support networks. Often, the best support involves conversations with someone who understands what it means to live with cancer one treatment session at a time.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your provider if you’re experiencing new or worsening symptoms during cancer treatment. In some cases, they’ll advise you on how to manage them. Or they may need to change your dosage or even the type of cancer treatment.
Regardless, your provider not only needs to know how your treatment is working but also how it’s impacting your overall sense of well-being. Maintaining your quality of life is an essential part of your treatment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Current cancer treatments reflect 250 years of research into the most effective approaches to fighting this disease. And this work has made a huge impact. According to the U.S. National Cancer Institute, over the next eight years, 16.3 million people in the U.S. will be alive at least five years after first receiving their cancer diagnosis. This means that people with cancer are living longer, fuller lives, thanks to new cancer treatments.
Of course, this doesn’t mean that the treatment experience is easy. You’ll need to lean on your care team and loved ones more than ever. You’ll need to be patient with yourself as you manage the changes to your everyday life that this diagnosis involves. But you’re not alone. And you have options when it comes to treatments that fight this disease on your terms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/27/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials