Silicosis: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Silicosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Silicosis
Silicosis is a lung disease that can develop from breathing in silica dust, usually around mining and construction sites. Symptoms include a long-lasting cough, problems breathing, inflammation in your airways and scarring in your lung tissue. There’s no cure. But there are ways to manage your symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Silicosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Silicosis?
Silicosis causes permanent damage to your lungs. It affects people who breathe in silica dust over a long period of time.
Silicosis (sil-eh-KOH-sis) is a type of
interstitial lung disease
that can occur from breathing in very tiny silicon dioxide particles (silica dust). Silica is a natural compound that’s in things like:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Plants, including dark, leafy greens, bell peppers and other vegetables
Rocks, including quartz and granite
Sand
Soil
Water
Manufacturers often include silicon dioxide (silica gel) packets in packages to absorb moisture.
Silica is nontoxic if you drink it or eat it. But inhaling certain kinds of silica dust can cause problems with your
respiratory system
. It damages the immune cells in the tiny air sacs in your lungs (alveolar macrophages). Alveolar macrophages (al-VEE-uh-ler MAK-ruh-feyj-es) are part of your
immune system
— they’re part of your respiratory system’s core line of defense.
Most people get silicosis because they breathe in silica dust at their jobs. Symptoms aren’t usually noticeable right away. But over time, silica can damage your lungs. For some kinds of silica, this can take about 10 years of regular exposure. With higher levels of exposure, lung damage can happen faster. Silicosis rates have improved with safety regulations. But in the past five years, a large number of people have developed silicosis from working with engineered stone products.
You can’t cure or reverse silicosis. But healthcare providers can help you manage symptoms. Severe cases can affect your ability to do daily activities. It can also be fatal.
Advertisement
Types of silicosis
Silicosis may develop in three ways:
Acute (sudden) silicosis
: You can get this type by having an intense silica dust exposure — the dust you breathe in consists of a lot of silica. It usually takes five years or less to develop. But you may develop acute silicosis within several months.
Chronic (long-term) silicosis
: This is the most common type. It usually develops after exposure to breathable dust for more than 10 years. The amount of silica in the dust is also a factor. Simple silicosis is the most common type of chronic silicosis. Progressive massive silicosis is another type that causes a lot of scarring.
Subacute silicosis (accelerated silicosis)
: This type typically develops over two to five years. It develops faster because of heavier exposure to silica dust.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of silicosis?
The main silicosis symptoms include:
Long-lasting (persistent) cough, especially coughing up phlegm
Inflammation in your lung tissue
Scarring in your lung tissue
(pulmonary fibrosis)
These symptoms can also cause:
Fatigue
Muscle weakness
Shortness of breath
Unexplained weight loss
What is the main cause of silicosis?
Damage to your lungs from breathing in silica dust causes silicosis. This usually happens in a work-related setting.
Risk factors
Silicosis is a work-related lung disease. You’re at greater risk of developing silicosis if you work in the following industries:
Construction, building and demolition
Foundry work
Mining and quarrying
Pottery, ceramics and glassmaking
Sandblasting
Stone work, including making stone countertops
What are the long-term effects of silicosis?
People who have silicosis are at an increased risk of the following:
Autoimmune diseases like
scleroderma
,
rheumatoid arthritis
and
lupus
Chronic bronchitis
Chronic kidney disease
(CKD)
Lung cancer
Tuberculosis
and other lung infections
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose silicosis
A healthcare provider will:
Review your medical history
Ask about your symptoms
Perform a physical exam, including listening to your lungs with a stethoscope (auscultation)
They may also ask about your job history. If they suspect silicosis or another lung condition, they’ll recommend additional testing.
Tests that are used
Healthcare providers may recommend the following tests to help diagnose silicosis:
Bronchoalveolar lavage
: This test “washes” your lungs and examines the fluid they pull out.
Imaging tests
: Chest X-rays and CT scans can provide detailed images of your lungs.
Lab tests
: Lab tests can’t diagnose silicosis. But they can help providers rule out other conditions, like some types of infections. One test may include a tuberculosis skin test.
Lung
biopsy
: Providers remove a small piece of your lung tissue for examination. Providers rarely recommend a lung biopsy to help diagnose silicosis.
Pulmonary function tests
: These tests evaluate how well your lungs work.
Sputum culture
: A sputum culture examines mucus that you cough up.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
Can lungs recover from silica dust?
No. There’s no
cure
for silicosis. Healthcare providers can’t reverse lung damage from silica dust. They can only help manage your symptoms.
What are the treatment options for silicosis?
You can’t treat silicosis. But you can help manage your symptoms by:
Changing jobs
Doing
pulmonary rehab
Quitting smoking, vaping and using tobacco products
Taking a
bronchodilator
to improve airflow
Using
supplemental oxygen
In severe cases, healthcare providers may recommend a
lung transplant
.
Are there silicosis clinical trials?
Yes, there are ongoing clinical trials for silicosis treatments. Researchers use antifibrotic drugs to treat some forms of silicosis. Some of these drugs are experimental. But one drug —
nintedanib
(OFEV®) — has approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat pulmonary fibrosis.
If your healthcare providers think you’re a good candidate, they may suggest that you participate.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should have regular checkups with a healthcare provider if you work around silica dust. Schedule an appointment right away if you have a cough or trouble breathing.
Call a provider right away if you have silicosis and notice new symptoms that concern you.
During your appointment, you may wish to ask your provider:
Will my condition get worse?
What can I do to feel better?
How can I protect my lungs?
Am I a good candidate for a silicosis clinical trial?
Can you recommend a silicosis support group?
Do I need to think about a lung transplant, and what does this process look like?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have silicosis?
Your outlook depends on many factors, including:
How much silica you’ve been exposed to
How long you’ve been exposed to silica dust
Whether you’re still exposed to silica dust
Your age
Any other conditions you may have
Your healthcare providers will give you a better idea of what to expect, according to your situation. But in general, your outlook is better if your symptoms don’t get worse.
If silicosis causes progressive massive fibrosis, your outlook is poor. You’re more likely to have permanent breathing problems and a reduced quality of life. It’s also more likely to cause premature death.
What is the life expectancy?
It depends on the severity of your condition, your age and your overall health. Some people can live 10-20 years or longer after receiving a silicosis diagnosis. Your healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect.
Prevention
Can silicosis be prevented?
Yes, you can prevent silicosis. If you work around respirable crystalline silica dust, you can help lower your risk of developing silicosis by:
Changing out of dusty clothes
Making sure job sites have air-monitoring equipment
Using equipment that helps reduce the amount of dust in the air, including exhaust ventilation, dust-collecting systems, spraying water on surfaces and using “wet drills” to keep dust down
Using vacuums with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters or wet mops to clean worksites instead of a dry broom
Wearing the proper
PPE
, including a tight-fitting respirator
Advertisement
It’s also a good idea to get regular silicosis screenings through your employer. Screenings are tests that check for signs of silicosis before you have symptoms. Early detection is key to preventing severe symptoms.
Additional Common Questions
Is silicosis the same as cancer?
No, silicosis isn’t cancer. It doesn’t cause your cells to grow out of control. But silicosis may be a factor in developing lung cancer.
Can exercise help?
Exercise may be helpful if you have silicosis. Discuss your exercise plans with a healthcare provider. They may suggest pulmonary rehab, which includes exercises that can help improve your breathing.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s common to write off a cough and other symptoms of silicosis as a common respiratory infection. But if you work around silica and have symptoms, it’s a good idea to schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider to figure out exactly what’s going on with your respiratory system.
There’s no cure for silicosis. Some cases are mild while others are very serious. Only a provider can tell you what to expect in your specific situation. They’ll work with you to create a plan to manage your symptoms and protect your airways from further damage.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breathing issues can affect your life in many ways. Cleveland Clinic’s respiratory therapy program treats your symptoms so you can feel better day to day.
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment