Lone Star Tick Diseases: Cause & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Lone Star Tick Diseases
Advertisement
Advertisement
Lone Star Tick Diseases
Lone star tick diseases include alpha-gal syndrome, bourbon virus, ehrlichiosis, heartland virus disease, southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI) and tularemia. You get them from the bite of a lone star tick, a small bug usually found near wooded areas in parts of the U.S. Talk to your provider if a tick bites you and you have symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Lone Star Tick Diseases?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Are Lone Star Tick Diseases?
Lone star tick diseases are illnesses you can get through the
bite
of a lone star tick. Ticks are bugs that can be as small as a poppy seed. As adults, female lone star ticks have a white dot on their back (the “lone star”). They live in and around wooded areas in the Midwestern and Eastern parts of the U.S.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Diseases lone star ticks spread include:
Alpha-gal syndrome
(“red meat allergy”)
Bourbon virus disease
Ehrlichiosis
Heartland virus disease
Southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI), which has symptoms similar to
Lyme disease
Tularemia
Many of these illnesses can be severe if not treated right away.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of lone star tick diseases
Symptoms of lone star tick diseases depend on which illness you have. Some symptoms could include:
Fever
Chills
Headache
Muscle pain
or soreness
Tiredness
Rash
or
hives
An open wound (ulcer or lesion) on your skin
Painful,
swollen lymph nodes
Digestive symptoms like nausea,
vomiting
, stomach pain,
diarrhea
and
loss of appetite
Eye symptoms like pain, watering,
sensitivity to light
or
corneal ulceration
Lone star tick bites can also severely irritate your skin without causing other symptoms. The area around the bite might itch, swell, turn red or be lighter or darker than the skin around it. This doesn’t necessarily mean the tick infected you with a
germ
.
How long does it take to get sick from a lone star tick?
It can take anywhere from a few days to two weeks to develop symptoms after a tick bites you.
Lone star tick disease causes
Bacteria
and
viruses
cause lone star tick diseases. Experts don’t know what causes STARI.
Ticks don’t just bite you and leave like mosquitos. They latch on and burrow their heads into your skin, feeding for a day or longer. During this time, they can transmit diseases.
Advertisement
Complications
If not treated quickly enough, some lone star tick diseases can lead to serious or life-threatening complications, including:
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
or respiratory failure
Renal failure (acute kidney injury)
Internal bleeding (
hemorrhaging
)
Sepsis
Brain inflammation (
meningoencephalitis
)
Heart failure
Seizures
Coma
Alpha-gal syndrome can cause
anaphylaxis
(a severe allergic reaction) when you eat red meat or products that contain animal proteins.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose lone star tick diseases
To diagnose a disease caused by a lone star tick bite, a healthcare provider will give you a physical exam and ask you about your symptoms and health history. It’s important for them to know if you’ve recently (within the past three weeks) been in an area where you could’ve been bitten by a tick, even if you don’t remember being bitten.
They might also get
blood tests
or a
bacterial culture
to look for signs of infection. If they think you have an illness caused by bacteria, they may need to start treating you right away, before the culture tests come back.
Management and Treatment
Is there a cure for lone star tick diseases?
There’s no single cure for lone star tick diseases, as they have different causes. Diseases caused by bacteria are treated with
antibiotics
. Those caused by viruses don’t have a specific treatment.
If your symptoms are severe, you may need to be treated in the hospital with IV (intravenous) fluids, IV antibiotics or pain medications. Getting rest, drinking fluids and taking over-the-counter medications (if recommended by your provider) can help your symptoms while you recover.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’ve been bitten by a tick or have been in an area with ticks and have symptoms, see a healthcare provider right away.
Go to the nearest ER if you experience:
Fever over 103 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius)
Coughing up blood
Difficulty breathing
Confusion
or other mental changes
Severe stomach (abdominal) pain
Seizures
Swelling of your face, mouth, tongue or throat
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a lone star tick disease?
You can fully recover from most types of lone star tick diseases if diagnosed and treated right away. It might take several weeks to completely feel better. Alpha-gal syndrome doesn’t have a cure — you’ll have to avoid foods and medications you’re allergic to.
Prevention
Can lone star tick diseases be prevented?
Avoiding
tick bites
is the best way to reduce your risk of lone star tick diseases. Some strategies include:
Keep grass cut shorter than 5 inches.
Stay on cleared paths while in wooded areas.
Use bug sprays with DEET or other ingredients approved to keep ticks away.
Use clothing to cover as much of your skin as possible when you’re in the woods or areas with long grass.
Check yourself for ticks after you’ve been outside. If possible, have someone else check you in places you can’t see yourself (like your back and scalp).
Ask your veterinarian about the best way to protect your pets from ticks. Check your pets for ticks often, especially after they’ve been outside.
Follow directions for
safely removing a tick
if you find one on you.
Advertisement
What happens if you get bitten by a lone star tick?
If you find a tick biting you, don’t panic. Clean the area with rubbing alcohol and a cotton ball. Use a pair of tweezers to carefully remove the tick by its head as close to the skin as possible (don’t squeeze the body of the tick). Make sure the head and mouth parts are attached and not stuck in your skin.
Note how the tick looks — if it’s flat or rounded. This information can help your provider determine how long the tick may have been biting you and your risk for tick-borne illnesses.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Bug bites are usually just annoying. But ticks can spread serious illnesses. If you’re often in areas that have ticks, know how to prevent bites and safely remove ticks you find on yourself. If you do get bitten, talk to a provider about what symptoms to look out for and when to seek treatment. Most people make a full recovery with quick treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment