Pontine Stroke: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pontine Stroke
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pontine Stroke
A pontine stroke causes a blood flow blockage to a part of your brainstem. It’s life-threatening and can cause irreversible brain damage. It’s crucial to familiarize yourself with the symptoms of a pontine stroke and to go to the hospital as soon as possible if you develop symptoms. Early treatment is essential.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is a pontine stroke?
A pontine stroke (infarction) happens when there’s a blood flow blockage to a part of your
brainstem
called the
pons
. It’s a type of
ischemic stroke
. The blockage may be sudden (acute) or develop over time (chronic).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The pons is the largest portion of your brainstem. It has several important functions.
Other names for a pontine stroke include:
Brainstem stroke or infarction.
Pons stroke or infarction.
A pontine stroke is a medical emergency, and early treatment is crucial.
How common are pontine strokes?
Strokes
are very common. But compared to other types of strokes, pontine strokes are less common.
Pontine strokes represent about 7% of all ischemic strokes. About 691,000 people in the U.S. experience an ischemic stroke each year. That means about 48,000 people in the U.S. have a pontine stroke each year.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a pontine stroke?
There are several possible symptoms — and groups of symptoms — that can develop from a pontine stroke. It’s important to note that pontine stroke symptoms are slightly different from
typical stroke symptoms
.
Symptoms of a pontine stroke may include:
Muscle weakness on one side of your body (
hemiparesis
).
Weakness and droopiness on one or both sides of your face (
facial nerve palsy
).
Abnormal sensations
(like
numbness
or pins and needles) on one side of your face.
Abnormal sensations on one side of your body (hemisensory loss).
Slurred speech (
dysarthria
).
Difficulty swallowing (
dysphagia
).
Difficulty breathing.
Loss of coordination or balance (
ataxia
).
A spinning sensation (
vertigo
).
Hearing loss
.
Uncontrollable crying or laughing (
pseudobulbar affect
).
Paralysis
in both arms and legs (
quadriplegia
).
Loss of consciousness.
Advertisement
Eye and vision symptoms may include:
Double vision
when viewing objects side by side (due to
sixth nerve palsy
).
Repetitive, uncontrolled eye movements (
nystagmus
).
Inability to move both eyes together in a single direction (conjugate gaze palsy).
Issues with blinking.
Get medical help immediately if you or a loved one develops any of these symptoms. Pontine strokes are life-threatening and can cause irreversible damage.
Types of pontine strokes
You can have a blood flow blockage in different parts of your pons, resulting in different types of pontine strokes. The different types tend to cause different symptoms, though many symptoms overlap. Healthcare providers use anatomical terms to describe the different types.
For example:
A medial pontine stroke (near the middle of your pons) typically causes weakness on one side of your body, eye muscle paralysis and horizontal gaze palsy.
A lateral pontine stroke (on either side of your pons) typically causes hemisensory loss on the opposite side of your body and ataxia. You could have a bilateral (affecting both sides) or unilateral (affecting one side) pontine stroke.
A caudal pontine stroke (near the back of your pons) typically causes facial nerve palsy, hearing loss and vertigo.
What causes a pontine stroke?
A pontine stroke happens when there’s a blockage in the blood flow to your pons. Two common causes of a blockage include:
Small artery disease
: Long-standing
high blood pressure
or
diabetes
can damage small arteries in your pons, leading to long-term blood flow restriction and an eventual blockage (stroke). This is the most common cause.
Large artery
atherosclerosis
: Atherosclerosis is the hardening of your
arteries
due to gradual plaque buildup. Buildup in the larger arteries that lead to your brain (
vertebral
or
basilar artery
) can block blood flow to the smaller arteries of your pons.
What are the risk factors for pontine stroke?
The main risk factors for pontine stroke are the same as those for ischemic stroke: high blood pressure and diabetes. These conditions can damage your blood vessels, including those in your pons.
Other risk factors include:
Smoking
.
High cholesterol
.
History of ischemic
heart disease
(heart issues caused by narrowed heart arteries).
Blood clotting disorders (hypercoagulable states)
.
Vasculitis
.
If you have any of these risk factors, it’s important to see your healthcare provider regularly to make sure your treatment plan is working well.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is pontine stroke diagnosed?
You should go to an emergency room (ER) as soon as possible if you develop stroke symptoms. There, a healthcare provider will do several tests and assessments to help diagnose a pontine stroke and check your health. These may include:
Advertisement
Checking your
blood pressure
and
heart rate
.
Checking your breathing (respiratory function).
Physical exam
and medical history.
Neurological exam
. This can pinpoint telltale signs of a stroke and potentially which part of your brain it’s affecting.
Brain imaging tests, like a
CT scan
and/or
MRI scan
. These tests can confirm that the stroke is in your pons.
The provider may order additional tests, like
blood tests
and an
EKG
, to check other aspects of your health.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for a pontine stroke?
The highest treatment priority for a pontine stroke is restoring circulation (blood flow) to your pons. That’s because restoring circulation quickly can prevent permanent damage or at least limit a stroke’s severity. Once again, it’s essential to get to a hospital as soon as possible if you’re having stroke symptoms so you can get treatment quickly.
Restoring circulation usually involves a type of medication called
thrombolytics
. It may also involve a procedure called a mechanical
thrombectomy
to remove the
blood clot
if you have a large artery blockage.
Other goals of treatment include:
Preventing complications. Your healthcare team may give you various other treatments to prevent or treat complications.
Rehabilitation to improve neurological side effects or complications.
Strategies for preventing additional strokes, like medications, eating changes and increased physical activity.
Advertisement
Pontine stroke rehabilitation
Stroke rehabilitation is a major part of recovery for most people who have a stroke. It can take many forms depending on your symptoms, including:
Speech therapy
: This can help you regain language and speaking abilities and improve your ability to control muscles that help you breathe, eat, drink and swallow.
Physical therapy
: This can help you improve or regain the ability to use your hands, arms, feet and legs. This can also help with
balance issues
, muscle weakness and more.
Occupational therapy
: This can help retrain your brain so you can go about your typical daily activities, like using utensils to eat and putting on clothes.
Sensory re-education
: This helps to retrain or stimulate your senses. For example, you may experience and identify different textured objects, vibrations, pressures and temperatures.
Cognitive therapy
: This can be helpful if you’re having
memory problems
. It can also help if you have difficulty with activities that require focus or concentration that you could do before.
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for people with a pontine stroke?
The prognosis (outlook) for people with a pontine stroke depends on several factors, like:
Where the stroke happened in your pons.
The severity of the stroke.
How quickly you received treatment.
Your overall health and age.
Advertisement
For example, unilateral (affecting one side) pontine strokes typically have better outcomes than bilateral (affecting both sides) and caudal (affecting the back of your pons) pontine strokes.
Your healthcare team will give you a better idea of what recovery will look like after a pontine stroke. Lean on your loved ones to help with raising any questions or concerns.
What are the long-term effects of a pontine stroke?
A pontine stroke can cause several long-term or permanent complications. This is because your brainstem, which includes your pons, is a vital brain structure with many important functions. Your risk of experiencing complications depends on many factors, like the type of pontine stroke and its severity.
Complications can include:
Permanent brain damage.
Difficulty eating that requires
tube feeding
.
Loss of bladder control (
urinary incontinence
) requiring the use of a urinary catheter.
Long-lasting muscle weakness, which could result in frequent falls.
Post-stroke depression
.
Complications due to long-term bed rest, like
bedsores
and
deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
.
Long-term disability.
Locked-in syndrome
.
Aspiration pneumonia
due to pseudobulbar palsy or locked-in syndrome.
Death.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you (or a loved one) had a pontine stroke, it may help to ask your healthcare provider the following questions:
What type of pontine stroke did I have?
What brain and body functions did the stroke impact?
What will my recovery be like? What are the next steps for my care?
What types of rehabilitation will I need?
What will I be able to do in the next few months?
What can I expect one year from now?
What skills do my loved ones and I need to take care of me?
What services and resources can help me and my loved ones?
What are my risk factors for another stroke?
Prevention
How can I prevent a pontine stroke?
Pontine strokes aren’t always preventable. But you can work with your healthcare provider to help manage any stroke risk factors you may have. Management strategies may include:
Blood pressure management with a goal of 140/90 mmHg or lower. Your provider may recommend
medication
and/or activity and eating changes.
High cholesterol (dyslipidemia) treatment, like increased physical activity, food changes and/or
statins
.
Diabetes management with the goal of maintaining an
A1C
of 7% or lower.
Quitting smoking
, which may involve
psychotherapy
(talk therapy) and nicotine replacement therapy (NRT).
Changes to your eating plan, like following the
DASH diet
or
Mediterranean diet
.
Regular physical activity for 40 minutes a day for three to four days a week.
Reaching and/or maintaining a healthy weight.
Taking
anticoagulants
(aspirin or warfarin) if you have
atrial fibrillation (Afib)
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A pontine stroke can upend your life in an instant. Because of this, it’s essential to familiarize yourself with its symptoms and go to the hospital as soon as possible if you or a loved one develop them. Life after a stroke can be really challenging and disorienting. Be sure to lean on your healthcare team and loved ones for support throughout your recovery.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/12/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment