Diabulimia: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Diabulimia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Diabulimia
Diabulimia is a life-threatening eating disorder that can affect people with Type 1 diabetes. It involves restricting or limiting insulin doses to lose weight. Diabulimia can cause serious complications and requires medical treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Type 1 Diabetes Management
Pediatric Type 1 Diabetes Management
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is diabulimia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is diabulimia?
Diabulimia is an
eating disorder
in which someone with
Type 1 diabetes
withholds
insulin
to lose weight. It can be life-threatening.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
People with diabulimia may have other
disordered eating
behaviors, like purging. Or they may only limit insulin dosages and otherwise have healthy eating patterns.
The name “diabulimia” is misleading. Not all people who have it
binge eat
or purge — the defining features of
bulimia nervosa
. Despite this, people widely use the term “diabulimia” to describe limiting insulin to lose weight. Diabulimia is also known as an “eating disorder in diabetes mellitus Type 1 (ED-DMT1).”
By changing your weight with a lack of insulin, you may feel like you finally have control of your body. But diabulimia can lead to severe health problems and even death. It’s essential to get help if you or someone you know has warning signs.
Why does a lack of insulin lead to weight loss?
Insulin is an essential
hormone
your body needs to use the food you eat for energy. It does this by taking glucose (sugar) out of your bloodstream and moving it into your body’s cells.
If you have Type 1 diabetes and don’t have enough insulin, your body starts breaking down
body fat
and
muscle
for energy. This is because it can’t access glucose.
No matter how much you eat, your body is essentially starving because it can’t use the food you eat for energy. This leads to a decrease in body weight.
Advertisement
But this type of weight loss is very dangerous. It can lead to a toxic buildup of
ketones
in your blood (ketoacidosis). If the lack of insulin is persistent, it can also lead to severe
dehydration
. This causes weight loss in the form of water loss, which is also dangerous.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of diabulimia
Physical signs and symptoms of diabulimia may include:
An
A1c
of 9.0 or higher
Unexplained weight loss
Dizziness
and
fainting
Electrolyte imbalance
(sodium and potassium)
Fatigue
Nausea
and
vomiting
Persistent thirst and
frequent urination
Irregular periods
Vision changes
Emotional and behavioral signs of diabulimia include:
Avoiding diabetes-related appointments
Fear of
low blood sugar
episodes due to needing to eat food to treat them
Fear that insulin causes weight gain
Feeling drained by diabetes management (diabetes distress and burnout)
Infrequently filled insulin prescriptions
Irritability and
mood swings
Secrecy about diabetes management
Multiple
diabetes-related ketoacidosis (DKA)
episodes or near-DKA episodes
Not giving insulin (bolusing) for meals and/or under-bolusing for meals
If you or someone you know has these signs of diabulimia, it’s important to seek medical help. One
study
estimates that diabulimia affects roughly 1 in 11 adults with Type 1 diabetes. It’s more common than most people realize.
Diabulimia causes
There’s no one cause of diabulimia. Diabulimia and all eating disorders are complex conditions. There are lots of reasons diabulimia may develop. And it may be a combination of physical, social and mental health problems.
The mental work of managing diabetes can play a part in triggering diabulimia and other eating disorders, like:
Constant and intense focus on food, especially counting
carbohydrates
Carefully reading
nutrition labels
Tracking several numbers, like blood glucose levels, A1c results and weight
Several other factors could contribute to developing diabulimia, including:
A desire to lose weight
Body image
issues
Diabetes distress
Cultures that idealize a particular body type — usually “thin” bodies
Feeling unsupported
Mental health conditions, especially
clinical depression
and
anxiety
Needing to eat food to treat low blood sugar
Peer pressure
Previous history of eating disorders
Trauma
Wanting a sense of control
Weight gain after initial diabetes diagnosis and treatment
If you or a loved one has signs of diabulimia, it’s important to seek help.
Complications of diabulimia
Diabulimia can have severe short-term and long-term health consequences.
Short-term complications of diabulimia
Several of the short-term complications of diabulimia are due to persistently
high blood sugar
. Short-term complications include:
Advertisement
Diabetes-related ketoacidosis (DKA)
Severe dehydration
Slow wound healing
Staph
and other
bacterial infections
Yeast infections
and
urinary tract infections (UTIs)
Loss of muscle mass (
muscle atrophy
)
Long-term complications of diabulimia
Long-term complications of diabulimia are the same as those of diabetes. But people who have diabulimia may experience these complications sooner.
Long-term complications include:
Cardiovascular disease
Nerve damage to your eyes (
retinopathy
)
Nerve damage to your feet and hands (
neuropathy
)
Stomach paralysis (
gastroparesis
)
Kidney disease
Liver disease
These complications can lead to frequent hospitalizations and death.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Eating disorders, in general, are difficult to diagnose. They’re usually secretive conditions. Many people with an eating disorder don’t seek treatment on their own. This may be especially true for people who have diabulimia. People with diabetes often fear criticism from healthcare providers or loved ones for mismanaging it.
Because of this, many people with diabulimia are undiagnosed.
You may suspect your loved one has diabulimia if they have an A1c of 9.0 or higher. Another common sign is multiple DKA episodes without any other explainable cause.
It can be difficult to tell the exact cause of persistent high blood sugars. So, in most cases, a person needs to admit that they’re withholding insulin for others to know they have diabulimia.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is diabulimia treated?
The goals of diabulimia treatment include:
Using insulin appropriately
Healthily managing blood glucose levels and weight
Avoiding short-term and long-term diabetes complications
Treating psychological issues that may have contributed to diabulimia
Treatment for diabulimia most often involves a combination of the following strategies:
Medical evaluation and/or hospitalization
Psychotherapy
(talk therapy)
Nutrition and/or diabetes education
Medications to help manage depression and anxiety
Diabulimia has physical and psychological components. So, its treatment involves care from multiple types of healthcare providers, including:
Certified diabetes care and education specialists (CDCES)
Endocrinologists
Psychologists
Registered dietitians
Medical evaluation and/or hospitalization
First, it’s important to make sure a person with diabulimia is medically stable. If they have DKA, they’ll need treatment in a hospital.
In severe cases of diabulimia, treatment will require hospitalization. This way, providers can ensure they’re not restricting insulin. If the person has other eating disorder behaviors, providers can also monitor these.
Providers will likely recommend tests to check for complications.
Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy (talk therapy) focuses on changing your problematic thinking and behavior patterns.
Advertisement
People with diabetes are two to three times more likely to have depression than others. In addition, people with diabetes are 20% more likely than others to have anxiety.
Psychotherapy can help treat depression and/or anxiety. Exploring your feelings about diabetes through therapy can also help with diabetes burnout.
Nutrition and/or diabetes management education
Having a thorough understanding of diabetes can help you feel more confident managing it. With the help of a CDCES, you can learn about the biology of diabetes and management strategies.
Nutrition education may help if you have problematic thinking about certain food groups (for example, “carbohydrates are bad”). And it can help with other disordered eating behaviors.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adult Type 1 Diabetes Management
Pediatric Type 1 Diabetes Management
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with diabulimia?
The prognosis (outlook) for someone with diabulimia varies depending on certain factors, like:
How long the person has had diabulimia
How much and how often they’re restricting insulin
If they have other disordered eating behaviors
The type of treatment and if they stick to it
Diabulimia gets worse the longer it’s left untreated. The sooner you get help, the better the outcome. But people with diabulimia often won’t disclose that they’re withholding insulin. They might resist treatment or refuse to follow the treatment plan.
Diabulimia is a serious and potentially life-threatening eating disorder if it’s untreated. People with diabetes tend to have a somewhat shorter lifespan than others. But people with diabulimia are at risk of dying much earlier than people with diabetes alone.
The good news is that diabulimia can be treated. Support of loved ones can help ensure a person with diabulimia sticks to their treatment.
How can I take care of myself?
It can be uncomfortable and scary, but it’s important to tell someone if you have diabulimia.
If you already have a diabulimia diagnosis, stay committed to your treatment plan:
Take your prescribed insulin doses regularly.
If you take other prescribed medication, be sure to take it regularly.
If you’re doing talk therapy, see your therapist regularly.
Reach out to family and friends for support.
Consider joining a support group for people who have diabetes and/or diabulimia.
Avoid content (like on
social media
) that may trigger diabulimia behaviors.
See your healthcare provider regularly.
Be kind to yourself.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Type 1 diabetes is a complex condition that can be difficult and daunting to manage. Know that you’re not alone — everybody with diabetes has their ups and downs. But diabulimia is a serious condition that can have devastating health consequences. The first step to breaking the cycle and healthier living is asking for help. Your healthcare providers and loved ones are there to support you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Type 1 diabetes can affect your life in many ways. At Cleveland Clinic, we can help develop a treatment plan that matches you and your goals.
Adult Type 1 Diabetes Management
Pediatric Type 1 Diabetes Management
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes