Vitamin B12 Deficiency: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vitamin B12 Deficiency
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vitamin B12 Deficiency
Vitamin B12 deficiency is a treatable condition that happens if you aren’t consuming enough vitamin B12 in your diet or if your body isn’t absorbing it properly. Vitamin B12 deficiency can cause physical, neurological and psychological symptoms. It can be treated with vitamin B12 medications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Vitamin B12 Deficiency?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Vitamin B12 Deficiency?
Vitamin B12 deficiency, sometimes called cobalamin deficiency, happens when your body is either not getting enough or not absorbing enough vitamin B12 from the foods you eat. Vitamin B12 is an important nutrient that helps your body make
red blood cells
and
DNA
, the genetic material in all of your cells. It’s essential to how your body functions. Without treatment, vitamin B12 deficiency can cause physical, neurological and psychological problems.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is vitamin B12?
Vitamin B12 is an important nutrient that helps your body keep your nerve cells and red blood cells healthy. It also helps your body make DNA.
Your body doesn’t make vitamin B12 on its own. You have to consume food and drinks that have vitamin B12 to get it. Vitamin B12 is found mostly in animal products, like fish, meat, dairy and eggs. It’s also in fortified foods (foods with vitamins and minerals added to them), like cereals, breads, plant-based milks and nutritional yeast.
Adults need around 2.4 micrograms (mcg) of vitamin B12 a day. And
women
who are
pregnant
or
breastfeeding
need more. The amount of B12 babies and children need varies based on age.
How does my body absorb vitamin B12?
Two things need to happen for your body to absorb vitamin B12 from the food you eat:
Hydrochloric acid in your stomach removes vitamin B12 from the food it is in.
Vitamin B12 combines with something called intrinsic factor, a protein your
stomach
makes.
Your
digestive system
can then absorb B12.
What is vitamin B12 deficiency anemia?
Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia happens when your body doesn’t have enough healthy red blood cells. As B12 helps make red blood cells, a lack of vitamin B12 can cause
anemia
. But you can also have a vitamin B12 deficiency without having anemia.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Vitamin B12 deficiency can lead to physical, psychological and neurological symptoms.
Symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency
The symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency can develop slowly and can get worse over time. You may have no symptoms despite having a low level of vitamin B12 in your body. Vitamin B12 deficiency can cause physical, neurological and psychological symptoms.
Physical symptoms can include:
Feeling very
tired
or weak
Experiencing
nausea
,
vomiting
or diarrhea
Not feeling as hungry
as usual
Losing weight
Having a sore
mouth
or tongue ulcers
Having pale skin
Neurological symptoms can include:
Numbness
or tingling in your hands and feet
Vision
problems
Having a hard time remembering things or
getting confused
easily
Having a difficult time walking or speaking like you usually do
Psychological symptoms can include:
Feeling
depressed
Feeling irritable
Experiencing a change in the way you feel or behave
Vitamin B12 deficiency causes
Vitamin B12 deficiency happens if you aren’t eating enough vitamin B12 or your body isn’t absorbing the vitamin B12 you consume. Situations or conditions that can cause vitamin B12 deficiency include:
Lack of vitamin B12 in your diet
: People who don’t eat enough foods that have vitamin B12 or don’t eat foods fortified with B12 can develop a deficiency.
Gastritis
: Gastritis is inflammation of the stomach lining, and it’s a common cause of vitamin B12 deficiency. It can cause vitamin B12 deficiency due to a lack of hydrochloric acid in your stomach, which you need for B12 absorption.
Pernicious anemia
: People who have pernicious anemia don’t make intrinsic factor. You need intrinsic factor so your body can absorb B12 vitamin. People with pernicious anemia have a B12 vitamin deficiency.
Digestive diseases
: Diseases that affect your digestive system, like
Crohn’s disease
and
celiac disease
, can prevent your body from fully absorbing vitamin B12.
Surgery
: People who have had gastrointestinal surgery — like a
gastric bypass
— can have difficulty absorbing vitamin B12.
Alcohol use disorder
: This condition can damage your digestive system and cause vitamin B12 deficiency.
MTFHR deficiency
: A gene mutation (change) that makes it harder to metabolize B12 correctly. You need higher doses of vitamin B12 to function well and, sometimes, a special methylated B12 supplement.
Transcobalamin II deficiency
: This is a rare
genetic disorder
that makes it hard for vitamin B12 to circulate in your body.
Risk factors
You are more likely to develop vitamin B12 deficiency if you have one or more of the following risk factors:
Being older than 75 years
: People over 75 are more at risk for developing vitamin B12 deficiency because their bodies are often unable to fully absorb vitamin B12.
Having a digestive system disorder
: Digestive disorders can make it more difficult for your body to absorb vitamin B12.
Following a vegan or vegetarian diet
: Vitamin B12 is only naturally found in animal products, like meat and dairy. Because of this, people who eat a
vegan
or vegetarian diet are more likely to have a vitamin B12 deficiency if they aren’t taking a B12 supplement.
Taking certain medications
: Certain medications can cause low levels of vitamin B12 in your body, including
metformin
,
proton pump inhibitors
,
H2 blockers
and
oral birth control pills
.
Having
Sjögren’s syndrome
: People with Sjögren’s syndrome are more likely to have vitamin B12 deficiency.
Drinking excessive amounts of alcohol
: Chronic alcohol use can damage your digestive system and cause vitamin B12 deficiency.
Complications of B12 deficiency
Left untreated, vitamin B12 deficiency can cause lasting side effects that affect your
nervous system
and
brain
. More severe side effects include:
Advertisement
Peripheral neuropathy
Degeneration of your
spinal cord
Paralysis
Bowel incontinence
and/or
urinary incontinence
Erectile dysfunction
Paranoia
and delusions
Memory loss
Diagnosis and Tests
How is vitamin B12 deficiency diagnosed?
It can be difficult to diagnose vitamin B12 deficiency because you may not have symptoms, or symptoms can be like other nutritional deficiencies. Healthcare providers will usually do
blood tests
to check for B12 deficiency in people who have a high risk of developing it.
Specific tests to help diagnose vitamin B12 deficiency are:
Complete blood count (CBC)
Vitamin B12 test
Methylmalonic acid (MMA) test
Homocysteine
test
Management and Treatment
How is vitamin B12 deficiency treated?
Getting more vitamin B12 treats the deficiency. Providers may prescribe cyanocobalamin, a human-made form of B12. Options for vitamin B12 treatment include:
Vitamin B12
oral medication
Vitamin B12
injections
Vitamin B12
nasal spray
or nasal gel
Eating more foods that are rich in B12 (like meat, fish, eggs and dairy)
Depending on the cause of the deficiency, you may only need treatment until your vitamin B12 levels are back to normal, or you may need B12 therapy for the rest of your life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
What you can expect depends on how early the vitamin B12 deficiency is caught and how low your levels are. If your deficit is mild, you may respond quickly to medication and eating more foods containing B12.
Advertisement
If you have chronic low B12 levels or have underlying health conditions that cause the deficiency, you may need to take B12 for the rest of your life (or for as long as you have the underlying condition).
Work with your healthcare provider to find the treatment that works best for you based on your situation.
Prevention
How can I prevent B12 deficiency?
Most people can prevent vitamin B12 deficiency by eating foods that have vitamin B12.
Options for consuming B12 include:
Animal food products
: Fish, milk, dairy products, eggs, poultry and red meat all contain vitamin B12.
Fortified foods
: Fortified foods are foods that have vitamins and nutrients added to them that they don’t naturally have. Fortified foods include certain breakfast cereals, nutritional yeast, plant milk and certain bread. You can check the food label to see if a food has been fortified with vitamin B12
.
Vitamin B12 dietary supplements
: Many multivitamins have vitamin B12. There are also supplements that only contain vitamin B12. Ask your healthcare provider or
pharmacist
to help you choose which supplement is best for you.
Other things you can do to help prevent vitamin B12 deficiency include:
Avoid alcohol
: Frequent alcohol consumption can damage your digestive system and make it difficult for your body to absorb vitamin B12.
Do your best to manage a digestive disease
: If you have a digestive disease, be sure to follow your healthcare provider’s instructions to stay healthy.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Vitamin B12 is an important vitamin that your body needs to be healthy. But it’s one of those things that you probably don’t think about needing until you have symptoms of not having enough of it. Most of us can prevent vitamin B12 deficiency by consuming enough of it in the foods we eat. If you have risk factors for developing vitamin B12 deficiency or are experiencing symptoms, be sure to contact a healthcare provider to get a blood test to check your levels.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hormonal conditions can be tricky to find and complicated to treat. The experts in endocrinology at Cleveland Clinic are here to provide the best care.
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/01/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes