Neurotoxicity: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Neurotoxicity
Advertisement
Advertisement
Neurotoxicity
“Neurotoxicity” is an umbrella term for neurological damage that happens due to exposure to natural or manufactured toxins. It can result in a wide spectrum of neurological issues ranging from barely noticeable to life-threatening.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is neurotoxicity?
Neurotoxicity happens when exposure to natural or manufactured toxic substances (neurotoxicants) changes the function of any part of your
nervous system
. This could include your
brain
,
spinal cord
and/or
nerves
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
These changes can range from mild to severe. They may be treatable or long-lasting. In severe cases, neurotoxicity can lead to
death
.
Neurotoxicity may result from exposure to excess amounts of normally nontoxic substances, like certain medications. Or it can result from substances that are neurotoxic at all doses, like
lead
.
Neurotoxicity can happen during
fetal development
,
child development
or in adulthood. The severity is typically greater when neurotoxicant exposure happens during fetal development and early childhood. In addition, certain conditions increase your vulnerability to neurotoxicity, like hyperbilirubinemia (
jaundice
) in newborns and
Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease (CMT)
.
What are neurotoxicants?
There are hundreds of neurotoxicants. They can come in gas, liquid and/or solid form. For some neurotoxicants, trace amounts of them or a single exposure can cause symptoms. For others, only large amounts and/or repeated exposure cause noticeable symptoms.
Some examples of neurotoxicants include:
Heavy metals, like lead and
mercury
Other naturally occurring substances, like
carbon monoxide
,
arsenic
and trichothecene mycotoxins from certain molds
Pesticides, like organophosphates and chlorpyrifos
Industrial and/or cleaning solvents, like tetrachloroethylene
Manufacturing materials, like vinyl chloride, toluene, formaldehyde and polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs)
Substances
, like
alcohol
,
amphetamines
,
opioids
,
inhalants
and
cocaine
Advertisement
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs)
, like bisphenol A (BPA), phthalates and polychlorinated biphenyl compounds (PCBs), can also indirectly cause neurotoxicity.
Medications and neurotoxicity
Medications, like
antibiotics
and
antipsychotics
, for example, can also lead to neurotoxicity for a variety of reasons. But in many cases, their benefit far outweighs the risk of neurotoxic effects.
Cancer
-related therapies often have neurotoxic effects, like these
chemotherapy
medications:
Platinum-based agents (
oxaliplatin
,
cisplatin
,
carboplatin
)
Taxanes (
paclitaxel
,
docetaxel
)
Vinca alkaloids (
vincristine
,
vinblastine
)
Proteasome inhibitors
Thalidomide analogs
Radiation therapy
may also lead to neurotoxicity by damaging your central nervous system.
How common is neurotoxicity?
There are so many neurotoxicants, and the symptoms of neurotoxicity vary considerably. So, it’s difficult for researchers to estimate how common neurotoxicity is. But researchers do consider neurotoxicant exposure to be widespread.
To highlight just two examples of toxins that cause neurotoxicity:
One study estimated that 385 million cases of unintentional, acute (sudden and severe) pesticide poisoning happen every year worldwide, resulting in about 11,000 deaths.
Each year, an estimated 1 million people die from lead poisoning. About 1 in 3 children — up to 800 million globally — have elevated blood lead levels.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of neurotoxicity?
The symptoms of neurotoxicity vary widely depending on the type of neurotoxicant exposure. Symptoms can range from mild to severe. They may appear immediately after exposure or develop over time — over weeks, months or even years.
Examples of physical symptoms include:
Coordination and
balance problems
Diarrhea
Fatigue
Headache
Loss of appetite
Pain disorders, like
neuropathic pain
Muscle
issues, like weakness,
spasms
and
twitching
Nausea
and/or
vomiting
Numbness
Sleep
changes, like
insomnia
Slurred speech (
dysarthria
)
Vision issues or loss of vision
Examples of cognitive (mental) symptoms include:
Behavioral changes or issues
Cognitive decline, like
mild cognitive impairment
Dizziness or disorientation
Executive dysfunction
, like difficulty regulating your emotions and issues with attention and focus
Increased
aggression
Memory loss
Mood changes
If you notice changes in or issues with your or your child’s thinking, behavior, mood or physical health, it’s always a good idea to see a healthcare provider. While neurotoxicants may be the culprit, there are several other possible causes.
Emergency symptoms of neurotoxicity
There are many possible symptoms of acute (sudden and severe) neurotoxicity. They typically come on suddenly.
If you have the following symptoms, you should seek emergency medical care. Call 911 or go to the nearest hospital.
Advertisement
Acute neurotoxicity symptoms can include:
Changes in
heart rate
Confusion
or
delirium
Loss of consciousness
Psychosis
, including experiencing
hallucinations
Seizures
Significant changes in body temperature (
hyperthermia
or
hypothermia
)
Sudden and extreme muscle weakness
Sudden vision issues or vision loss
Trouble breathing
What causes neurotoxicity?
Neurotoxicity happens when exposure to neurotoxicants damages, changes or kills cells in your
peripheral
or
central nervous system
. This often affects neurons (nerve cells). Neurons are essential for transmitting and processing signals in your brain, spinal cord and peripheral nerves. Other parts of your central or peripheral nervous system can also be damaged, like
myelin
.
Because your nervous system is a very intricate body system, neurotoxicity damage can present in many ways. A few examples include:
Changes in
neurotransmitter
(like
dopamine
) levels and signaling
Inflammation
in your brain or spinal cord (neuroinflammation)
Structural brain changes, like differences in
grey matter
and white matter volume
Damage to the myelin sheath
of peripheral nerves
Neurotoxicant exposure
Neurotoxicants may enter your body by or through:
Breathing them in
Consuming (eating or drinking) them
Skin absorption
Advertisement
Neurotoxicants can also affect a fetus. If neurotoxicants enter your body during pregnancy, they can transfer from your blood to the fetus through the
umbilical cord
. Some medications are
unsafe in pregnancy
due to potential neurotoxic effects on the fetus.
Once neurotoxicants are in your bloodstream, they may cross your
blood-brain barrier (BBB)
and directly affect aspects of your central nervous system. Or they may indirectly affect your brain by altering other body systems, like in the case of endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs).
Exposure to neurotoxicants can happen in many places because these toxins are found in many sources. You may encounter them from:
Environmental sources like traffic, farming and industrial activities
Nearby sources in places like parks, schools or during local chemical spills
Sources in your home, such as certain household products or foods
What are the complications of neurotoxicity?
Some cases of neurotoxicity can result in chronic (long-term) neurological issues, and severe cases can lead to death.
Exposure to certain neurotoxicants during fetal development and early childhood has been associated with several conditions. Examples include:
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Learning disabilities
Depression
Anxiety
Schizophrenia
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
Advertisement
It’s important to note that there’s a link between neurotoxicant exposure and these conditions. Researchers don’t know yet if neurotoxicity directly causes them. They’re actively studying all the possible effects and complications of neurotoxicants.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is neurotoxicity diagnosed?
Because there are hundreds of neurotoxicants and the symptoms of neurotoxicity are wide-ranging, diagnosis may involve many tests and exams. Your healthcare provider will start by asking about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll then do
physical
and
neurological exams
.
They may recommend any of the following tests or exams:
Behavioral assessment
Blood tests
Cognitive tests
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Eye exam
Imaging tests, like a
brain MRI
Nerve conduction study
and
electromyography (EMG)
Neuropsychological testing and assessment
Spinal tap
for cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) analysis
In some cases, healthcare providers may be unable to find the exact cause of neurotoxicity symptoms.
Management and Treatment
How is neurotoxicity treated?
Treatments vary widely based on your symptoms and which neurotoxicant is the cause. In general, treatment involves eliminating or reducing exposure to the neurotoxicant, followed by treating or managing symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with neurotoxicity?
The prognosis (outlook) for someone with neurotoxicity varies greatly depending on several factors, including:
The type of neurotoxicant(s)
The amount of exposure
The length of exposure
The extent of nervous system damage
Your age and overall health
Exposure to certain neurotoxins can be fatal. In some cases, you may survive the exposure, but you may not recover all of your neurological functions. In other cases, you may completely recover after receiving treatment.
Prevention
Can I prevent neurotoxicity?
It’s practically impossible to prevent all exposure to neurotoxicants due to how prevalent they are in everyday life. But there are some steps you can take to try to reduce your risk of exposure, like:
Install a carbon monoxide detector in your home and change the batteries yearly.
Never
mix cleaning products or household chemicals. The results can be deadly.
Have your house tested for lead and other harmful toxins.
Keep your windows closed on days with bad air quality.
Avoid using substances.
If you’re pregnant, talk to your healthcare provider about neurotoxicant exposure and how it might affect fetal development.
It’s important to remember that preventing neurotoxicant exposure to you and your family isn’t just your responsibility — it’s the collective responsibility of federal and local governments, corporations and citizens. Groups like the NIEHS (National Institute of Environmental Health Services) are actively researching how the environment and neurotoxicants can affect human health.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Neurotoxicity involves a broad range of symptoms and causes. While it’s nearly impossible to avoid exposure to all neurotoxicants, there are steps you can take to try to protect yourself and your family. If you or your child experience neurological symptoms or you have questions about neurotoxicant exposure, see a healthcare provider. They’re available to help you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/09/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment