Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma: Symptoms, Types & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a group of blood cancers that develop in your lymphatic system. They include B-cell lymphomas and T-cell lymphomas. Tumors usually start in your lymph nodes, but they can spread to organs in your lymph system and throughout your body. Some forms of NHL are curable, while others require ongoing treatment or management.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Is Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma?
Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma involve key differences when it comes to how common they are, who they're most likely to affect and how treatable they tend to be.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a group of
blood cancers
that develop in your
lymphatic system
. It’s one of two types of
lymphoma
— cancers that start in white blood cells called lymphocytes.
Lymphocytes
are important
immune system
cells that help fight off infections.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
With non-Hodgkin lymphoma, genes inside B lymphocytes (
B cells
) or T lymphocytes (
T cells
) mutate, or change, at some point in your lifetime. The abnormal lymphoma cells usually form in your
lymph nodes
and form tumors. But they can also be in other lymph system organs, like your
thymus
or
spleen
, or lymph tissue in other places. Without treatment, non-Hodgkin lymphoma can spread.
People with non-Hodgkin lymphoma are living longer than ever, thanks to new treatments. In some cases, treatments
cure
the condition. Other times, the goal of treatment is to put the disease into
remission
(no signs or symptoms of cancer) for as long as possible.
Types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
There are more than 70 subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Healthcare providers classify them based on the type of lymphocyte affected:
B-cell lymphoma
. These cancers arise from B cells. B cells make
antibodies
that fight infection-causing germs. B-cell lymphomas account for about 85% of all NHL diagnoses.
T-cell lymphoma
. These cancers arise from T cells. T cells target germs and other foreign cells and help B cells make antibodies.
Providers classify B-cell and T-cell lymphomas as either aggressive or indolent. Aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphomas spread faster than indolent non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Aggressive NHL often requires more intensive treatment.
Advertisement
How common are non-Hodgkin lymphomas?
They’re relatively common. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is the 8th most common cancer diagnosis, with
80,620 new cases
expected in 2024 in the U.S. It’s the
11th most common cancer
worldwide.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is much more common than the other type of lymphoma —
Hodgkin lymphoma
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma?
The most common symptom is painless swelling in your neck, armpits or groin. This is a sign of
swollen lymph nodes
in those areas. Other signs and symptoms depend on where the lymphoma cells are. Additional NHL symptoms include:
Persistent
fatigue
Chest pain
Cough
Trouble breathing (
dyspnea
)
Belly (abdominal) pain
or swelling
Feeling full even when you haven’t eaten much
Unexplained
fever
(especially a fever that stays above 103 degrees Fahrenheit or 39.5 degrees Celsius for two or more hours after home treatment or that lasts longer than two days)
Drenching
night sweats
(so intense that it soaks your sheets)
Unexplained weight loss
(losing 10% of your total body weight over six months)
It’s important to remember that many conditions share these symptoms. Having one or more doesn’t necessarily mean you have non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Still, it’s a good idea to contact a healthcare provider anytime you notice changes in your body that last for several weeks.
B symptoms
Healthcare providers consider whether you have B symptoms when they diagnose lymphomas. B symptoms include fever, night sweats and unexplained weight loss. These help your provider classify the type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma you have and determine the best treatments.
What causes non-Hodgkin lymphomas?
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas form when your body produces too many lymphocytes. These include B cells, T cells or (rarely)
natural killer (NK) cells
. Acquired
genetic mutations
that affect lymphocyte growth play a part in the process. “Acquired” means you develop them during your lifetime instead of being born with them.
When lymphocytes mutate, they multiply and eventually become
tumors
. Usually, the tumors start in your lymph nodes. As your lymphatic system touches nearly every part of your body, non-Hodgkin lymphoma often
spreads
to other lymph organs.
Risk factors
​​There are several risk factors linked to non-Hodgkin lymphoma. A risk factor is a trait, activity or condition that increases your risk of developing a disease. For example, people more likely to get diagnosed with NHL are:
Over 60 (NHL risk increases with age)
Male
White
Other factors that may increase your risk of NHL include:
Immune system deficiencies
. Having
HIV
weakens your immune system and may increase your risk of HNL. Taking medications that
suppress your immune system
after an
organ transplant
is also a risk factor.
Autoimmune diseases
. People with
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
,
rheumatoid arthritis
,
psoriasis
or other rheumatologic conditions may have an increased risk of developing NHL.
Infections
.
Bacterial
and
viral infections
that have been linked to NHL include
H. pylori
infection
, human T-lymphotropic virus Type I,
Hepatitis C
and
Epstein-Barr virus
.
Exposure to pesticides
. Some research shows that people exposed to high levels of weed killers and insecticides may have a slightly increased risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Family history
. Your risk may be greater if you have a parent, sibling or child with lymphoma or other blood cancer.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is non-Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosed?
A non-Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosis involves many steps. First, you’ll likely need tests to rule out more common conditions that may be causing your symptoms. For example, a swollen lymph node is more likely to mean an infection — not lymphoma. Once your healthcare provider determines you have non-Hodgkin lymphoma, they’ll do tests to determine the type and how advanced it is.
Tests or procedures you may need to diagnose non-Hodgkin lymphoma include:
Physical exam
. Your provider will ask about your symptoms and check for signs of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, like swollen lymph nodes.
Blood tests
. Blood tests, like a
complete blood count (CBC)
, give your provider a view of your overall health. They may also test your blood for viruses linked to non-Hodgkin lymphoma or for substances that may be signs of tissue damage related to the disease.
Imaging tests
. Imaging tests can show cancer cells inside your body. Depending on where the lymphoma cells are, you may need a
CT scan
,
MRI
,
ultrasound
or
PET scan
.
Biopsy
. A biopsy is the only way to know for sure if abnormal cells are NHL. Your provider removes all or part of a lymph node or involved tissue. A
pathologist
will examine the tissue under a microscope to check for lymphoma cells.
Immunophenotyping
. This test helps diagnose specific NHL types. It identifies cancer cells based on the types of
antigens
(markers on cells’ surface).
Advertisement
Stages of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Test results help providers with cancer staging. Providers
stage cancer
to develop treatment plans and estimate
prognosis
, or expected outcome. The stages of non-Hodgkin lymphoma are:
Stage I
.
One lymph node area or lymphoid organ contains cancer cells. Or there’s lymphoma in one area of a single organ outside of your lymph system.
Stage II
. There’s lymphoma in two or more groups of lymph nodes on the same side of (or near) your
diaphragm
.
Stage III
.
There are cancer cells in lymph node areas both above and below your diaphragm or in the lymph nodes above your diaphragm and in your spleen.
Stage IV
.
At least one organ outside your lymph system, like your
liver
or
lung
, contains widespread lymphoma.
Management and Treatment
How is non-Hodgkin lymphoma treated?
There are several types of treatment for non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The treatment you’ll need depends on factors like the type of NHL, the cancer stage and your overall health. Treatments include:
Active surveillance
. If you have an indolent (slow-growing) non-Hodgkin lymphoma and aren’t experiencing symptoms, your provider may hold off on treatment. This is called active surveillance, or watchful waiting. Providers monitor your health, so they’re ready to start treatment as soon as you have symptoms.
Chemotherapy
. Chemotherapy uses
drugs
to attack cancer cells throughout your body. It’s the most common NHL treatment. You may get chemo alone or alongside other treatments.
Targeted therapy
. These treatments home in on weaknesses in cancer cells to destroy them.
Monoclonal antibody
therapy is a common targeted therapy treatment for NHL.
Immunotherapy
. This treatment boosts your body’s immune system, so it’s better at destroying cancer cells.
CAR-T cell therapy
is a common immunotherapy treatment for NHL. Bispecific antibodies are a new class of drug treatments that direct your own T cells to eliminate the cancerous lymphoma cells.
Radiation therapy
. This treatment uses energy beams from a machine to destroy cancer cells. It may be the only treatment needed for early-stage NHL. Providers also use it to destroy lymphoma cells that remain after chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy with
stem cell transplantation
. For this treatment, providers give high doses of chemotherapy to treat your cancer. Then, they replace
stem cells
(immature blood cells) damaged during chemotherapy with healthy ones from your own body or a donor. You may need a transplant if other NHL treatments haven’t worked.
Advertisement
Side effects of treatment
Common cancer treatments for non-Hodgkin lymphoma — including
chemotherapy
,
radiation therapy
and
immunotherapy
— can cause side effects. Most are short term and go away once treatment ends, while other side effects may be long term.
Ask your healthcare provider about potential side effects before starting treatment. They’ll help you weigh the benefits of treatment against the risks of possible side effects.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for non-Hodgkin lymphoma?
In some cases, treatment can cure non-Hodgkin lymphoma. This means that treatment has eliminated all cancer cells for good. This is more common after treatment for aggressive B-cell lymphomas. Most aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphomas that come back usually do so within the first two years after treatment, or they never come back. Still, you’ll need regular check-ups so your healthcare provider can check for relapse.
With other non-Hodgkin lymphomas, especially indolent ones, you may have this condition in the long term. This means you may need continuous or occasional treatment for the rest of your life.
It’s important to remember, though, that even when non-Hodgkin lymphoma isn’t curable, current treatments are helping people live longer, fuller lives with this disease. Most people with indolent lymphoma die from other causes, even if the lymphoma can’t be cured.
What is the survival rate for non-Hodgkin lymphoma?
According to the U.S. National Cancer Institute,
74%
percent of people with non-Hodgkin lymphoma are alive five years after their diagnosis.
Generally, people diagnosed before the condition spreads live longer than people who are diagnosed after cancer spreads. The five-year
survival rate
for early-stage non-Hodgkin lymphomas (stages I and II) ranges from
79% to 87%
. The survival rate for advanced-stage disease (stages III and IV) ranges from
64% to 73%
.
Prevention
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
You can manage
living with non-Hodgkin lymphoma
in several ways. These activities won’t make your condition go away, but they may help you feel more confident about living with it:
Eat healthy meals
. Food is energy.
Eating well
is one way to maintain strength. Ask a
dietitian
for more information or ideas for meals and snacks.
Rest as much as you can
. Chemotherapy and other treatments may make you feel worn out. Rest helps your body recover and regain strength.
Manage
stress
. Living with a non-Hodgkin lymphoma isn’t easy. You may wonder how the condition and treatment will affect your daily life. Talk to your provider if you’re worried about your prognosis. They’ll answer your questions and recommend programs, like support groups, that may help.
Exercise
.
Regular exercise
is one of the best ways to keep your mind and body in shape. Talk to your provider about the types of activities and intensity levels that are good for you.
Seek additional resources
. If you’re living with non-Hodgkin lymphoma, you may want to explore
palliative care
. Palliative care provides symptom relief and support for people with cancer, no matter their stage or prognosis.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re receiving treatment for non-Hodgkin lymphoma, you should contact your provider if your symptoms return or get worse. If your treatment has ended, make sure to attend all regular follow-up visits.
When should I go to the emergency room?
Visit the emergency room if you have severe or significantly worsening symptoms that don’t get better despite measures to improve how you feel.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider include:
What kind of non-Hodgkin lymphoma do I have?
What stage is the disease?
What treatments do you recommend?
What are the side effects of those treatments?
Can you cure my non-Hodgkin lymphoma?
What are the chances the cancer will come back?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning you have non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) can feel unsettling for so many reasons. After all, there are many types of this disease with different outcomes. Some aggressive types may require more treatment and cause unpleasant side effects — but are ultimately curable. Others may not require treatment right away but will require long-term management. There just aren’t easy answers with this diagnosis.
Your healthcare provider can provide clarity about what your NHL diagnosis means for your health moving forward. In the meantime, know that people diagnosed with this disease are living longer lives. Ask your provider about your prognosis based on your condition.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
There are many types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Whether you have an aggressive type or one that’s slow growing, Cleveland Clinic is here with personalized treatment.
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials