Physical Changes After Childbirth
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Pregnancy: Physical Changes After Delivery
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pregnancy: Physical Changes After Delivery
You may experience certain changes after delivery, including lochia (discharge), breast engorgement, discomfort in the perineal area and constipation. Tips are provided for dealing with these and other changes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What physical changes can I expect after delivery?
Lochia (vaginal discharge)
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Lochia is the
vaginal discharge
you have after a
vaginal delivery
. It has a stale, musty odor like
menstrual
discharge. For the first three days after delivery, lochia is dark red in color. A few small blood clots, no larger than a plum, are normal. For the fourth through 10th day after delivery, the lochia will be more watery and pinkish to brownish in color. From about the seventh to 10th day through the 14th day after delivery, the lochia is creamy or yellowish in color.
You might notice increased lochia when you get up in the morning, when you’re physically active, or while
breastfeeding
. Those who have cesarean sections may have less lochia after 24 hours than those who had vaginal deliveries. The bleeding generally stops within four to six weeks after delivery. You should wear pads, not tampons, as nothing should go in your vagina for six weeks.
Incision drainage
If you had a
C-section
or
tubal ligation
, it’s normal to have a small amount of pink, watery drainage from the incision. Keep the incision clean and dry. Wash the incision with soap and warm water. You can bathe or shower as usual. If the drainage doesn’t stop, call your healthcare provider.
Breast discharge
When you’re breastfeeding, your breasts may leak fluid. If you’re unable to breastfeed, the leaking may occur initially and will stop within one to two weeks after delivery. Breast pads, worn inside your bra, may help keep you dry.
Advertisement
Breast engorgement
Breast engorgement is breast swelling characterized by a feeling of warmth, hardness, and heaviness in the breasts. Engorgement is caused by increased circulation to the breasts. It can happen as milk comes in or if you miss a feeding (if you’re breastfeeding).
If you’re bottle-feeding your baby, you can relieve the discomfort of engorgement by taking pain medication as directed by your healthcare provider. You can also apply ice packs. Wearing a supportive bra also helps.
When breastfeeding, you can prevent engorgement by frequently feeding your baby or pumping your breasts. To relieve the discomfort: Apply warm compresses or take a warm shower to help the milk let down (but then feed your baby or pump immediately after). Do not repeat this if you don’t get relief, as it may increase swelling and prevent the milk from flowing.
If you still have discomfort, you may try the following:
Apply ice packs
Express some milk before feeding your baby
Use an
anti-inflammatory
such as ibuprofen, as directed by your healthcare provider, to reduce swelling
Wear a supportive bra
Seek help from your healthcare provider, lactation consultant, attend a lactation support group or call the lactation hotline if this continues to be a problem for you. If there’s one area that is red and wedge-shaped and toward the nipple, it could be an infection. Call your healthcare provider if you suspect an infection.
Discomfort in the perineal area
If you had an episiotomy, the area of skin between the vagina and anus (called the perineum) might be very sore and sensitive. To relieve discomfort, try warm sitz baths. Sit in a tub filled with a few inches of water. (To prevent infection, do not add bubble bath or other products.) You can also buy a small basin that fits on the toilet. You may also use this treatment for discomfort associated with
hemorrhoids
.
Perineal care
Keeping the perineum clean will increase comfort and prevent the risk of infection. After each time you use the bathroom and/or change your pads, fill the peri bottle (given to you in the hospital) with warm water. Squirt the water over the area between your vagina and rectum in a front-to-back motion. Pat the area dry with toilet tissue. Don’t rub the area. Apply a clean pad often to maintain cleanliness. Continue to do the perineal care for one week after delivery.
Uterine contractions
Within a few hours after birth, the upper portion of your
uterus
(fundus) is at about the level of your navel. It remains there for about a day, then gradually descends each day. If you’re breastfeeding, this may occur more rapidly. Without complications, your uterus will return to its approximate non-pregnant size (the size of a pear) in about six weeks.
Advertisement
After-pains, or cramps, are caused by uterine contractions that stop the bleeding from the area where the placenta was attached. These pains are more common if you’ve had more than one pregnancy. The discomfort can be intense — especially if you’re breastfeeding — for about five minutes, but will gradually subside.
To relieve discomfort, you may try these methods:
Lie on your stomach with a pillow under your lower abdomen.
Take a walk.
Take pain medication as recommended by your healthcare provider.
Take a sitz bath.
Use a heating pad on your stomach.
Urination contractions
You may feel discomfort when urinating. Discomfort is common, but be sure to tell your healthcare provider if you
feel pain or if urinating
is difficult.
Incontinence
The stretching of your muscles during delivery can cause temporary loss of
urinary
and sometimes bowel control.
Urinary incontinence
may occur more frequently when you laugh, cough or strain. Practice your
Kegel exercises
to improve urinary incontinence. It’ll improve a few weeks after delivery. If incontinence continues to be a problem after your first postpartum checkup, talk to your healthcare provider.
Constipation
The first bowel movement after delivery may be delayed to the third or fourth day after delivery. Your healthcare provider may prescribe or recommend an over-the-counter stool softener to soften the stool and make bowel movements less uncomfortable. Increase fruits, vegetables and whole grains in your diet to keep your bowel movements regular. Also make sure you’re drinking at least 10 to 12 glasses of fluid per day. Narcotic pain relievers may worsen the situation, so minimize their use. Over-the-counter creams can help hemorrhoid discomfort, as can sitz baths. If constipation continues to be a problem, call your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Perspiration
Increased perspiration, especially at night, is common after delivery as your body adjusts to new hormone levels after delivery. Protect yourself from getting the chills by showering and changing your clothes and bed linens. Also, increase fluids to quench your thirst during this time.
Menstruation
If you’re breastfeeding, you may not get your period (menstruate) until after your baby weans from the breast. Please be aware that, although you may not get your period while breastfeeding, you can
still get pregnant
. If you’re bottle-feeding, you’ll usually menstruate six to 12 weeks after delivery. The first few periods after delivery may be
irregular
.
When should I call my healthcare provider after delivery?
Call your healthcare provider if you have:
A
fever
over 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius) or severe chills
Foul-smelling vaginal discharge
Bright red bleeding that continues beyond the third day
Passing of large blood clots (larger than a plum)
Pain, burning or trouble urinating
Severe cramping or
abdominal pain
that isn’t relieved by pain medication
Increased redness, swelling, bruising or pain on your perineum, or separation of your stitches
Increase in the amount of vaginal discharge or bleeding in which you need to use more than one sanitary pad per hour
Blurred vision
Severe headaches
or
fainting
Increased pain, redness, drainage or separation of abdominal incision (cesarean delivery)
Severe pain, swelling, or redness, of one extremity more than the other
Warm, red painful areas on your breast
Difficulty breathing
Any signs of
postpartum depression
such as being unable to cope with everyday situations, thoughts of harming yourself or your baby, or feeling anxious, panicked or scared most of the day
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/01/2018.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment