Childhood Leukemia: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Childhood Leukemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Childhood Leukemia
Leukemia is the most common form of childhood cancer. It happens when blood cells turn into cancer cells. It can cause symptoms like ongoing exhaustion, belly pain and frequent infections. Chemotherapy is the most common treatment, curing the cancer in most cases. Your child may also be able to access newer therapies in a clinical trial.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Childhood Leukemia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Childhood Leukemia?
Childhood
leukemia
is cancer in your child’s blood or bone marrow (where blood cells are made). It’s the most common type of
childhood cancer
. About 4,000 children in the U.S. are diagnosed each year.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The most common leukemias are “acute,” or fast-growing:
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
affects 3 in 4 children with leukemia.
Acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) is the second most common type.
Less often, children develop slow-growing (chronic) forms.
Learning your child has blood cancer can leave you searching for answers. The good news is that most of these cancers are curable. Still, your child’s outlook depends on their unique diagnosis.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of childhood leukemia
Early symptoms can be tough to spot because they’re common in other conditions, too. But if any of the signs or symptoms listed here seem to last a long time, schedule an appointment with your child’s pediatrician:
Being extremely tired, weak or pale
Belly pain or a swollen belly (especially on the left side, where their spleen is)
Bone pain (your child may limp or not want to walk)
Bruising or bleeding more frequently than usual
Fever, chills or heavy sweating
Red, purple or brown spots beneath your child’s skin (signs of bleeding)
Swollen lymph nodes in your child’s neck, armpit or groin
Unexplained weight loss
Childhood leukemia causes
Leukemia happens when there’s a change (
mutation
) in the genes within a cell. Usually, these mutations affect white blood cells. It prevents them from doing their regular job: fighting infections.
Advertisement
The abnormal cancer cells multiply out of control in bone marrow. Bone marrow is where your body makes most of its blood cells. The cancer cells crowd out healthy white blood cells, red blood cells and platelets. Eventually, the cancer cells spill out of the bone marrow and into your child’s blood and/or lymph nodes. From there, they can spread and cause more damage.
Researchers don’t know what causes mutations in the first place. But they’ve discovered specific gene changes that are common in childhood leukemia. These discoveries have helped doctors design life-saving treatments to fight this cancer.
Risk factors
Having a
genetic disorder
may increase your child’s risk of leukemia. Some disorders increase your child’s cancer risk in general. Others may make it harder for their immune system to fight cancer cells.
These include:
Ataxia-telangiectasia
Bloom syndrome
Down syndrome
Fanconi anemia
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Severe congenital
neutropenia
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
Wiskott-aldrich syndrome
Some extremely rare genetic disorders are also linked to increased risk.
Other factors include radiation exposure and having a sibling — especially a twin — who has leukemia.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Diagnosis begins with talking to your child’s pediatrician about their symptoms. Try to provide as much information as you can during this appointment. Let them know the changes you’ve noticed, including when symptoms started and how severe they are.
You may need to meet with additional healthcare providers along the way, including a pediatric oncologist.
Your child will likely need several tests, which may include:
A
physical exam
to check for swollen lymph nodes or an enlarged liver or spleen
Blood tests
, to check for abnormal blood cells
Imaging scans
, to check for signs of cancer inside your child’s body
Biopsies
, to check for cancer cells in their bone marrow or lymph nodes
Lumbar puncture
, to check for cancer cells in the fluid surrounding your child’s brain or spine
Genetic tests
, to check for common mutations found in childhood leukemia
Most of these tests are simple and noninvasive. For procedures that involve removing tissue, your child will be completely relaxed or asleep. Their care team will ensure the process is as easy as possible, for both you and your child.
Management and Treatment
How is childhood leukemia treated?
Children with leukemia usually receive standard cancer treatments along with new cancer therapies. The goal is to provide the best cancer treatment with the least amount of side effects. Your child’s care team will discuss all options with you so you’re confident in your child’s treatment plan.
Treatments for children with leukemia include:
Chemotherapy
: This is the most common treatment to kill cancer cells. Your child may get this treatment as an infusion (IV), a shot or a pill.
Radiation therapy
: Rarely, children get radiation alongside chemotherapy. Often, this treatment happens as part of a stem cell transplant.
High-dose chemotherapy with a
stem cell transplant
: With this treatment, your child receives chemotherapy to kill cancer cells. Then, they get new stem cells (an early form of blood cells) to replace the cancer cells.
Targeted therapy
: This treatment targets cancer cells with specific gene changes.
Immunotherapy
: This treatment strengthens your child’s immune system so it’s better at fighting leukemia.
Palliative care
: This treatment can help your child manage cancer treatment side effects. Unlike end-of-life care, it’s available no matter your child’s prognosis (likely treatment outcomes).
Clinical trials
: A clinical trial tests the safety and effectiveness of new treatments. Your child may be able to access new treatments, like immunotherapy, by participating. Your child’s provider will explain the process (and benefits) to you.
Advertisement
Recovery time
Most children receive treatment in cycles, with recovery periods between. The treatment break reduces side effects.
But it may take a few years to finish treatment entirely. This is because treatment involves several parts. At first, the goal of treatment may be to send cancer into remission (no cancer signs or symptoms). This may involve several cycles (or rounds) of chemotherapy. Even after remission, your child will likely need more treatment to kill cancer cells that may be hiding. This helps prevent cancer from coming back.
Ask your child’s care team what their treatment and recovery timeline will look like.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your child will receive ongoing care during and after treatment. In the meantime, make sure you know what side effects to expect. Ask when you should contact your child’s healthcare provider or seek emergency care.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has this condition?
Most childhood leukemias are curable. With treatment, it’s possible that your child can live cancer-free for the rest of their lives. But much depends on the type of leukemia and the type of gene mutations involved. For example, some types are more likely to grow back. Your healthcare provider can discuss this with you.
The survival rates for childhood leukemia are excellent. About
86 out of every 100 children
diagnosed are alive five years later. The five-year mark is important because most cancers that don’t come back within five years don’t come back at all.
Advertisement
Still, there can be long-lasting effects that you’ll need to discuss with your child’s provider. For example, survivors of childhood cancer may be at increased risk of developing a different kind of cancer in the future. Both the cancer itself and treatment can increase their risk of conditions later in life.
Your child’s cancer care providers will work with you to develop a
cancer survivorship
plan. It includes information about their diagnosis, treatment and future care they’ll need. Every provider your child sees in the future needs to know this information.
Is there anything I can do to help my child feel better?
As your child’s primary support, it’s important to realize that you don’t (and shouldn’t) have to go it alone. Your child’s care team is not only there to provide treatment, but they’re also there to support you.
They can provide tips about
how to talk to your child
about their diagnosis. And they can connect you with specialists like a dietitian and counselor, so your child receives both the mind and body support they need.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Perhaps the only thing harder than hearing, “You have cancer,” is hearing those words spoken about your child.
Treatments have come a long way when it comes to curing childhood leukemia. But a leukemia diagnosis can still mean a lot of challenging emotions, including uncertainty. This is why it’s essential to lean on your child’s care team in the months ahead. Share your questions and concerns. Take advantage of every resource they provide. And know that you’re not alone in this. Your child, your family and your child’s care team will face this challenge together.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A leukemia diagnosis can come as quite a shock. Cleveland Clinic’s blood cancer experts are here to guide you through it and help you move forward.
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials