Diamond-Blackfan Anemia: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Diamond-Blackfan Anemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Diamond-Blackfan Anemia
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare blood disorder that starts at birth. It keeps your bone marrow from making enough red blood cells, leading to anemia and sometimes other health issues. Though it’s lifelong, treatments can ease symptoms and improve quality of life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Diamond-Blackfan Anemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Diamond-Blackfan Anemia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
What Is Diamond-Blackfan Anemia?
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (sometimes called Blackfan, DB anemia or DBA) is a very rare
blood disorder
. It keeps your
bone marrow
from making enough
red blood cells
. You need red blood cells to carry oxygen throughout your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
DBA is a
genetic disorder
that happens when certain genes have
variations
(changes). Those genetic changes determine what kind of symptoms you have and whether those symptoms are mild or severe.
Almost everyone with DBA has
anemia
, and some also have other health issues that affect daily life. Over time, there’s also a higher risk of certain
cancers
, especially
leukemia
.
DBA affects around
1 in 500,000
babies. It’s a lifelong condition, but treatment can manage symptoms and improve your quality of life.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Diamond-Blackfan anemia?
Diamond-Blackfan anemia symptoms range from mild to severe and may include:
Fatigue
Headache
Loss of appetite
Rapid heartbeat (
tachycardia
)
Shortness of breath
Skin paleness (
pallor
)
Swelling
in your hands and feet
Weakness
Diamond-Blackfan anemia causes
Diamond-Blackfan anemia happens when there’s a change in your ribosomal protein genes. Your ribosomal protein genes make red blood cells. The changes cause a decrease in red blood cell production, leading to anemia.
Between
10% to 25%
of people with DBA inherit it from their biological parents. Most cases occur in people with no family history of the condition.
Complications of this condition
Possible complications of Diamond-Blackfan anemia include:
Birth defects
: Issues with the heart, kidneys, or limbs
Growth faltering
: Slower-than-expected growth
Iron overload
: From repeated blood transfusions
Neutropenia
: Low levels of neutrophils, a type of white blood cell
Pancytopenia
: Low levels of all blood cells
Thrombocytopenia
: Low platelet count
Advertisement
If you have DBA, you have a slightly increased risk of developing these conditions:
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)
Osteosarcoma
Other
tumors
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers may use several tests to diagnose this condition:
Complete blood count (CBC)
: This test measures hemoglobin, red and white blood cells, and platelets.
Reticulocyte count
: This checks immature red blood cells. A low count suggests bone marrow problems.
Bone marrow aspiration
and
biopsy
: This collects bone marrow samples to look for low red blood cell production.
Management and Treatment
How is Diamond-Blackfan anemia treated?
Treatments for DB anemia, from most to least common, include:
Corticosteroids
. These medications help your bone marrow make more red blood cells.
Blood transfusion
. This treatment uses donated red blood cells to boost your levels. Healthcare providers usually start blood transfusions immediately after diagnosis.
Stem cell transplant
from family members or an unrelated donor. This is the only known cure for Diamond-Blackfan anemia. But it can potentially cause several life-threatening complications. Healthcare providers consider this option on a case-by-case basis.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
Steroids typically help within two to four weeks. Blood transfusions usually bring fast relief.
Everyone’s different, so ask your provider what to expect in your case.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Diamond-Blackfan Anemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for Diamond-Blackfan anemia?
With treatment, the outlook is good, but it requires lifelong care and monitoring. Your risk of serious complications increases around age 25.
Diamond-Blackfan anemia life expectancy
How long someone lives with DBA depends on their symptoms and treatment. Research shows that about
75%
of people with DBA are alive at age 50. But because it’s rare, data is limited. Your provider can offer more personalized information.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have Diamond-Blackfan anemia, you’ll need to stay in close communication with your healthcare provider. See them for routine check-ups.
You should also tell your provider if your symptoms get worse. For instance, if you’re suddenly more tired all the time or have had several recent infections, let them know.
Call 911 or head to your nearest emergency room if you develop:
Chest pain
Severe
belly pain
Sudden headache or confusion (
stroke
signs)
Uncontrolled bleeding
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with a lifelong illness like Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is hard, especially when it affects your child. It can be even tougher when most people have never heard of it. You might feel alone, but you’re not. Your provider can connect you with resources, support and a care plan tailored to your needs.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have Diamond-Blackfan anemia, you need to manage it for life. That means you’ll want the best care. Cleveland Clinic is here for you.
Diamond-Blackfan Anemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials