What Is a Registered Nurse?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Registered Nurse
Advertisement
Advertisement
Registered Nurse
A registered nurse (RN) is a healthcare provider who works with doctors and others to give you the best possible care. RNs do many different tasks, including performing physical exams, talking to you about your symptoms and teaching you about a condition or treatment plan. RNs work in hospitals, doctors’ offices and many other settings.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is a registered nurse? (RN)
A registered nurse (RN) is a
nurse
who works with doctors and other healthcare professionals to provide patient-centered care. RNs often specialize in caring for specific populations or working in certain settings. For example, an RN might specialize in caring for people with
cardiovascular disease
or working in emergency departments.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
An RN might care for you while you’re staying in the hospital or even during a routine medical appointment. They might also be the person who talks to you about a loved one’s condition and explains what at-home care involves. They’re prepared to break down complex information into terms you and your family can understand.
RNs must complete a rigorous education and meet licensure requirements. This training ensures they have the knowledge and skills necessary to give you the best possible care.
Where do registered nurses work?
RNs work in a variety of settings, including:
Hospitals.
Doctors’ offices.
Outpatient clinics.
Schools.
Community health centers.
Nursing and residential care facilities.
Private homes (home health care).
What does a registered nurse do?
A registered nurse’s duties can vary according to where they work and their specialty. In general, an RN may:
Give you a
physical exam
.
Talk to you about your medical history and symptoms.
Record observations about your health.
Give you medications or other treatments.
Assist with diagnostic tests.
Use medical equipment.
Work with your other healthcare providers to coordinate your care.
Help create a plan to guide your care.
Educate you and your loved ones on your condition and related treatments or management plans.
Oversee
licensed practical nurses
, who may also play a role in your care.
Advertisement
While an RN does a lot to support your care, there are some duties they can’t do. An RN won’t diagnose your condition, independently create your treatment plan or prescribe you medications. These are responsibilities that doctors have. However,
nurse practitioners
(RNs with graduate-level training) can typically diagnose conditions, create treatment plans and prescribe medications depending on state regulations.
What is a pediatric registered nurse?
A pediatric registered nurse is an RN who specializes in caring for children. They gain extensive work experience in pediatrics and may earn a specialty certification.
Pediatric RNs are skilled at working with kids and understanding their needs. They’re also prepared to educate parents about a child’s medical condition.
Additional Common Questions
How do I become a registered nurse?
To become a registered nurse, you must:
Complete a nursing education program.
Pass the National Council Licensure Examination (NCLEX-RN) to earn your nursing license.
Meet other licensing requirements specific to your state, like passing a background check or earning a specialty certification. Your state board of nursing can tell you more about specific requirements to work as a registered nurse.
Registered nursing programs
Registered nursing programs provide the knowledge and skills you need to work as an RN. There are several different ways to get this education:
Earn a Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) degree. This is the most common path RNs take.
Earn an Associate Degree in Nursing (ADN) or Associate of Science in Nursing (ASN) degree.
Earn a diploma from a nursing program.
Any of these three paths will give you the education you need to be eligible to take the NCLEX-RN exam and work as an entry-level staff nurse. But some workplaces prefer to hire nurses with a bachelor’s degree. You may choose to start your career by earning a diploma, ADN or ASN and then return to school later for your BSN. Some schools offer RN-to-BSN programs as well as other programs that let you build on your existing education to earn higher degrees.
With any of the paths above, you’ll:
Take courses in the natural sciences and social sciences. Examples include anatomy, physiology, biology and psychology.
Gain clinical experience in a supervised setting.
BSN programs offer a broader and deeper education, including courses on:
Leadership.
Communication.
Critical thinking.
Health informatics.
Health policy.
Caring for specific populations, like children, adults with chronic disease or people with
mental health conditions
.
National Council Licensure Examination
The National Council Licensure Examination for registered nurses (NCLEX-RN) is a computer-based exam. You take it at a professional test center. The exam measures your ability to work as an RN and provide safe, effective care for patients. You need to pass the exam to earn your RN license.
Advertisement
The NCLEX website offers information about the exam and resources to help you prepare. You must complete an accredited nursing program to be eligible to take this exam.
It’s common to feel nervous or anxious before any big test. Talking to a friend or mentor about how you feel as you prepare may help calm your nerves and make you feel ready on exam day.
Registered nurse specialty certifications
A specialty certification is a professional credential beyond your RN license. It demonstrates you have advanced knowledge and skills in a specific area of patient care. For example, you might specialize in caring for children or caring for people with certain medical conditions or needs. Or you might specialize in providing care in certain settings, like emergency departments.
Some states require you to earn a specialty certification to practice nursing there. And some employers may prefer or require such certification. Even if it’s not required, you may choose to earn a specialty certification to learn and grow in your field. To earn your certification, you need to take and pass an exam. You then need to meet certain requirements to stay certified over the years.
The Accreditation Board for Specialty Nursing Certification (ABSNC) offers a list of accredited nursing specialty certification programs. When a program is accredited, that means it meets certain quality standards. You can check out the ABSNC website for more information.
Advertisement
How many years does it take to become a registered nurse?
It usually takes two to four years to become an RN. The fastest option is earning an associate’s degree or a nursing diploma. These programs may take as little as two years.
However, many jobs and graduate programs prefer you to have a Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) degree. So, while you can become an RN and gain an entry-level job in two years, you might have to go back to school later to advance your career. It’s more common to spend four years earning a BSN to become an RN.
If you already have a bachelor’s degree in another area, you may choose to enroll in an accelerated nursing program to earn a BSN. These programs take anywhere from 11 to 18 months.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When you’re receiving care, it’s easy to lose track of a healthcare provider’s title or what their role is on your larger care team. But learning what your providers do and the kind of training they receive can help you feel more comfortable, especially in moments when you’re nervous or afraid of what comes next.
Registered nurses have the training and skills necessary to provide direct care, educate you and your family and work with your other providers. Don’t hesitate to share any questions or concerns with an RN who’s caring for you. They’ll listen, offer guidance and point you to other resources to help you learn more.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/30/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider