Shone's Complex: Symptoms, Causes and Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Shone’s Complex
Advertisement
Advertisement
Shone’s Complex
Shone’s complex is a rare heart condition that’s present at birth. Babies with the condition have at least two defects that affect blood flow in the left side of their heart. Usually, treatment includes surgery soon after birth. Adults with Shone’s complex need to visit a cardiologist (heart doctor) regularly.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Congenital Heart Disease in Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Shone’s Complex?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Shone’s Complex?
Shone’s complex (also called Shone syndrome) is a type of
congenital heart disease
that affects
blood flow
on the left side of your baby’s heart. This side receives blood from their lungs and sends it out to the rest of their body. Multiple obstructions, also called lesions, make it harder for blood to move into and out of the lower left heart
chamber
(left ventricle). Your baby needs surgery to repair these issues and improve blood flow.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What conditions are associated with Shone’s complex?
Shone’s complex is named for the doctor who first described it in the 1960s. Dr. Shone identified four associated heart problems, but experts have since expanded the list. Babies with Shone’s complex have at least two of the following eight heart defects:
Cor triatriatum
: There’s an extra membrane in the top left chamber of your baby’s heart (left atrium). This divides the chamber into two sections. Blood has a harder time flowing down to the left ventricle.
Supravalvular mitral ring
: Your baby’s
mitral valve
has a ring of fibrous tissue just above it. That
narrows
the valve opening and limits blood flow from their left atrium to their left ventricle.
Parachute mitral valve
: Your baby’s mitral valve is missing a papillary muscle. These two muscles open and close the valve. Having just one can make the valve narrow or leaky.
Hypoplastic left ventricle
: “Hypoplastic” means not fully developed. The left ventricle is the heart’s main pumping chamber. Being smaller means it can’t pump blood like it should.
Subaortic stenosis
: Your baby’s
aortic valve
is narrow because of extra tissue below it. Their heart must pump harder because of the narrowing.
Bicuspid aortic valve
: Your baby’s aortic valve has just two flaps rather than three. This can lead to problems like a narrow or leaky valve.
Small aortic valve annulus
: The tough ring at the base of your baby’s aortic valve is smaller than it should be. Less blood can flow through the valve into the
aorta
.
Coarctation of the aorta
: Your baby’s heart has to work harder because their aorta has a narrow spot.
Advertisement
Shone’s complex is rare. It accounts for about
1 in 50
congenital heart disease cases providers diagnose before birth.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Shone’s complex
In severe cases, symptoms can begin soon after birth. This is because your baby’s heart can’t pump enough blood to meet their body’s needs. Other times, signs and symptoms can develop later in childhood or even in adulthood. Your child may have:
Difficulty gaining weight
Sweating and trouble breathing when feeding
A lower amount of pee than expected
Weak pulses in their legs and arms
Higher blood pressure in their arms than their legs
A buildup of
lactic acid
in their blood
What causes Shone’s complex?
Healthcare providers don’t know exactly what causes Shone’s complex. Most cases are sporadic. We don’t yet have enough information on genetic or
environmental
risk factors to say for sure why some babies are born with this condition.
Some
research
suggests Shone’s complex may be hereditary. But how it passes down within biological families is complex. We need more research to fully understand it.
Complications of this condition
Shone’s complex may cause complications like:
High blood pressure in your child’s lung arteries (
pulmonary hypertension
)
Abnormal heart rhythms, like
heart block
and
atrial arrhythmias
Your child’s heart not being able to pump blood like it should (
heart failure
)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers diagnose Shone’s complex using one or more of the following tests:
Fetal echocardiogram
: This test uses ultrasound to diagnose heart problems before birth.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)
: This test also uses ultrasound to make images of your child’s heart. It’s the main way providers diagnose Shone’s complex after birth.
Cardiac CT scan
or
MRI
: Providers don’t routinely use these imaging scans to diagnose Shone’s complex, but they’re helpful in some cases.
Your baby’s provider will diagnose Shone’s complex if at least two of the eight possible defects are present. Babies with this condition usually have at least one lesion affecting blood flow into the left ventricle and at least one affecting blood flow out of it. Coarctation of the aorta is the most common feature.
Diagnosis usually happens before or soon after birth. But providers sometimes identify the condition for the first time in older children, teens and adults when they notice a
heart murmur
or other signs that lead to further testing. This can happen in people who have milder or incomplete forms of Shone’s complex. Cases diagnosed in older kids and adults are typically less severe but can still cause serious problems down the road.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is Shone’s complex treated?
Surgery is the only way to treat Shone’s complex. There currently aren’t any medicines that can treat this condition. But your provider may prescribe medicines to manage your child’s symptoms or support their heart function until surgery.
There isn’t one surgery specific to Shone’s complex. Rather, providers choose the surgeries that meet your child’s needs. Exactly what happens during surgery depends on the heart defects your child has and how well their heart is working.
Your child may need one or more surgeries to:
Remove the ring of tissue around their mitral valve
Repair their mitral valve
Replace their mitral valve (this is less common than repair)
Remove extra tissue below their aortic valve
Widen their aortic valve opening
Repair the narrowed part of their aorta
Providers sometimes use a staged approach. That means your child will have two surgeries with some time in between them. The first surgery improves blood flow out of their left ventricle. The second improves blood flow into their left ventricle. Your child’s provider will explain how many surgeries your child may need and the best timing for them.
When should I seek medical care for my child?
It’s important to follow the appointment schedule your child’s provider gives you. Your child will need follow-up visits after each surgery. Their provider will run tests (echocardiograms) to check heart and valve function. These tests are key to finding and treating problems early.
Advertisement
Your child will need routine checkups with a cardiologist throughout their life.
Questions to ask
You may want to ask your child’s healthcare provider the following questions:
What surgeries does my child need?
What will happen during these surgeries?
What follow-up care does my child need after surgery?
How might Shone’s complex affect my child’s quality of life?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Congenital Heart Disease in Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for Shone’s complex?
Your child’s prognosis (outlook) depends on many things, including:
The severity of their condition
How soon they get treatment
Any complications that arise
Whether heart issues treated earlier in life come back
For example, coarctation of the aorta, narrowed valves and other features of Shone’s complex can recur. Your child may need more operations as they get older — even if treatment earlier in life worked. Your child’s providers can explain more based on their unique situation.
Shone’s complex survival rate
Most
studies
show long-term survival (up to 20 years) of at least 75% after surgery for Shone’s complex.
In general, Shone’s complex is more likely to shorten a person’s lifespan if:
Their heart defects severely disrupt blood flow in their heart
They need complex or multiple surgeries
They develop severe mitral valve disease or pulmonary hypertension
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Shone’s complex isn’t something you hear about every day. And when you hear it’s your child’s diagnosis, you probably have all sorts of questions. These might pop into your mind as you go about your day. It may help to write them down as they come so you’re ready for the next appointment. Getting your thoughts on paper can also help if you’re feeling a bit overwhelmed.
Advertisement
Your child’s care team understands there’s a lot to take in. Ask them anything. Let them guide you through the next steps. You may also want to connect with other parents whose children have heart conditions. Sharing your story — and hearing theirs — can help you feel supported and understood.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you were diagnosed as a child or later in life, Cleveland Clinic is here to treat your adult congenital heart disease.
Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Congenital Heart Disease in Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment