What Is Histamine?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Histamine
Advertisement
Advertisement
Histamine
Histamine is a chemical your immune system releases. It’s mainly known for its role in causing allergy symptoms. But it has other important functions, like regulating your sleep-wake cycle and cognitive function. Antihistamines are a common medication that can manage histamine levels.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
What is histamine?
Histamine is a signaling chemical your
immune system
releases to send messages between different cells. Histamine has several functions, but it’s mainly known for its role in causing allergic and anaphylactic symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Allergies
are your body’s reaction to a foreign protein. Usually, these proteins (allergens) are harmless. However, if you have an allergy to a particular protein, your immune system overreacts to its presence in your body.
A cascade of reactions leads to a release of histamine, which causes allergy symptoms. These symptoms are usually confined to one area of your body. If the immune reaction is severe, it causes
anaphylaxis
, which affects most of your body. Anaphylactic shock is life-threatening.
Your body mainly stores histamine in mast cells in tissues and basophils in blood. Mast cells are a type of
white blood cell
that’s present in connective tissues throughout your body, especially:
Under your skin.
Near
blood vessels
and lymph vessels.
In
nerves
.
In your
lungs
and intestines.
Basophils are another type of white blood cell.
What does histamine do?
Histamine regulates countless bodily functions and plays a key role in your body’s
inflammatory response
. The effect histamine has depends on which histamine receptors it binds to. Researchers have identified four types of histamine receptors.
H1 receptors
You have H1 receptors throughout your body, including in neurons (brain cells), smooth muscle cells of your airways and blood vessels. Activation of the H1 receptors causes the well-known allergy and anaphylaxis symptoms. It causes:
Advertisement
Itchy skin (pruritus)
.
Expanding of blood vessels (
vasodilation
).
Low blood pressure (hypotension)
.
Increased heart rate (
tachycardia
).
Flushing.
Narrowing of your airways (bronchoconstriction).
Pain.
Movement of fluids through blood vessel walls (vascular permeability).
Some of these bodily changes result in sneezing,
nasal congestion
and
runny nose
(rhinorrhea).
Outside of allergic reactions, H1 receptors also help regulate:
Sleep-wake cycles.
Food intake.
Body temperature.
Emotions.
Memory.
Learning.
H2 receptors
You have H2 receptors mainly in the cells in your stomach that release acid, smooth muscle cells and heart cells.
Activation of the H2 receptors leads to:
Stomach acid secretion, which helps with digestion.
Stimulation of mucous glands in your airways.
Vascular permeability.
Hypotension.
Flushing.
Headache
.
Tachycardia.
Bronchoconstriction.
H3 receptors
H3 receptors are mainly involved in
blood-brain barrier
function. They’re found in neurons in your central
nervous system
. H3 receptors regulate the release of histamine and
neurotransmitters
like
dopamine
,
norepinephrine
and
acetylcholine
.
Researchers are currently studying H3 receptor antagonist medications for potential use in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.
H4 receptors
H4 receptors are present in your bone marrow and hematopoietic cells (immature cells that can develop into all types of blood cells). They play a role in the formation of certain blood cells.
They also play important roles in inflammatory disorders and
autoimmune diseases
.
What conditions involve histamine issues?
Histamine plays a central role in several allergic conditions, including:
Atopic dermatitis
(eczema)
.
Contact dermatitis
, which can happen due to contact with things like poison ivy, fragrances, metals (like nickel) and preservatives.
Allergic rhinitis (hay fever)
, which can happen due to pollen, pet dander, dust mites, mold and cockroaches.
Allergic asthma
. The same allergens that trigger allergic rhinitis can trigger allergic asthma.
Allergic conjunctivitis
. This happens when the
conjunctiva
of your eyes becomes swollen or inflamed due to allergens.
What is histamine intolerance?
Histamine intolerance occurs when you have a high level of histamine in your body. It can happen if your body can’t break down histamine properly. It causes a variety of symptoms, including:
Headaches or
migraines
.
Nasal congestion.
Fatigue
.
Hives
.
Digestive issues.
Irregular periods
.
How can you clear histamine from your body?
Healthcare providers recommend or prescribe the following medications to help manage histamine levels in your body:
Advertisement
H1
antihistamines
: These are a class of drugs commonly used to treat symptoms of allergies, such as those caused by pollen and pet dander. They do so by blocking H1 receptors. Antihistamines can be prescription or over-the-counter (OTC) medications. They come in several forms, such as tablets, liquids, creams and eye drops.
H2 antihistamines
: H2 antihistamines can help treat several digestive conditions, including
peptic ulcer disease
,
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
and
indigestion (dyspepsia)
. They do so by blocking H2 receptors, which trigger stomach acid release.
Corticosteroids
: Steroids can help with the inflammatory effects of histamines and allergies. Many
inhalers
that help treat and prevent asthma, for example, have steroid medications in them.
Epinephrine injections
: These injections treat severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) or sudden asthma attacks. Epinephrine opens up your airways and increases blood pressure.
Certain supplements
: Studies show that
vitamin C
, copper and/or
vitamin B6
supplements may help lower histamine levels. Talk to your healthcare provider before starting any supplements.
When should I see my healthcare provider about histamine issues?
If you develop signs of seasonal allergies or an allergic reaction, reach out to your provider, especially if your symptoms are affecting your daily functioning. They can perform
allergy testing
and recommend treatments. Also, see your provider if you have symptoms of histamine intolerance.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
While histamine plays important roles in regulating normal bodily functions like your sleep-wake cycle and cognitive function, it can also wreak havoc when your body overreacts to otherwise harmless allergens. If allergies are affecting your daily life, see a healthcare provider. They can conduct tests to pinpoint your allergies and prescribe medications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Allergies can wreak havoc on your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our team of experts can help create a treatment plan that’ll help you breathe easier.
Allergy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialist
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/28/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider