Class III Obesity (Formerly Known as Morbid Obesity)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Class III Obesity (Formerly Known as Morbid Obesity)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Class III Obesity (Formerly Known as Morbid Obesity)
Class III obesity, formerly known as morbid obesity, is a complex chronic condition that can lead to several serious health issues. There are many treatment options for class III obesity, including healthy lifestyle changes, behavioral and psychological therapy, medication and weight loss procedures.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Weight Management
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is morbid obesity (now known as class III obesity)?
Class III obesity, formerly known as morbid obesity, is a
complex chronic disease
in which you have a
body mass index (BMI)
of 40 or higher. The BMI scale isn’t always accurate. So, healthcare providers may use other tests and tools to assess obesity.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Class III obesity can lead to several serious health conditions, like
Type 2 diabetes
and
heart disease
. The good news is that it’s treatable. There’s no quick fix. But together, you and your healthcare team can create a tailored plan to reach a weight that’s healthy for you.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of class III obesity?
There are no specific symptoms of class III obesity. The main feature of class III obesity is having a body mass index (BMI) of 40 or higher.
Class III obesity can cause side effects and complications in many parts of your body.
What are the complications of class III obesity?
Class III obesity can contribute to the development of several health conditions, including:
Atherosclerosis
(plaque buildup inside your
arteries
)
Breathing issues, like
obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS)
Certain
cancers
, like
pancreatic
,
colorectal
,
breast
and
liver
cancers
Depression
or other mental health conditions
Heart disease
High blood pressure (hypertension)
Kidney disease
Liver disease
Osteoarthritis
Metabolic syndrome
Sleep disorders
, like
obstructive sleep apnea
Type 2 diabetes
Class III obesity can also cause
fertility issues
.
What causes class III obesity?
Class III obesity is a complex disease that has several contributing factors. The main reason your body stores adipose tissue (body fat) is an imbalance between the number of
calories
you consume and the amount your body uses. A lack of physical activity can play into this, as well.
Advertisement
But several other factors contribute to how much food you eat, the type of food you eat and how your body uses that energy. Every person’s body is unique and
metabolizes
energy differently. Some people are at a greater risk of weight gain than others.
Class III obesity rarely results from a lack of willpower to lose weight or a lack of “control” over the amount of food you eat.
Contributing factors to obesity include:
Genetics
. There are at least 15 obesity-related
genes
. Certain genetic syndromes can cause obesity, as well, like
Cohen syndrome
,
Down syndrome
and
Prader-Willi syndrome
.
Hormonal imbalances
. Hormone-related conditions that can lead to weight gain include
Cushing syndrome
,
hypothyroidism
and
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
.
Certain medications
.
Antidepressants
,
antipsychotic medications
,
antiseizure medications
,
corticosteroids
and other medications can lead to weight gain.
Cultural factors
. Prevalent advertising for calorie-dense foods and increased portion sizes can contribute to developing obesity.
Environmental factors
. Exposure to chemicals known as obesogens can change your hormones and increase adipose tissue in your body.
Financial factors.
Easier financial and/or geographical access to fast foods compared to more nutritious, whole foods can lead to weight gain.
Geographical factors
. Having limited access to parks or other places to exercise can lead to obesity. Having few safe or easy ways to walk in your neighborhood can, as well.
What are the risk factors for class III obesity?
Risk factors for developing class III obesity include:
Lack of sleep
. Many studies show a link between high BMI and people who don’t get enough
sleep
(typically less than seven hours a night).
Chronic
stress
. Long-term stress triggers the production of hormones (like
cortisol
) that control your energy balances and hunger cues.
Your age
. The risk of weight gain increases as you age.
Your sex
.
Females
have more adipose tissue than males from
puberty
onward.
Pregnancy
and
menopause
can also contribute to excess adipose tissue.
Your race
. In the United States, rates of obesity are highest in non-Hispanic Black people, followed by Hispanic people, then white people.
You can’t change some of these risk factors. But healthy lifestyle changes may decrease your risk of developing obesity.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is class III obesity diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose class III obesity in part by measuring your body mass index (BMI). BMI is the ratio of your height to your weight. Optimum BMI ranges from 20 to 25. You may have class III obesity if you have a BMI of 40 or more.
The BMI scale isn’t always accurate for certain populations. Providers use a different scale to assess
obesity in children
.
Providers also use waist circumference measurements to help diagnose obesity. In adults who aren’t pregnant, obesity may mean:
Advertisement
A waist circumference over 35 inches for females
A waist circumference over 40 inches for males
If you’re of South Asian or Central and South American descent, your provider may use smaller waist circumference values. People from these backgrounds may have unhealthy amounts of adipose tissue deep in their abdomens.
Providers can also estimate obesity by measuring skin thickness in different areas of your body.
It can be difficult to go through these assessments. It may feel like you’re being reduced to a series of numbers. Talk to your provider if you’re uncomfortable at any point.
What tests are used to diagnose class III obesity?
Your provider may recommend lab tests to check for health conditions that could be causing weight gain. They may also check for conditions that are highly associated with class III obesity. These tests include:
Basic metabolic panel
C-reactive protein (CRP) test
Complete blood count
Hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C)
Kidney (renal) function tests
Lipid panel
Liver function tests
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) test
Urinalysis
Vitamin D test
Your provider may also recommend other tests like an
electrocardiogram (EKG)
and
sleep studies
.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for class III obesity?
Treatment for class III obesity is very individualized. Every person is unique. So, you’ll need a treatment plan that’s specific to your situation and goals. Together, you and your healthcare provider can come up with a plan that treats the underlying causes of obesity. You’ll make plans to manage any other health conditions.
Advertisement
Management for class III obesity may include:
Healthy lifestyle changes
Behavioral and psychological therapy
Medications
Weight loss procedures
Healthy lifestyle changes
Certain lifestyle changes can help you manage obesity, improve your overall health and/or lose weight, including:
Eating changes
. A registered
dietitian
can help you learn about which foods are part of a healthy eating pattern. They commonly recommend the
DASH eating plan
for obesity.
Physical activity
.
Moving
your body has many health benefits — not just weight loss. Before starting any exercise program, ask your provider about what amount and type of physical activity is right for you.
Healthy sleep
. It’s essential to get healthy sleep and/or receive treatment for sleep disorders to manage obesity. Aim for over seven hours of sleep.
Stress management
. Chronic stress can contribute to weight gain. It’s important to learn to
cope with stress
in a healthy way, such as with
meditation
or
breathing exercises
.
Behavioral therapy and psychotherapy
Your provider may recommend doing an individual or group behavioral weight-loss program. A specially trained healthcare provider will customize a weight-loss plan for you.
Mental health conditions like depression and
anxiety
occur at high rates among people with obesity. Because of this, your provider may also recommend
psychotherapy
(talk therapy), like:
Advertisement
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)
Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT)
Medications
When healthy lifestyle changes aren’t enough, your provider may recommend FDA-approved medications. Anti-obesity medications can be a powerful tool in managing obesity, especially when combined with lifestyle modifications such as eating changes and exercise.
Anti-obesity medications are designed to assist with weight loss by affecting various aspects of appetite and
metabolism
. Providers typically prescribe these medications for people with a BMI of 30 or higher. Or they may prescribe them or people with a BMI of 27 or higher who have obesity-related health conditions, like Type 2 diabetes or hypertension.
Most of these medications mainly work by controlling your appetite rather than increasing your
metabolic rate
. They affect
neurotransmitters
and hormones that regulate hunger and satiety, helping you feel fuller sooner and reducing food intake.
Commonly prescribed anti-obesity medications include:
Orlistat
Phentermine
Phentermine-Topiramate
Naltrexone-Bupropion
Liraglutide
Semaglutide
Tirzepatide
These medications each have different side effects. Together, you and your provider will decide if weight loss medication is right for you.
Weight loss procedures
Lifestyle changes and weight loss medications may not be enough. If this is the case, you may be eligible for
endoscopic
weight loss procedures or
bariatric surgeries
.
Endoscopic weight loss procedures include:
Endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty (ESG)
. A provider attaches a suturing device to the endoscope to close off a portion of your stomach with stitches.
Intragastric balloon
. A provider places a medical implant (balloon) in your stomach to help you feel full and reduce the amount of food you can take in.
Bariatric surgeries include:
Gastric bypass surgery
. A surgeon connects a small part of your
stomach
to the middle part of your intestine, bypassing the first part of your intestine.
Sleeve gastrectomy
. A surgeon removes a big portion of your stomach, which makes you feel full with less food.
Gastric band surgery
. A surgeon places a hollow band around the upper part of your stomach, which creates a smaller stomach.
Weight loss procedures have certain risks and benefits. Talk to your healthcare provider about possible side effects and complications.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re having a difficult time managing your weight, contact your provider. You may need to adjust your health plan or try something new.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you have class III obesity, it may be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:
Do I have any health conditions that are causing weight gain?
Do any of my medications cause weight gain?
What lifestyle habits may be contributing to my health risks and obesity?
What can I do about the challenges I face in managing my weight?
Do I have any health conditions that obesity is causing?
What are the treatment options for obesity?
Should I see a dietitian or nutritionist?
Should I see a mental health professional with expertise in weight management?
Is weight-loss medication or surgery an option for me?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Weight Management
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for class III obesity?
Without treatment, class III obesity can lead to:
Several physical and mental health conditions
Reduced economic and social opportunities
Reduced quality of life
It’s possible to treat class III obesity and improve health outcomes. Research shows:
Some people who take prescription weight management medications lose 10% or more of their starting weight
People who undergo bariatric surgery may lose 30% to 50% of their excess weight in the first six months. They may lose 77% of excess weight 12 months or more after surgery
People who had bariatric surgery could maintain a 50% to 60% loss of excess weight for 10 to 14 years after surgery
It can be daunting and overwhelming to try to lose weight and change lifestyle habits. Know that even a 5% to 10% weight loss can significantly improve your health by lowering
blood sugar
, blood pressure and
triglyceride
levels. It may also improve your quality of life.
What is the life expectancy of someone with class III obesity?
If untreated, class III obesity may shorten your life expectancy by up to 14 years.
Cardiovascular disease
and cancer are the greatest health risks associated with obesity that can lead to
death
.
Additional Common Questions
Why was class III obesity called morbid obesity?
Two healthcare providers coined the term “morbid obesity” in 1963. They did so to justify insurance reimbursement for the cost of intestinal bypass surgery for weight loss in people with a BMI over 40.
In a medical setting, “morbidity” means illness or disease. The medical meaning of “morbid” is appropriate in describing this type of obesity since class III obesity is considered a disease.
The problem is that, like many words, “morbid” has another meaning. Outside of the medical setting, “morbid” means disturbing or unpleasant. Since most people aren’t familiar with the medical definition, they connected morbid (class III) obesity and people with obesity to those negative words.
Now, healthcare providers, researchers and health organizations use the term “class III obesity” in place of “morbid obesity.”
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting treatment for class III obesity can be overwhelming. It has several causes, so that means several approaches to treatment. The path to weight loss is rarely without its ups and downs, but it is possible. Make one change at a time and know that your healthcare team will be by your side to help you reach your goals.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic providers work together to develop weight management plans that address the challenges you face while finding your healthy weight.
Weight Management
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes