Hyperandrogenism: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hyperandrogenism
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hyperandrogenism
Hyperandrogenism happens when you have high amounts of androgens (a group of sex hormones) in your body. It most commonly affects females and can cause excessive hair growth, acne and irregular periods.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hyperandrogenism?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Hyperandrogenism?
Hyperandrogenism happens when you have an excess amount of
androgens
in your body. These hormones help start
puberty
and play a role in reproductive health and body development.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Everyone produces androgens, but
males
naturally make much more than females. The most well-known androgen is testosterone. Androgens are mostly made in the
testicles
or the
ovaries
. Both sexes also make androgens in their
adrenal glands
. Hyperandrogenism affects about 5% to 10% of females of reproductive age. It’s less common in males.
The condition causes different symptoms based on your age and sex. It has several possible causes. There are several ways healthcare providers treat the condition.
Is hyperandrogenism the same as polycystic ovary syndrome?
No, but they’re related.
PCOS
is a common cause of hyperandrogenism in females. But it’s just one possible cause out of many. Hyperandrogenism can affect anyone, no matter their sex. PCOS only affects females.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of hyperandrogenism depend on your sex and whether you’ve reached puberty.
Symptoms of hyperandrogenism
Hyperandrogenism has various symptoms depending on your sex and whether or not you’ve been through puberty.
You can have symptoms of hyperandrogenism even if your androgen levels look normal in a
blood test
. It’s also possible to have high androgen levels in your blood but not notice symptoms.
If these symptoms develop rapidly and suddenly, it’s important to see your healthcare provider as soon as possible. In this case, the cause is often an androgen-secreting tumor.
Symptoms of hyperandrogenism in females who haven’t gone through puberty include:
Advertisement
Enlarged
clitoris
Acne and oily skin
Excess body hair (hirsutism) that causes coarse, dark hair (not “peach fuzz”) on the upper lip, chin, chest, abdomen and/or back
Symptoms of hyperandrogenism in males who haven’t gone through puberty include:
Enlarged
penis
Early or excess hair growth in the pubic area and armpits
Deep voice
Symptoms of hyperandrogenism in adult females include:
Acne and oily skin
Excess body hair (hirsutism)
Irregular periods
Infertility
Male pattern baldness
In adult males, the effects of hyperandrogenism depend on where the hormones come from — your adrenal glands or an outside source like anabolic steroid injections. High levels of adrenal androgens usually don’t cause obvious symptoms. But they can affect how the testicles work and may lead to infertility.
Hyperandrogenism causes
Hyperandrogenism happens when any of the organs or hormones that produce or release androgens aren’t working right. Possible causes include:
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) — the most common cause
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Cushing disease
Androgen-secreting tumors
Certain medications
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
With PCOS, high levels of luteinizing hormone and insulin cause your ovaries to make more androgens. High insulin levels (
hyperinsulinemia
) prevent your liver from making a protein called SHBG. Without SHBG, you have more testosterone in your blood. This results in increased levels of free testosterone in your blood.
Approximately 80% to 90% of females with hyperandrogenism have PCOS.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)
CAH is a group of genetic conditions affecting your adrenal glands.
A
genetic change
causes the body to have low levels of certain enzymes needed to make important hormones. When these enzymes are low, the adrenal glands can make too much testosterone.
Some people have a milder form of this condition with just a partial enzyme shortage.
Cushing disease
Cushing disease is a type of
Cushing syndrome
. It happens when your body has too much cortisol.
Cushing disease happens when a
noncancerous tumor
in your pituitary gland makes too much ACTH, a hormone that tells your body to produce cortisol. This extra ACTH also makes your adrenal glands release more androgens.
Androgen-secreting tumors
Certain
adrenal tumors
and tumors in your ovaries or testicles can produce and release androgens. Hyperandrogenism from these kinds of tumors is rare, but is often very severe and sudden. This causes higher-than-normal androgen levels in your body.
Hyperandrogenism due to ovarian or adrenal tumors is rare. See your provider right away if you have sudden symptoms of hyperandrogenism.
Certain medications
Certain medications can cause hyperandrogenism:
Anabolic-androgenic steroids
Synthetic
progestins
Antiseizure medication
Advertisement
Risk factors
Hyperandrogenism can affect both children and adults. But it more commonly affects females of reproductive age.
Since PCOS is one of the most common causes in females, reducing your risk of PCOS can help. There isn’t one proven way to do this, but maintaining a healthy weight and exercising regularly can help.
Another risk factor for hyperandrogenism is
obesity
, which can increase
insulin resistance
.
Complications
Left untreated, hyperandrogenism can lead to complications like:
Infertility
Type 2 diabetes
High blood pressure
Heart disease
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose hyperandrogenism
Your healthcare provider will perform a physical exam to check for signs of the condition, like excessive body hair growth.
They’ll also ask you several questions about your medical history, including:
Your age when your breasts started to develop
Your age when you started to grow pubic hair
Your age when you had your first period
The frequency, length and heaviness of your periods
If you’ve used anabolic steroids or testosterone
If your provider suspects hyperandrogenism, they’ll order blood tests to measure certain hormone levels:
Total testosterone
: This is the total amount of all the
testosterone
in your bloodstream. Total testosterone levels are often mildly elevated in those with PCOS. Highly elevated levels may indicate an ovarian or testicular tumor.
Free testosterone
: This testosterone is unattached to any proteins and is a small percentage of the total testosterone. Free testosterone levels may be elevated in those with PCOS.
Androstenedione
: Androstenedione is a steroid hormone that acts like androgen hormones in your body. Elevated levels may indicate PCOS.
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS)
: A mildly elevated DHEAS level is common with PCOS. Highly elevated levels may indicate an adrenal tumor.
17-hydroxyprogesterone
: This screens for non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Advertisement
Your provider may order additional blood tests to rule out other possible causes of your symptoms. They may also order the following imaging tests:
Pelvic ultrasound
to look for
ovarian cysts
or tumors
CT scan
or
MRI
to look for adrenal tumors
Management and Treatment
How is hyperandrogenism treated?
Providers treat hyperandrogenism by lowering the amount of androgens in the body. This can usually be accomplished by blocking the effects of androgens or by preventing your ovaries or adrenals from producing them.
Many people see their provider to help with symptoms like excess hair growth, acne or irregular periods.
Medical treatment for hyperandrogenism
The medical treatment depends on its cause. For example:
Corticosteroids
: They can help with adrenal hyperandrogenism.
Birth control pills
: They can help treat acne, hirsutism and irregular periods.
Spironolactone
: This drug blocks the effects of androgens and helps with hormonal acne and excessive body hair.
Cyproterone
: This medication can help treat PCOS, reduce testosterone levels and reduce the production of acne-causing oils.
Meformin
: This medication can be useful if you have PCOS.
Surgery can be a treatment for ovarian, testicular or adrenal tumors. Sometimes, stopping a medication or switching to a different medication can help (if medication is the cause).
Advertisement
Treatment of hyperandrogenism symptoms
You can also seek treatment that improves your symptoms:
Acne
: Treatment for acne includes topical anti-acne agents, oral antibiotics like tetracycline, birth control pills and
isotretinoin pills
.
Hirsutism
: Treatment for excess hair could involve waxing, shaving and
laser hair removal
. Birth control pills can also help. A medication called spironolactone blocks the effects of excess androgens.
Irregular periods
: Taking hormonal birth control can be a treatment for irregular periods.
Is it reversible?
It’s not completely reversible, but you can manage the symptoms it causes.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re taking medication, you’ll likely need to see your healthcare provider regularly to make sure your treatment is working.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
The outlook for hyperandrogenism is good. Treatment is usually lifelong. But with the right care and treatment, you can manage its effects. Work closely with your healthcare provider. It may take several tries to find the right combination of treatments that work for you.
The signs and symptoms of hyperandrogenism can affect your self-esteem and mental health. It’s important to see a psychologist if you’re experiencing
stress
and/or
depression
due to these symptoms.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hyperandrogenism can be tough to deal with, especially when it affects things like your skin, hair or how you feel about your body. It’s okay to feel frustrated. Talk to your provider about your symptoms and don’t be afraid to ask questions. Treatment is available to help you. With your provider’s help, you can find ways to manage the condition.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hormonal conditions can be tricky to find and complicated to treat. The experts in endocrinology at Cleveland Clinic are here to provide the best care.
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes