Catamenial Pneumothorax: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Catamenial Pneumothorax
Advertisement
Advertisement
Catamenial Pneumothorax
Catamenial pneumothorax is air around your lungs that happens around the time of your period. Endometriosis, hormone changes and issues with your diaphragm can cause it. You might get symptoms like chest pain and shortness of breath within a few days before and after your period. Surgery and hormone-regulating medications may help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Catamenial Pneumothorax?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Catamenial Pneumothorax?
Catamenial pneumothorax (cat-uh-MEE-nee-uhl new-mo-THOR-axe) is when you get air in the space between your lungs and the inside of your chest around the time of your period. “Catamenial” means related to menstruation (your period) and “pneumothorax” means air in your chest cavity. The air can surround and squish your lung and sometimes collapse part or all of it. In most people, it affects their right lungs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The relationship between your
menstrual cycle
and
pneumothorax
might seem mysterious. And the cause isn’t always clear to healthcare providers, either. Causes range from conditions like
endometriosis
to period-related
hormone
changes.
But the important thing to know is that you should always see a provider about chest pain and shortness of breath. While most cases of aren’t life-threatening, pneumothorax can sometimes be dangerous — and its symptoms are similar to other serious health conditions.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of catamenial pneumothorax?
Symptoms of catamenial pneumothorax include:
Chest pain
Difficulty breathing
Cough
Coughing up blood (
hemoptysis
)
Fast breathing or heart rate
Bluish skin, lips or nails (
cyanosis
)
Symptoms usually start within a few days before or after the start of your period.
What causes catamenial pneumothorax?
Healthcare providers think endometriosis — when tissue similar to the lining of your uterus (endometrium) grows somewhere else in your body — is the main cause of catamenial pneumothorax. If you have endometrium in your lungs,
pleurae
(linings of your lungs and chest wall) or
diaphragm
, it could cause air to enter the space between the linings of your lungs (pleural space). This could lead to pneumothorax. Catamenial pneumothorax is also called endometrial pneumothorax when you know that endometriosis caused it.
Advertisement
But not everyone with catamenial pneumothorax has endometriosis. Hormones and inflammation can cause changes in your body that affect your lungs during your period. Possible factors that can play a role in developing pneumothorax during menstruation include:
Prostaglandins
causing reduced blood flow. These hormone-like chemicals can lead to air pockets in your lungs rupturing and the air escaping into the pleural space.
Air moving through your
reproductive tract
. It can get through small holes in your diaphragm and into your pleural space.
What happens when endometriosis spreads to your lungs?
Endometriosis in your lungs or the structures around them can cause thoracic endometriosis syndrome. In addition to pneumothorax, this can lead to:
Blood in your pleural space (
hemothorax
)
Pulmonary (lung)
nodules
Coughing up blood around the time of your period (catamenial hemoptysis)
Pneumothorax that happens between periods can still result from endometrium growing in or around your lungs or diaphragm, even if you don’t have an endometriosis diagnosis.
What are the risk factors for catamenial pneumothorax?
Catamenial pneumothorax is most common in
females
who
ovulate
. Rarely, those on hormonal birth control or who are
pregnant
experience it. You might be at higher risk if you or someone in your family has endometriosis.
What are the complications of catamenial pneumothorax?
In some cases, pneumothorax can lead to serious complications, like
respiratory failure
or
heart failure
. This is uncommon, but you should always have a healthcare provider evaluate you if you have symptoms of pneumothorax — especially since the symptoms can be similar to other serious health conditions.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is catamenial pneumothorax diagnosed?
Providers usually diagnose catamenial pneumothorax by listening to your lungs and looking at them with imaging. Imaging might include
chest X-rays
,
CT scans
or a lung ultrasound.
To help your provider determine a cause, it might be helpful to tell them if:
You’re expecting to get your period soon
You’ve recently started your period
You’ve experienced these symptoms around the time of your period before
Your provider may not be able to diagnose the exact cause of pneumothorax without surgery or a
biopsy
.
Management and Treatment
How is catamenial pneumothorax treated?
Pneumothorax usually gets better on its own. But you might need
thoracentesis
or a chest tube to reduce the air in your chest.
To prevent it from happening again, your provider might recommend:
Video-assisted thoracoscopy (VATS)
. During this surgery, your provider can remove endometrial tissue, fix issues with your diaphragm or close air pockets (blebs).
Medications
. Your provider might prescribe medications that regulate your hormones, like oral contraceptives,
gonadotropin-releasing hormone
agonists or
danazol
.
Pleurodesis
. During surgery, your provider can attach your lung to your chest wall using chemicals or by gently scraping your pleura.
Hysterectomy
with bilateral
oophorectomy
. If other treatments don’t work, surgery to remove your
uterus
and
ovaries
will stop you from ovulating.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you have concerning symptoms that happen around your period. Always see a provider if you’re having chest pains or trouble breathing.
It might be helpful to ask your provider:
Do you know what caused this?
What are my treatment options?
If I need to have a chest tube, how long will I have it?
Will I need to stay in the hospital?
How do I take care of myself at home?
How do I take this medication?
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of pneumothorax, like chest pain or difficulty breathing. These can be signs of many serious health conditions. You may need emergency treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have catamenial pneumothorax?
Catamenial pneumothorax is usually not life-threatening. But if you’ve had it happen once, it will often keep coming back without treatment. You may need multiple types of treatment (like surgery and medications) to manage it.
Prevention
Can catamenial pneumothorax be prevented?
Catamenial pneumothorax usually comes back many times. Depending on the cause, surgery, hormone-regulating medications or both can prevent it from happening again.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
From aches and pains to mood changes, your period can be a whole-body experience. But most people don’t expect lung issues to be part of the deal. Fortunately, most cases of catamenial pneumothorax aren’t life-threatening. And there are treatment options that can help prevent it from happening again.
Advertisement
But you should have a healthcare provider check out any kind of chest pain and difficulty breathing. They can determine how serious the condition is and discuss your treatment options with you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breathing issues can affect your life in many ways. Cleveland Clinic’s respiratory therapy program treats your symptoms so you can feel better day to day.
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment