Takayasu Arteritis (Pulseless Disease): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Takayasu Arteritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Takayasu Arteritis
Takayasu arteritis is a rare inflammatory disease that targets your arteries. Inflammation causes your arteries to harden and narrow, making it harder for blood to flow through them. This can cause life-threatening complications. Medications can reduce the inflammation and the damage. This is a lifelong condition, but many people go into remission.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Autoimmune Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Takayasu Arteritis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Takayasu Arteritis?
Takayasu arteritis is a disease that damages your major arteries throughout your body. It’s a form of vasculitis, which is chronic inflammation in your blood vessels. Arteritis is inflammation in your arteries. These are the vessels that bring oxygenated blood to your organs and tissues. As Takayasu arteritis damages these vessels, it can reduce their blood flow.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Takayasu arteritis starts with general symptoms, like fatigue, loss of appetite and just feeling ill. Eventually, your arteries may become hardened and narrowed, which reduces their blood flow. Your blood flow through these arteries may become so weak that healthcare providers have difficulty finding your pulse. This is why it’s sometimes called “pulseless disease.”
Weak blood flow through your arteries (
arterial insufficiency
) can cause a variety of other symptoms and complications, some of which are life-threatening. It can affect your brain, heart, kidneys, limbs and other body tissues. It can also make daily life uncomfortable and difficult. Fortunately, once diagnosed, Takayasu arteritis is treatable, and it can even go into remission.
Symptoms and Causes
Takayasu arteritis symptoms
Chronic inflammation puts constant stress on your body. You might not notice this right away. But usually, the first symptoms you’ll notice will be vague symptoms of overall illness.
Early symptoms may include:
Fever
Fatigue
Loss of appetite
Muscle pain
Joint pain
Skin rash
Since it’s a chronic disease, the inflammation never stops. Over time, it damages your arteries, restricting blood flow to your organs and tissues. This causes further complications.
Advertisement
Secondary symptoms can include:
Abdominal pain
Back pain
Chest pain
Cramping pain in your arms or legs (claudication)
Dizziness
Fingertips that briefly turn blue (Raynaud’s syndrome)
Headache
Heart palpitations
Pain in the front of your neck (carotidynia)
Shortness of breath
Vision changes
Weak or missing pulse
Takayasu arteritis causes
Healthcare providers don’t know the exact cause of Takayasu arteritis. They believe it’s a type of
autoimmune disease
. This means your immune system attacks your arteries with inflammation by mistake. Inflammation is usually a tool for fighting infections. Some researchers believe an infection or toxin might trigger the process. Then, somehow, the inflammation continues on autopilot.
Complications of Takayasu arteritis
Takayasu arteritis starts in your aorta. This is the main channel that leaves your heart carrying oxygenated blood. From here, the inflammation spreads into your aorta’s major branches.
Chronic inflammation can have one of two effects on your arteries. It can weaken and stretch them, leading to
aneurysms
and bleeding. Or it may cause scarring that makes them thicken and narrow (
stenosis
). This constricts their blood flow. Sometimes, both of these things happen in different places.
Complications can include:
Aortic stenosis
: This condition can cause pulmonary hypertension and heart failure.
Carotid artery stenosis
: This condition raises your risk of stroke.
Coronary artery disease
: This condition raises your risk of heart attack.
Renal artery stenosis
: This can cause high blood pressure and chronic kidney disease.
Subclavian artery stenosis
: This is a form of peripheral artery disease. It can affect your limbs and your brain. It raises your risk of subclavian steal syndrome and transient ischemic attack.
Risk factors
Takayasu arteritis is a rare condition. There are fewer than 2 million cases worldwide. It especially affects:
Females
(about
90%
of the time)
People of childbearing age (average age 15 to 40)
People of East Asian, Indian and Mexican descent
While it doesn’t seem to run in families, Takayasu arteritis does seem to run in ethnic groups. Researchers have recently identified several genes that might be connected with it.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Takayasu arteritis diagnosed?
Diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis is based on a combination of factors, including:
Medical history and physical exam
: Your provider may notice signs like a weak pulse, lower blood pressure in one arm or a whooshing sound (carotid bruit) through their stethoscope.
Imagining tests
: Images of your arteries can help show where and how much they’re damaged. These may include X-rays, a Doppler ultrasound, a CT angiogram or MR angiogram.
Blood tests
: Blood tests can check for certain products in your blood that may suggest you have inflammation. ESR and CRP are two examples. These test results are only suggestive, though.
Advertisement
It can take some time to get the right diagnosis. Since the early symptoms of Takayasu arteritis tend to be mild and vague, you and your provider might not suspect it until you have more advanced symptoms.
Management and Treatment
How is Takayasu arteritis treated?
Healthcare providers treat Takayasu arteritis with medications to control the inflammation and stop the damage to your arteries.
Corticosteroids
, like
prednisone
, are powerful anti-inflammatory medications. Most people start with corticosteroids and slowly reduce the dose as their condition improves. You might need to stay on a low dose, and/or take other medications, to manage your condition long term.
Other long-term medications may include:
Immunosuppressant drugs
: These medications decrease the activity of your immune system that causes the inflammation in your arteries. But as a side effect, you can get sick more easily.
TNF inhibitors
: These are a biologic form of
DMARDs
(disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs) that work to prevent inflammation.
Biologics
are medications derived from living organisms.
Blood pressure medications
: If you have high blood pressure, you may need medications to reduce it. This helps prevent complications of artery disease.
Statins:
If you have high cholesterol, statins can help prevent plaque buildup in your arteries.
Advertisement
While medications can limit further damage to your arteries, they can’t reverse the damage already done. Some people may need
vascular surgery
to restore blood flow to their organs and tissues.
These procedures may include:
Aneurysm surgery
: Your surgeon removes the aneurysm and replaces it with a graft.
Angioplasty
: Your surgeon widens your narrowed artery and places a stent to keep it open.
Aortic valve replacement
: Your surgeon replaces your valve with a transplant or prosthesis.
Arterial bypass surgery
: Your surgeon reroutes your blood flow to bypass a blocked area.
Since Takayasu arteritis is a lifelong condition, you’ll need lifelong care, even if you’re feeling well. Your provider will monitor your condition regularly to make sure your treatment plan is up to date. Even when it’s working, you might have times when you feel better or worse. Taking stock of how you feel and letting your provider know can help them identify new complications or treatment side effects.
When should I seek care?
When you have Takayasu arteritis, it’s important to see your provider regularly so they can monitor your condition. You should also be sure to contact them if any new symptoms appear.
Talk with your provider if you become or plan to become pregnant. It’s possible to have a successful pregnancy with Takayasu arteritis, but it’s important to know how to manage it safely.
Advertisement
Seek emergency care if you develop:
Difficulty breathing
Difficulty smiling or speaking
Dizziness or faintness
Chest pain (angina)
Loss of feeling in a limb
Muscle weakness on one side
Pain when you lift your arms
(intermittent claudication)
A weak or missing pulse
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Autoimmune Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Takayasu arteritis?
Without treatment, Takayasu arteritis can be debilitating or even fatal. But with the right diagnosis and treatment, the prognosis (outlook) is good. In the United States and Japan, only
about 3%
of people with Takayasu arteritis die from it, after an average period of five years. Other parts of the world may have worse outcomes, due to low recognition of the disease, delayed diagnosis or poor access to care.
While there’s no cure for Takayasu arteritis, it usually improves with treatment. Symptoms may seem to come and go. When they’re active, you may find it hard to keep up with your usual activities. But after several years of treatment, many people find that their symptoms seem to go away for good. This is called remission. In this case, you may be able to stop treatment, although you’ll still need checkups.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Takayasu arteritis is serious, but it’s treatable. Once you get the right diagnosis and treatment, you can start to feel better. Over time, your symptoms may change or come and go. This is why it’s important to have a trusted provider to follow up with. Don’t be afraid to speak up if you notice something different about your health. Your provider will want to know about it so they can help you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic provides accurate diagnoses and personalized treatments for all types of autoimmune disorders, including lupus, MS and rheumatoid arthritis.
Autoimmune Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment