Idiopathic Hypersomnia (IH): What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Idiopathic Hypersomnia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Idiopathic Hypersomnia
Idiopathic hypersomnia is a sleep disorder where you feel unrested after sleeping through the night. You may feel disoriented, exhausted or unable to function during the daytime. Medications can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypersomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is idiopathic hypersomnia?
Idiopathic hypersomnia (IH) is a
sleep disorder
where you have an excessive need to sleep. You wake up very tired even after getting an adequate amount of sleep. “Idiopathic” means the cause is unknown.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you have idiopathic hypersomnia, you probably won’t feel rested when you wake up, even after more than nine hours of sleep at night. You may need to set several alarms and drag yourself out of bed in the morning. You might take an afternoon nap to help you feel more alert, but you still feel tired when you wake up. Feeling tired during the day can interfere with your ability to function as expected.
A healthcare provider can help you manage the symptoms of this type of
hypersomnia
.
How rare is idiopathic hypersomnia?
Idiopathic hypersomnia affects an
estimated
10 people out of every 100,000 in the United States annually.
Symptoms and Causes
Idiopathic hypersomnia causes symptoms that affect how you feel during the daytime.
What are the symptoms of idiopathic hypersomnia?
The symptoms of idiopathic hypersomnia include:
Daytime sleepiness
Sleeping more than 11 hours within 24 hours, including naps, or more than nine hours at night
Difficulty waking up; feeling unrested or disoriented when waking up after sleeping through the night (sleep inertia)
These symptoms may make daytime functioning extremely difficult. Symptoms usually affect you a few times a week (or daily) for at least three months, after which a healthcare provider will make a diagnosis. In some cases, you may have symptoms for years before being correctly diagnosed.
When awake, in addition to
feeling tired
, you might also experience:
Advertisement
Brain fog
Confusion
Depression
Dizziness
Headaches
Irritability
What causes idiopathic hypersomnia?
The cause of idiopathic hypersomnia is unknown. Research is ongoing to learn more. Some studies suggest the following may play a role:
Genetic variants (
mutations
).
A gene variant may affect signaling and cell regulation within your brain, interfering with your sleep-wake schedule.
An abnormal
immune system
response.
Your immune system mistakenly targets healthy cells within your nervous system and sees them as a threat.
What triggers idiopathic hypersomnia?
Triggers are things that could cause symptoms to start or to increase. Idiopathic hypersomnia triggers may include:
Sudden changes to your sleep-wake schedule
Overexertion
Undergoing general
anesthesia
for a procedure
A
virus
Head trauma
What are the risk factors for idiopathic hypersomnia?
You may have a genetic predisposition for idiopathic hypersomnia that puts you more at risk of developing it. This means that hypersomnia or another sleep disorder may run in your biological family history.
What are the complications of idiopathic hypersomnia?
If you’re always tired, you likely can’t do things to the best of your ability. The following may be challenging for you:
Functioning as expected during daytime hours (completing your daily routine, staying focused on a task, etc.)
Maintaining relationships with loved ones
Meeting obligations at work, school or in your personal time
Balancing your mental health and emotional well-being
Activities requiring your full attention, like driving or operating heavy machinery, may not be safe. This can put you and others at risk of injury.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is idiopathic hypersomnia diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose idiopathic hypersomnia after a
physical exam
and testing. During the exam, your provider will learn more about your symptoms. They may ask you to rank how sleepy you are by answering questions on the
Epworth Sleepiness Scale
assessment.
You may also need to keep a sleep journal for several weeks, to keep track of when you fall asleep and wake up. Your provider might also ask you to wear an
actigraph
device, which can record sleep times for you.
Testing may include sleep studies like a
polysomnography
or a multiple sleep latency test. Your provider will review your sleep study results and run additional testing to rule out conditions with similar symptoms.
Management and Treatment
Is there a cure for idiopathic hypersomnia?
There isn’t a cure for idiopathic hypersomnia, but treatment options are available to help you manage symptoms.
How is idiopathic hypersomnia treated?
Medications are usually successful at treating symptoms of idiopathic hypersomnia.
Cognitive behavioral therapy
for hypersomnia (CBT-H) is a form of
psychotherapy
specifically designed to help with idiopathic hypersomnia. This, alongside medications, may help improve overall sleep quality and daily functioning.
Advertisement
Idiopathic hypersomnia medications
Medications to treat idiopathic hypersomnia may include:
Central nervous system stimulants like
amphetamines
Non-amphetamine
central nervous system
stimulants, like
modafinil
Central nervous system depressants like
sodium oxybate
(FDA-approved)
GABA receptor
antagonists like
flumazenil
Side effects of these medications vary based on the type. Talk to your healthcare provider about the medications you currently take to see if there are any drug interactions with a new medication they prescribe. Don’t make changes to your medication routine unless a healthcare provider approves it.
Your provider may ask you to complete the Epworth Sleepiness Scale before you begin treatment and again during treatment to assess how well the treatment is working.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypersomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have idiopathic hypersomnia?
It’s easy to feel frustrated living with idiopathic hypersomnia. You consistently get hours of sleep each night but still feel tired during the daytime. This can make completing your daily routine, even getting to school or work on time, extremely challenging.
Your provider may recommend medications to help you feel more awake during the daytime. You might need to try different medications or doses to find what works best for your needs. Your provider will schedule regular appointments to monitor how treatment affects you.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you’re exhausted during the daytime after sleeping through the night. For example, you may fall asleep during daytime tasks, like in class, at work or when talking with friends. A healthcare provider can help you manage symptoms to feel more awake.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
What’s causing me to feel tired during the daytime?
Do I need to change my sleep schedule?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
Are there side effects of the treatment?
When should I take the medications you prescribed?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be difficult to fully participate in what life has to offer when you don’t get the rest your body needs, even after sleeping through the night. Idiopathic hypersomnia may cause you to miss meetings or deadlines, lose focus and concentration, or feel too tired to get out of bed. You might not want to socialize with loved ones because you’re afraid you’ll doze off during a conversation. This can have a significant impact on your mental health.
Luckily, you don’t have to live with these symptoms. A healthcare provider can help you figure out why you’re not getting the rest you need and offer treatment options to help you stay awake.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hypersomnia disorders cause you to be sleepy all day long. And can get in the way of life. Cleveland Clinic’s sleep experts are here to help.
Hypersomnia Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/11/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment