Cycloplegia: What It Is, Risks, Benefits & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Cycloplegia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cycloplegia
Cycloplegia is temporary paralysis of muscles that help with how you focus your eyes. Most people know it as dilating your eyes (a similar, related effect from medications that cause cycloplegia). When you have this, you can’t focus your eyes up close, and your pupils can’t narrow. How long it lasts depends on the medication and other factors.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
Overview
Cycloplegia paralyzes your iris and ciliary bodies temporarily, dilating your pupils and preventing up-close focusing.
What is cycloplegia?
Cycloplegia is a temporary paralysis of muscles inside your
eyes
that control how your eyes focus. Cycloplegia happens with medicated drops that go on the surface of your eye. It’s temporary, and how long it lasts depends on the medication causing it and other factors.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The lens of your eye is flexible. Part of your eye, the
ciliary body
, contains muscles that can change the lens’s shape. That shape-changing process is called “accommodation.” It allows you to focus your eyes on things up close (like when you read a book, use your phone or look at a computer screen).
Accommodation is a reflex, so you can’t control how it happens. Sometimes, the accommodation reflex can cause issues or make certain conditions worse. That’s where cycloplegia is most valuable.
When is cycloplegia used, and why?
Cycloplegia has a few main uses:
Temporarily blocking the accommodation reflex while an
eye care specialist
does an
eye exam
. One way that’s especially helpful is with diagnosing and measuring
refractive errors
.
Temporarily paralyzing muscles inside your eyes during
eye surgeries
.
Treating certain eye conditions, especially
lazy eye (amblyopia)
and specific forms of
uveitis
.
Several of the medications that cause cycloplegia also come in other forms or treat other conditions. So, cycloplegia can also happen as a side effect of these.
One key example of that is scopolamine, an antinausea medication in
motion sickness skin patches
. That’s why you should always wash your hands immediately after applying these patches. Medication residue on your hands can unintentionally cause cycloplegia that lasts up to a couple of days.
Advertisement
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of cycloplegia?
Cycloplegia has several advantages. They are:
It’s temporary
. Once the medication wears off, your eyes return to normal without lingering effects.
It’s noninvasive
. The medications come in eyedrop form, making them easy to apply.
It’s painless
. The medications themselves don’t cause any pain. You might have some discomfort because your pupils can’t narrow to limit how much light enters your eyes. Most eye specialists provide sunglasses for your comfort while you wait for the medications to wear off.
The number of treatment options
. Several medications can cause cycloplegia. That means there are usually other options if you can’t take certain medications for some reason. And the treatment options also have specific strengths and limits, especially how long they last.
What are the side effects of cycloplegia?
Cycloplegia is specific to the ciliary muscles that help you focus your eyes. But the medications that cause cycloplegia also cause pupil dilation, so that’s the most common “side effect” of cycloplegia (though in many cases, like with eye exams, having both is useful).
Because cycloplegia also causes temporary pupil dilation, it’s common to experience:
Light sensitivity
Difficulty reading printed materials and screens up close (like books, newspapers, computers, tablets or phones)
Headaches
Other eye side effects include:
Stinging or burning sensation (this is usually very brief and mild)
Eye redness
Eye irritation
There are several other possible side effects of medications that cause cycloplegia, and these can vary by medication. Some of the longer-acting medications may have more severe side effects. Your eye care specialist is the best person to tell you what medication-specific side effects you’re most likely to experience and what you can expect from them.
Recovery and Outlook
How long does cycloplegia last?
Some medications can cause cycloplegia that lasts for days. That’s more helpful with conditions where the affected eye structures need time to heal or where the goal is to penalize one eye to help the other strengthen (like with lazy eye). Medications that cause cycloplegia include:
Atropine
: lasts seven days to 12 days
Cyclopentolate
: lasts up to 24 hours
Homatropine
: lasts one to three days
Phenylephrine
: lasts up to six hours
Scopolamine
: lasts three to seven days
Tropicamide
: lasts six to 24 hours
How can I take care of myself after treatment involving cycloplegia?
If you have short-term cycloplegia from an eye exam or other treatment, it’s a good idea to take it easy while you wait for the medication to wear off. The side effects of cycloplegia aren’t usually severe. Still, they can interfere with simpler tasks, especially if you spend a lot of time reading or working in front of a computer screen.
Advertisement
While you have cycloplegia, you also may not want to drive. Cycloplegia makes your eyes sensitive to light and unable to focus up close, making it harder to drive safely. You may also find it harder to do work or hobbies while the medication remains active.
In general, your eye care specialist can guide you on things you can do while you have cycloplegia and what should wait until it wears off. And when in doubt, wait it out. It’s better to hold off on some activities rather than risk an injury or another issue because of trouble seeing.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have cycloplegia, the most likely reason is because of a medical treatment. Your eye care specialist can tell you more about specific side effects or issues that mean you need further medical attention.
The more serious side effects aren’t as likely with the most common cycloplegia-causing medications. Some of the more serious side effects that mean you should call your eye specialist or get medical care include:
Behavior changes
Changes in heart rate, especially
fast heart rate (tachycardia)
Confusion
Low blood pressure (hypotension)
Seizures
Breathing too slowly or taking breaths that aren’t deep enough (
respiratory depression
)
A note from Cleveland Clinic
While the effects of cycloplegia may seem inconvenient or bothersome, it can be a valuable tool for eye care specialists. It can help with eye exams and improve the accuracy of vision corrections, and it can treat several different eye conditions. And cycloplegia is temporary, which means your sight will eventually return to what it was before.
Advertisement
If you have concerns about cycloplegia, talk to your eye care specialist. They can explain more about how it can help you specifically and help manage any side effects that you want to minimize or avoid.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Getting an annual eye exam at Cleveland Clinic can help you catch vision problems early and keep your eyes healthy for years to come.
Schedule an Eye Exam
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment