Tokophobia (Fear of Childbirth): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tokophobia (Fear of Childbirth)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tokophobia (Fear of Childbirth)
Tokophobia is an extreme fear of childbirth. The condition causes some women to take excessive measures to avoid getting pregnant. Those who do become pregnant may dread each week of pregnancy instead of enjoying it. With therapy and extra support, this condition can be overcome.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is tokophobia?
Tokophobia is an extreme fear of childbirth. This condition primarily affects
females
, but a small number of males also experience it. Tokophobia is a specific phobia that causes fear of a particular situation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are two types of tokophobia:
Primary tokophobia
occurs in people who've never been pregnant.
Secondary tokophobia
develops after a traumatic event during pregnancy or labor. These may include difficult
labor
or
stillbirth
.
Tokophobia may stem from other fears, including:
Algophobia
:
Fear of pain.
Haphephobia
:
Fear of being touched.
Iatrophobia
:
Fear of doctors.
Nosocomephobia
:
Fear of hospitals.
Obesophobia
:
Fear of gaining weight.
Pedophobia
:
Fear of children.
Thanatophobia:
Fear of dying.
Trypanophobia:
Fear of needles.
What are phobias?
It’s natural to fear things that feel dangerous or uncomfortable. For many people, this includes pregnancy and childbirth. But these thoughts rarely disrupt daily activities.
Phobias cause intense fear that makes you go out of your way to avoid certain situations. You may experience irrational thoughts and behaviors that are difficult to control. In some cases, phobias get in the way of achieving life goals, like having children or expanding your family.
Do I have tokophobia?
Many people feel anxious about childbirth. Tokophobia causes some women to avoid getting pregnant. Women who become pregnant might not feel excited about it and try to hide their growing baby.
There’s no reason to feel embarrassed about tokophobia. And you shouldn’t have to experience these feelings alone. Talking to your healthcare provider can be one of the first steps toward getting relief. Treatment can make being pregnant and planning for childbirth less stressful.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What causes tokophobia?
Causes of tokophobia include:
Having a history of abuse or rape that makes you feel shameful about being pregnant.
Feeling pressured into having an uncomplicated vaginal birth.
Learning of other people’s bad experiences during childbirth.
Being self-conscious about healthcare providers putting their hands near your vagina during childbirth.
Not knowing that the likelihood of complications during childbirth is low.
Anticipating lifestyle changes, like not being able to control your schedule.
What are tokophobia symptoms?
Tokophobia affects your thoughts and behaviors. Many people with tokophobia suffer from
depression
. They’re are also likely to experience negative outcomes.
Thoughts and behaviors
Fear of pregnancy may cause you to:
Avoid sexual intercourse.
Not feel emotionally connected to the developing fetus.
Not feel excited about pregnancy.
Try to hide the fact that you’re pregnant.
Feel disconnected from your partner or loved ones.
Negative pregnancy outcomes
Women who have an extreme fear of giving birth are more likely to:
Choose a
Cesarean birth (C-section)
, even though a safe vaginal delivery is possible.
Seek an abortion if they become pregnant.
Put their baby up for adoption.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is tokophobia diagnosed?
Tokophobia is often diagnosed during healthcare provider visits for other reasons.
Women who aren't pregnant:
During annual exams, healthcare providers ask about
contraception
and plans to start a family. This is an excellent opportunity to discuss your concerns about childbirth.
Women who are pregnant:
Regular
prenatal exams
include questions about your mental health. Answering these questions honestly helps healthcare providers detect tokophobia.
Management and Treatment
How is tokophobia treated?
A common tokophobia treatment is
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
. Undergoing CBT helps you identify the aspects of childbirth that are fueling the phobia. You can also learn healthy coping methods by working with a mental health professional.
Can other treatments help me cope with tokophobia?
Additional methods for overcoming tokophobia may include:
Antidepressants:
If you have depression,
antidepressants
can help. These medications balance brain chemicals responsible for regulating mood.
Hypnotherapy:
Hypnotherapy
uses focused relaxation to achieve a heightened sense of awareness. While in this state, a mental health provider helps you explore subconscious thoughts that are holding you back.
Stress reduction:
Yoga,
meditation
and other relaxation techniques clear your mind. This may make you feel more confident about childbirth.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can tokophobia be cured?
With successful treatment, anticipating childbirth is less likely to feel overwhelming. You may still have
anxiety
about it. But knowing how to calm your mind prevents these feelings from escalating.
Prevention
Is there anything I can do to prevent tokophobia?
While tokophobia can’t be prevented, there are several ways you can reduce its influence on your life. It’s natural to be fearful about childbirth. But this doesn’t have to hold you back from starting or expanding your family. If you feel anxious, it’s never too early to discuss your concerns with your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
You may also wish to shut out stories of other people’s negative childbirth experiences. Just because things don’t go as planned for others doesn't mean the same will happen to you.
Living With
What else is important to know about overcoming tokophobia?
Having a support network can make it easier to cope with tokophobia. Identify friends and loved ones who are a positive influence in your life. These people may or may not have experienced pregnancy. But you can count on them for kind words and encouragement.
You can also learn more about childbirth by:
Attending prenatal classes:
These classes guide you through what to expect during childbirth. They take place toward the end of your pregnancy.
Taking early pregnancy classes:
These classes are for women in the early stages of pregnancy or who wish to become pregnant.
Touring a hospital or birthing center:
Most facilities offer guided tours and give you the opportunity to ask questions.
Joining a support group:
There are many online pregnancy forums, including options for people trying to conceive. Your hospital may also host an in-person group.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Tokophobia is an extreme fear of childbirth. It’s natural to be anxious about the many unknowns that come with delivering a baby. But you shouldn’t let this hold you back from starting or expanding your family. Talk to your healthcare provider about your concerns. There are many methods for overcoming this fear. Doing so can help you appreciate the joys of pregnancy and welcoming a new baby.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/12/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment