Gastrointestinal Diseases: Symptoms, Treatment & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Gastrointestinal Diseases
Advertisement
Advertisement
Gastrointestinal Diseases
GERD, diarrhea and colorectal cancer are examples of gastrointestinal diseases. When examined, some diseases show nothing wrong with the GI tract, but there are still symptoms. Other diseases have symptoms, and there are also visible irregularities in the GI tract. You can prevent and/or treat most gastrointestinal diseases.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
What are gastrointestinal diseases?
Gastrointestinal diseases are health conditions that affect your
gastrointestinal (GI) tract
. Your GI tract is the path food takes through your digestive system — from your mouth to your
rectum
. It also includes your
liver
,
pancreas
and
gallbladder
. Some digestive system diseases cause problems that go away relatively fast with treatment. Others cause problems that are more serious.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
GI diseases can be acute or chronic:
An acute GI disease is one that happens suddenly and lasts a short period of time.
A chronic GI disease can affect you for many months or years.
They can also be either functional or structural:
A functional GI disease is when your healthcare provider can’t see any physical or structural issues when they examine your digestive tract.
A structural GI disease is when your healthcare provider can see evidence of an issue when they examine you.
Functional gastrointestinal diseases
You’ve likely experienced several functional GI problems in your lifetime. Constipation,
gas
and
diarrhea
are examples of functional GI diseases. These types of GI diseases irritate your GI tract and lead to uncomfortable symptoms.
Some of the most common causes of functional GI problems are:
Eating a diet
low in fiber
or high in processed foods
Not getting enough exercise
Traveling or other changes in your typical routine
Stress
and anxiety
Holding your poop or not going as soon as you need to go
Taking certain medicines
Hormonal changes (like
pregnancy
or during
menstruation
)
Food sensitivities
or eating something that didn’t “agree” with you
Treatment for functional GI diseases usually involves lifestyle changes like eating more
fiber-rich foods
, getting more physical activity or avoiding triggers. Sometimes, functional problems go away on their own within a few days.
Advertisement
Structural gastrointestinal diseases
Structural GI diseases are typically more complicated. They tend to cause symptoms that last longer and don’t get better with lifestyle changes alone. Structural problems cause issues your provider can see such as
inflammation
or blockages. Common examples of structural GI diseases include
hemorrhoids
, colon polyps and
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
. Causes of structural GI diseases are more widespread.
What are the most common gastrointestinal diseases?
Healthcare providers who specialize in gastrointestinal diseases are called
gastroenterologists
.
Some of the most common GI conditions they treat include:
Constipation
Constipation
causes hard-to-pass or infrequent bowel movements. You may strain or push hard to get your poop out. You can treat your constipation at home by drinking more water and eating more fiber. Over-the-counter laxatives can also be helpful.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
is where your intestinal muscles contract more or less often than normal.
Abdominal pain
, gas and bloating are common symptoms. Treating IBS can involve changing your eating habits or taking medication that your provider prescribes.
Hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids
are swollen veins in your anus or rectum. Straining when having a bowel movement is the most common cause, but you can get them other ways, too. Avoiding constipation activities that cause straining can help hemorrhoids. Your healthcare provider can also remove large, painful or persistent hemorrhoids.
Diverticular disease
Diverticulosis
is when small pouches (diverticula) form in the wall of your large intestine. When they become infected, it’s called
diverticulitis
. This can lead to bleeding and bowel obstruction.
Treatment could involve eating more fiber, taking
antibiotics
or having surgery.
Colon polyps and colon cancer
Colorectal cancer
is one of the most common cancers in the U.S.
Colonoscopy
screenings help detect the disease, sometimes long before symptoms appear. Almost all colorectal cancers begin as
colon polyps
, benign (noncancerous) growths in the tissues lining your colon and rectum. Screening for colorectal cancer is important and early detection of the disease gives you the best chance at a cure.
Colitis
There are several types of
colitis
, which are conditions that cause inflammation of your bowel. Colitis can cause diarrhea,
rectal bleeding
, abdominal cramps and urgency (frequent and immediate need to poop).
Ulcerative colitis
and
Crohn’s disease
are two common types of colitis.
Celiac disease
Celiac disease
causes problems in your GI tract when you eat gluten, a protein found in wheat and grains. It can cause symptoms like stomach pain, gas and bloating. It’s also considered an
autoimmune condition
because your immune system attacks gluten when it’s in your small intestine. The attack can damage your intestine enough that it stops working properly.
Advertisement
Gastritis
Gastritis
is inflammation in your stomach lining. You may have symptoms like loss of appetite, stomach pain or nausea. Infection, chemicals and autoimmune diseases are common causes. Most cases of gastritis improve within a few days with over-the-counter medication.
Gastroenteritis
Gastroenteritis
is when inflammation spreads from your stomach into your intestines. It causes pain, vomiting and diarrhea. It usually happens when you have a bacterial infection from
food poisoning
or a virus like the
stomach flu
. Most people will have gastroenteritis a few times during their lives for various reasons.
Acid reflux/GERD
Acid reflux and GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease)
is when acid from your stomach flows back up into your esophagus and throat. It causes a burning feeling that can feel like a sore throat. Medications, changing your eating habits and surgery are options for treatment.
Lactose intolerance
Lactose intolerance
is when your small intestine can’t absorb lactose, an ingredient in milk and dairy products. It causes symptoms like diarrhea, bloating and gas. Treatment mainly involves avoiding foods and beverages that contain lactose.
Indigestion (dyspepsia)
Indigestion
is stomach pain or discomfort after eating. It’s very common and typically happens within a few minutes to a few hours after having a meal. You can usually relieve your symptoms with an
antacid
.
Advertisement
Barrett’s esophagus
Barrett’s esophagus
changes the appearance of the lining of your esophagus. Sometimes, it doesn’t cause symptoms, but chronic acid reflux/GERD almost always causes it. People with this condition have a higher risk of developing
esophageal cancer
.
Can gastrointestinal diseases be prevented?
You can lower your risk of many GI diseases by eating nutritious foods, being physically active several days each week and going to the bathroom as soon as you need to go. Getting regular screening for colon cancer and visiting your healthcare provider for annual wellness visits are also beneficial.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having a GI disease can be challenging and disruptive to your daily life. It may be hard to manage your symptoms and find relief. But you’re not alone in what you’re going through. More than 60 million people in the U.S. are affected by a digestive disease. Your healthcare team is there for you, too. Let them know what you’re going through and how it affects you. They’re there to listen to you and help you. They can recommend treatment options based on your condition.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have issues with your digestive system, you need a team of experts you can trust. Our gastroenterology specialists at Cleveland Clinic can help.
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/31/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us