BMI (Body Mass Index): What It Is & How To Calculate
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Body Mass Index (BMI)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Body Mass Index (BMI)
Body mass index (BMI) is a tool that healthcare providers use to estimate the amount of body fat by using your height and weight measurements. It can help assess risk factors for certain health conditions. The BMI isn’t always an accurate representation of body fatness.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Bariatric Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is body mass index (BMI)?
Body mass index (BMI) is a medical screening tool that measures the ratio of your height to your weight to estimate the amount of
body fat
you have. Healthcare providers calculate BMI by using weight in kilograms (kg) divided by the square of height in meters (m2).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In most people, BMI correlates to body fat — the higher the number, the more body fat you may have — but
it’s not accurate in some cases
. BMI alone doesn’t diagnose health. Healthcare providers use BMI and other tools and tests to assess someone’s health status and risks.
High body fat may lead to heart disease,
stroke
and Type 2 diabetes. Low body fat may be related to malnutrition. Just the right amount of body fat helps vitamins and minerals get into your body. It also provides a source of energy for your body, helps maintain body temperature and protects your organs.
You shouldn’t use the standard BMI chart to
evaluate a child’s or teenager’s weight
. Talk to your child’s healthcare provider about the optimum weight range for their age and height.
What is BMI used for?
Healthcare providers use BMI to help diagnose weight types and as a screening tool for certain health conditions.
Diagnosing weight types with BMI
In general, the following BMI ranges (in kg/m2) classify different weight types:
Underweight
: Less than 18.5
Optimum range
: 18.5 to 24.9
Overweight
: 25 to 29.9
Class I obesity
: 30 to 34.9
Class II obesity
: 35 to 39.9
Class III obesity
: More than 40
BMI isn’t the only tool providers use to classify weight types. Other tools include:
Advertisement
Measuring waist circumference
Measuring skin thickness using skinfold calipers in certain areas of your body, such as the back of your upper arms and under your shoulder blades
DEXA scan
and air displacement plethysmography (ADP) — these are used less often
Screening for health risks with BMI
If you have a BMI less than 18.5 (underweight), you may be at a higher risk for developing the following conditions:
Malnutrition
Anemia
Weakened
immune system
, which could lead to more frequent infections and illnesses
Osteoporosis
Infertility
If you have underweight, your healthcare provider will likely order certain blood tests and other tests to check your overall health and to see if you’re malnourished.
In general, the higher your BMI, the higher your risk for the following conditions:
Heart disease
High blood pressure (hypertension)
Type 2 diabetes
Gallstones
Osteoarthritis
Sleep apnea
Certain cancers, including
colon
,
breast
, endometrial and
gallbladder
Depression
and other mental health conditions
It’s important to remember that you could have any of the above health conditions without having a high BMI. Similarly, you could have a high BMI without having any of these conditions. Genetics and other factors, such as
smoking
cigarettes, play a large role in the development of these conditions.
If your BMI reveals you may have
obesity
, your provider will likely order certain blood tests to check your general health, such as a
comprehensive metabolic panel
and
lipid panel
.
How do I calculate my BMI?
You can calculate BMI yourself with these steps:
Multiply your weight in pounds by 703.
Divide that answer by your height in inches (there are 12 inches in 1 foot).
Divide that answer by your height in inches again.
For example, a person who weighs 180 lbs. and is 5 feet and 5 inches tall (65 inches total) would calculate their BMI in the following way:
180 x 703 = 126,540
126,540 / 65 = 1,946.769
1,946.769 / 65 = 29.95
Their BMI would be 29.9.
What is a healthy BMI?
The optimum range for a healthy BMI is considered to be 18.5 to 24.9.
It’s important to remember that body fatness isn’t the only determiner of overall health. Several other factors, such as genetics, activity level, smoking cigarettes or using tobacco, drinking alcohol and mental health conditions all affect your overall health and your likelihood of developing certain medical conditions.
What are the limitations of BMI?
The standard BMI chart has limitations for various reasons. Because of this, it’s important to not put too much emphasis on your BMI.
Even though the BMI chart can be inaccurate for certain people, healthcare providers still use it because it’s the quickest tool for assessing a person’s estimated body fat amount.
Advertisement
Limitations of using BMI to help diagnose weight types
The standard BMI has limitations in regards to diagnosing weight types, including:
BMI doesn’t differentiate between lean body mass (the weight of everything in your body except fat) and fat mass. Because of this, a person can have a high BMI (by being muscular) but still have a very low fat mass and vice versa.
The same BMI chart is used for
males
and females even though adult females typically have more body fat than adult males.
The BMI chart hasn’t been adjusted for the increasing average adult height over the years.
You shouldn’t use the standard BMI chart to assess the amount of body fat of the following populations:
Athletes and bodybuilders
Children and teenagers
Anyone who’s pregnant
Anyone over the age of 65
People who have
muscle atrophy
(wasting) due to medical conditions
Limitations of using BMI as a screening tool for health conditions
The BMI as a screening tool for assessing the risk of certain health conditions, such as Type 2 diabetes and heart disease, has some limitations, including:
The BMI doesn’t measure the location or distribution of body fat. This is an issue because excess fat accumulation in certain areas of your body, such as in your belly (abdomen), is associated with a higher risk of health conditions than excess fat accumulation in other areas of your body, such as in your thighs.
The relationship between BMI and rate of death often doesn’t account for such factors as family history of diabetes, high blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and high cholesterol (dyslipidemia), familial longevity (average lifespan) or family history of cancer.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Body mass index (BMI) is a quick tool that healthcare providers can use to assess your risk for certain health conditions. However, BMI isn’t always an accurate measurement of body fatness and isn’t the sole determiner of your general health. If you have any questions or concerns about your weight or your risk for developing certain health conditions, such as heart disease, talk to your healthcare provider. They’re available to help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have obesity and losing weight is an uphill battle, Cleveland Clinic experts can help you decide if bariatric surgery is an option.
Schedule Bariatric Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/09/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes