Nicotine Headache: What It Is & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nicotine Headache
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nicotine Headache
Nicotine headaches may be a side effect of tobacco use. Or they may be a symptom of nicotine withdrawal. You can get nicotine headaches from cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, e-cigarettes and nicotine patches. The only way to get rid of nicotine headaches permanently is to quit using tobacco.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a nicotine headache?
Some people who use nicotine notice that they develop
headaches
during or after its use.
Nicotine withdrawal
may also cause headaches. Nicotine is the addictive ingredient in cigarettes,
e-cigarettes
, chewing tobacco, cigars and other tobacco products.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There’s a link between nicotine and headaches. But tobacco products contain many other chemicals as well, which may also contribute to headaches. In addition, headaches have countless causes. It may be difficult to figure out if nicotine is causing your headache or something else.
Researchers are still learning how nicotine and other tobacco chemicals contribute to headaches. So far, there isn’t a clear cause.
Symptoms and Causes
What does a nicotine headache feel like?
The main symptom of a nicotine headache is pain. Headache and pain types can vary. Some types of headaches are more common with nicotine use, including:
Cluster headaches
: This severe, focused pain can last for 30 to 45 minutes at a time. You may get cluster headaches up to eight times a day for weeks or months.
Migraines
: These headaches cause severe, throbbing pain. Studies have found conflicting results about the link between tobacco and migraines. Getting a migraine after you smoke may be linked to factors unrelated to nicotine, but research is still ongoing.
Tension headaches
: These headaches cause a pressure or tight band feeling around your head. Cigarette smoke can be a trigger for this type of headache.
What causes nicotine headaches?
In general, headache pain results from signals interacting among your
brain
,
blood vessels
and surrounding
nerves
. During a headache, multiple mechanisms activate specific nerves that affect muscles and blood vessels. These nerves send pain signals to your brain, causing a headache.
Advertisement
Researchers are still learning how exactly nicotine causes headaches. So far, some theories include:
Long-term (chronic) nicotine use makes your nerves more sensitive to pain signals. This could increase your vulnerability to headaches and pain in general.
Nicotine narrows your blood vessels, which could decrease blood flow to your brain and cause headaches.
Nicotine withdrawal may cause headaches due to changes in
neurotransmitters
that your brain was previously used to.
Researchers think the other chemicals involved in
smoking
cigarettes could contribute to headaches, including toxicity from carbon monoxide.
Strong odors are also known to trigger headaches and migraines. Smoke odors from cigarettes or cigars may be triggers.
Can nicotine patches cause headaches?
Yes, one of the possible side effects of nicotine patches is headaches. Nicotine patches are a type of nicotine replacement therapy (NRT). NRT can help you quit using nicotine. Other NRT products, like nicotine gum, can also cause headaches.
If you have severe headaches while using NRT, speak with a healthcare provider. Headaches may be a sign that the therapy is giving you too much or too little nicotine.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are nicotine headaches diagnosed?
To diagnose a nicotine headache, a healthcare provider may ask you questions about headache symptoms. It’s important to be honest about your nicotine use, even if your healthcare provider doesn’t directly ask.
Your provider may want to know:
When headache symptoms start.
How long your symptoms last.
What factors decrease headache symptoms.
What tobacco products you use.
How often you use tobacco products.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for nicotine headache?
If you use nicotine regularly, your healthcare provider will likely encourage you to
quit
. Quitting nicotine use is the best way to get rid of nicotine headaches permanently. Giving up nicotine has many other health benefits, too.
Keep in mind that nicotine withdrawal can also lead to headaches in the first two to three weeks after quitting nicotine. To help you find nicotine withdrawal headache relief, your provider may recommend:
Over-the-counter pain medications
:
Acetaminophen
(Tylenol®),
ibuprofen
(Advil®, Motrin®) and
naproxen
(Aleve®) can provide pain relief. Be aware that using nicotine can make these medicines less effective.
Prescription medications
: Medicines such as
triptans
(Ergomar®, Imitrex®, Maxalt®) or
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) inhibitors
(Nurtec®, Ubrelvy®), among other medications, may relieve migraine symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
When do nicotine headaches stop?
Usually, nicotine headaches start going away about two to three weeks after quitting tobacco. You may still have mental symptoms, such as
depression
, irritability or anxiety, after physical symptoms go away.
Advertisement
When you quit using tobacco, the first week is the hardest. Physical symptoms like headaches, insomnia and tobacco cravings are usually the most intense in the first five days.
Prevention
How can I prevent nicotine headaches?
The best way to prevent nicotine headaches is to avoid using all tobacco products. Besides getting headaches, using tobacco significantly increases your risk of
lung cancer
,
stroke
and
cardiovascular disease
. It also makes it harder for your body to recover from surgery and health problems.
When you
quit smoking
cigarettes, your health risks decline sharply. Within five years of quitting, your stroke risk may be about as low as someone who has never smoked. Your risks for mouth, throat, esophagus and
bladder cancer
are cut in half. And within 10 years, your risk of dying from lung cancer decreases by 50%.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider about nicotine headaches?
If you want help quitting nicotine use, reach out to a healthcare provider. Their job is to help you, not to judge you. They can offer various resources and strategies for quitting.
If you have headaches or migraines that interfere with your life — whether you think they’re from nicotine or something else — it’s important to see a provider. They can do a headache evaluation and offer treatment options.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Nicotine impacts your health in many ways — and headaches may be one of them. Researchers know there’s a connection between the two but not the exact cause. The only way to know if nicotine is the culprit behind your headaches is to quit using the substance for good. You’ll gain several other health benefits by doing so.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A substance use disorder can turn your life upside down. Cleveland Clinic has the hope and treatment you need.
Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/30/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment