Laser Lipolysis: What To Expect, Sessions & Results
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Laser Lipolysis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Laser Lipolysis
Laser lipolysis is a safe in-office cosmetic procedure that uses laser energy to heat and remove fat cells. It’s ideal for shrinking various areas of the body. Laser lipolysis may be minimally invasive or noninvasive. Recovery is quick and the risks are minimal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What is laser lipolysis?
Laser lipolysis is a body contouring procedure. It uses laser energy to remove excess fat from various areas of your body, including your:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Abdomen.
Back and neck.
Calves.
Hips and butt.
Obliques (“love handles”).
Thighs.
Upper arms.
Other names for laser lipolysis include laser liposuction, laser lipo and liposculpture.
Types of laser lipolysis
Plastic surgeons
may perform:
Minimally invasive laser lipolysis:
Involves making a tiny incision in your skin to insert the laser applicator.
Noninvasive laser lipolysis:
Doesn’t involve any incisions, as the laser applicator is applied on top of your skin.
Does laser lipolysis really work?
Both minimally invasive and noninvasive laser lipolysis are effective in reducing fat cells. It may take up to three months to see results.
How many sessions of laser lipolysis are needed?
While everyone’s situation is different, on average, people may need one to two treatments for each body part.
Who is a good candidate for laser lipolysis?
Good candidates for laser lipolysis include people who:
Are in good overall health.
Don’t
smoke
or can
quit smoking
weeks before treatment.
Have realistic expectations about their results.
Who isn’t a good candidate for laser lipolysis?
In general, laser lipolysis may not be the best option for people who have:
Excess weight (
obesity
).
Loose skin.
Medical conditions, such as
diabetes
,
cardiovascular diseases
or
liver disease
.
Laser lipolysis also isn’t appropriate for
women
who are pregnant or trying to get pregnant. Your plastic surgeon will help you determine if minimally invasive or noninvasive laser lipolysis — or another type of
body contouring
— is right for you.
Advertisement
Is laser lipolysis permanent?
Laser lipolysis results are typically long-lasting. However, the slimming, tightening effects go away if you gain weight.
Is laser lipolysis safe?
For many people, laser lipolysis is a safe procedure with relatively minor risks and a quick recovery.
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for laser lipolysis?
Your plastic surgeon will give you special instructions to prepare for laser lipolysis, which may include:
Quitting smoking.
Stopping blood-thinning medication, such as aspirin and
warfarin
.
What happens before laser lipolysis treatment?
Laser lipolysis is an in-office procedure. Before minimally invasive laser lipolysis, a plastic surgeon applies local
anesthesia
to numb the area so you don’t feel any pain. You’ll be awake during the procedure.
Noninvasive laser lipolysis doesn’t require any anesthesia, as there are no incisions.
What happens during laser lipolysis treatment?
Minimally invasive laser lipolysis takes about an hour. During that time, a plastic surgeon:
Makes a small incision (cut) in your skin.
Inserts the laser through the incision, which melts away fat cells.
Inserts a small tube to suction out the melted fat.
Closes and covers the incision.
Noninvasive laser lipolysis takes about 25 minutes. Your healthcare provider puts a special laser applicator on the area of your body being treated. As the laser works, you’ll feel warm and cool sensations.
What happens after laser lipolysis treatment?
After laser lipolysis, the healthcare provider will give you special instructions. With minimally invasive laser lipolysis, you may have specific directions for
incision care
. You also might need to wear:
A thin tube near your incision to drain fluid and prevent swelling.
Compression garments to help you heal faster and enhance your results.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of laser lipolysis?
Laser lipolysis reduces fat in specific areas of your body that are often difficult to change with diet and exercise.
Compared to traditional
liposuction
, laser lipolysis has a lower risk of complications and faster recovery. There’s little to no downtime.
What are the risks of laser lipolysis?
Laser lipolysis risks are usually minimal and complications are uncommon. Your plastic surgeon should discuss the risks associated with the type of treatment you have.
With noninvasive laser lipolysis, you may experience temporary:
Redness.
Swelling.
Tenderness.
Minimally invasive laser lipolysis may cause side effects, such as:
Bruising
.
Collection of blood under the skin (hematoma).
Redness.
Scarring
.
Swelling.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time?
With noninvasive laser lipolysis, there’s no recovery time. It may take a few days to recover from minimally invasive laser lipolysis.
When can I go back to work and other activities?
With noninvasive laser lipolysis, you can return to work right away or the next day. With minimally invasive laser lipolysis, you may need to wait a few days.
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider might suggest waiting several weeks before participating in any strenuous activities, such as strength training.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your healthcare provider immediately if you’re experiencing any signs of possible infection, such as:
Discharge.
Excessive bleeding.
Pain.
Severe swelling.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Laser lipolysis is an effective way to reduce fat in various areas of your body, such as your thighs and upper arms. Treatment may be minimally invasive or noninvasive. Laser lipolysis results tend to be long-lasting unless you gain weight. Talk to your healthcare provider to see if you’re a good candidate for laser lipolysis or a different cosmetic treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need cosmetic or reconstructive plastic surgery, you’ll need skilled, detailed and compassionate providers. At Cleveland Clinic, we’re here to help.
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/09/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment