Subareolar Abscess Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Subareolar Abscess
Advertisement
Advertisement
Subareolar Abscess
A subareolar abscess is a painful, infected lump in your breast that can form as a complication of mastitis. Anyone can get this type of abscess, but you’re more likely to develop it if you’re breastfeeding. Antibiotics and draining the abscess can clear up the infection and help your breast heal. Don’t delay seeking medical care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is A Subareolar Abscess?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is A Subareolar Abscess?
A subareolar abscess is an infected collection of fluid beneath your areola (the darker area of skin around your
nipple
). It’s a type of
breast abscess
and a possible complication of
mastitis
. You might notice a swollen lump forming under your skin. The lump may hurt if you press on it, and
pus
may come out.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You should always see a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of a subareolar abscess. Don’t wait or try to treat it at home. Providers drain the fluid and give you medicine to clear up the infection.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a subareolar abscess
Subareolar abscess symptoms include:
Pain (often the first symptom)
A noticeable
lump
under your skin
Swelling around the lump
Skin changes around the lump (redness/discoloration, feeling warm to the touch)
Nipple that points inward
Pus leaking out
You may also have
flu-like symptoms
, including fatigue, fever or chills.
What causes a subareolar abscess?
A subareolar abscess is a complication of mastitis. Let’s take a closer look at what that means.
Mastitis is the medical term for
inflammation
in your
breast
tissue. Sometimes, the inflammation leads to a
bacterial infection
(bacterial mastitis). Treatment can stop the problem in its tracks. But without treatment, the infection can get worse. Fluid (pus and milk) starts building up in one spot under your skin. This fluid collection is called an abscess.
We’re talking about subareolar abscesses in this article, but it’s important to know that fluid can build up anywhere in your breast — not just beneath your areola. “Breast abscess” is the medical term for a fluid collection in your breast.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Most people who develop a subareolar abscess are
breastfeeding
. Other things that can raise your risk for this type of infection include:
Smoking
Recently getting a nipple piercing
Being born with an
inverted nipple
Complications of this condition
A subareolar abscess that’s not treated — or that comes back after treatment — can lead to a milk
fistula
. This is an abnormal passageway that carries milk from a duct to your skin’s surface. A fistula causes milk to leak out somewhere else on your breast — not at your nipple, where it should come out.
Rarely, a breast abscess can lead to a life-threatening complication called
sepsis
. Go to the emergency room right away if you notice any signs of sepsis, including:
Chills
Confusion
Fast heart rate
Fever
Shortness of breath
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
To diagnose a subareolar abscess, your healthcare provider will:
Ask you about your symptoms and when they started
Do a
physical exam
Do imaging tests — typically, an
ultrasound
and, possibly, a
mammogram
Collect a sample of fluid from the abscess to test in a lab
Your provider may recommend other tests as needed to diagnose or rule out other possible conditions.
Management and Treatment
How to treat a subareolar abscess
Subareolar abscess treatment typically involves:
Antibiotics
. Your provider will choose an
antibiotic
appropriate for your symptoms and the type of bacteria that’s responsible.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
is commonly the first-line choice for breast abscesses. You’ll likely take pills by mouth for 10 to 14 days.
Abscess drainage
. Your provider will inject a local
anesthetic
to numb the area around the abscess. Then, they’ll either insert a needle or make a tiny cut (incision) in the lump to allow the fluid to drain. This process helps your provider both diagnose and treat the abscess.
Your provider will tell you how to care for the affected skin at home. They may tell you to “pack the wound.” This involves filling the now cleaned-out space with gauze. This allows the abscess cavity to heal from inside out. It also lowers the risk of another abscess forming.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a subareolar abscess?
Following treatment, your breast will heal over the next few weeks. Be sure to follow your provider’s instructions on how to care for the
wound
. Your provider will also tell you if you should come back for any follow-ups.
Can I breastfeed while healing?
Ask your provider for guidance tailored to your situation. In general, it’s safe to breastfeed as you heal. You should continue feeding your baby as often as you normally would (no more and no less).
For example, if you were feeding or pumping every three hours prior to the abscess, continue at this frequency. Doing so helps you keep the right amount of milk for your baby’s needs. Pumping too often raises your risk of inflammation and
engorgement
.
Make sure your provider knows you plan to keep nursing so they can adjust your antibiotics as needed.
Prevention
How can I lower my risk of a subareolar abscess?
Smoking is one of the strongest risk factors for breast abscesses. If you smoke, talk to your provider about
ways to quit
.
You can also lower your risk of a breast abscess by:
Advertisement
Seeking good
lactation support
, including help with
latching
Avoiding
oversupply
by feeding/pumping based on your infant’s current needs
Avoiding rapid changes in how often you
pump
Directly breastfeeding, if possible
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might’ve anticipated some challenges to come along with breastfeeding. But you probably didn’t expect a painful abscess to be part of the journey. The most important thing you can do is seek medical care early for any subareolar abscess symptoms — including pain, skin color changes or lumps. Treatment can help your breast heal so you can feel better and enjoy this bonding time with your infant.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breastfeeding is natural and rewarding, but it’s not without challenges. Get the support you need at Cleveland Clinic.
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider