Cheilectomy: Surgery, Procedure Details & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Cheilectomy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cheilectomy
Cheilectomy surgery helps relieve problems in your big toe joint due to hallux rigidus, which causes pain, stiffness and inflexibility. During cheilectomy, surgeons remove bone spurs and bone tissue to relieve pain and create room in your toe joint for greater flexibility and range of motion.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What is cheilectomy?
Cheilectomy (pronounced “ky-LEK-tuh-me”) is surgery to remove bone spurs and bone from your foot so your big toe has enough space to bend.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What conditions does cheilectomy treat?
Cheilectomy treats
hallux rigidus
(“stiff big toe”). Hallux rigidus is a type of
osteoarthritis
in your big toe joint, the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint.
If you have hallux rigidus, painful
bone spurs
(osteophytes) may develop on your MTP joint. These bone spurs form a lump in your skin that makes wearing a shoe painful. It can make it difficult to move and walk.
Why is cheilectomy done?
A healthcare provider may perform cheilectomy if you have mild to moderate hallux rigidus and nonsurgical treatments haven’t helped.
Nonsurgical treatments for hallux rigidus include:
Corticosteroid
injections.
Elimination of certain activities, such as running.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs).
Orthotics and stiff shoes that limit movement in the joint.
What’s the difference between cheilectomy and bunion surgery?
Both surgeries remove bone spurs. The main difference between cheilectomy and bunion surgery is the location of the bone spurs.
In cheilectomy, surgeons remove bone spurs from the top of your MTP joint. A
bunion (hallux valgus)
is a bone spur that forms on the outside of your big toe. Healthcare providers perform
bunionectomy
when a bunion causes pain and immobility in your toe joint.
Treatment Details
What happens before cheilectomy?
Before cheilectomy, a healthcare provider does a
physical examination
. They may check the range of motion of your toe. You may have
X-rays
or other imaging tests so your provider can see the joint and any bone spurs.
Advertisement
How do healthcare providers perform cheilectomy?
During cheilectomy, your healthcare provider makes an incision in the top (dorsal side) of your foot to remove bone spurs. Bilateral cheilectomy is surgery performed on both feet at the same time.
Are there different types of cheilectomy surgery?
The procedure details for cheilectomy may differ slightly depending on the type of surgery you have:
Open cheilectomy
uses one large incision.
Minimally invasive cheilectomy
uses smaller incisions. Surgeons insert an instrument called a burr through small incisions in your foot to remove bone spurs. You may heal faster after minimally invasive cheilectomy.
What happens after cheilectomy?
Cheilectomy is usually outpatient surgery, so you’ll go home the same day. After the procedure, you’ll wear a special shoe for a few weeks while your foot heals. Your healthcare provider may recommend a pain reliever like ibuprofen or acetaminophen to help you manage discomfort.
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of cheilectomy?
For many people, cheilectomy relieves pain and improves flexibility in their big toe.
What are the risks or complications of cheilectomy?
Some people who have cheilectomy continue to have pain when moving their big toe. They may need more surgery to:
Repair hallux rigidus.
Fuse bones (arthrodesis procedure).
Help relieve pressure on damaged cartilage in their toe joint (Moberg osteotomy surgery).
Recovery and Outlook
How long will cheilectomy recovery take?
Cheilectomy recovery time varies. Your foot may be swollen for a few weeks or a few months after cheilectomy surgery. After surgery, wear the special support shoe for a couple of weeks as your foot heals.
When can I go back to work after cheilectomy?
Your healthcare provider will let you know when you can return to work. Most people are back on the job in about one to two months. If you have significant pain or swelling — or if your job requires a lot of movement — it may take a bit longer to return to work.
Are there cheilectomy complications?
As with any surgery, infection and
scarring
can happen.
Other complications after cheilectomy surgery include:
Worsening of hallux rigidus.
Pain in the ball of your foot.
Needing more surgery, including bone fusion surgery (arthrodesis).
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider after cheilectomy?
Call your healthcare provider if the skin around your incision becomes red or extremely swollen.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hallux rigidus causes pain, stiffness and bone spurs to form on the top of your big toe joint. Cheilectomy is surgery to remove bone spurs and bone from your foot so your big toe has enough space to bend. During cheilectomy, your surgeon removes bone spurs to relieve pain and give your joint room to move. Cheilectomy can relieve big toe pain and inflexibility.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/24/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment