Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome: Symptoms, Causes & Triggers, Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome
Cyclic vomiting syndrome is when you experience cycles of severe nausea, vomiting and exhaustion that can last from a few hours up to a few days. Although the symptoms won’t occur daily, the syndrome can last a lifetime. Avoiding triggers and taking anti-seizure and anti-nausea medications can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS)?
Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) involves repeated, unexplained episodes of severe nausea and vomiting. Episodes can last from a few hours to several days. They can be so severe that you need to stay in bed. You may need to go to the emergency room (ER) or hospital to get IV fluids to prevent dehydration. Following an episode, you’re free of symptoms and return to normal health.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
CVS may last for months, years or decades. However, symptoms don’t occur every day. Episodes generally occur several times a year but can happen up to once or twice a month.
The symptoms, time of day, frequency, severity and length of each episode are usually the same for any one person. But these factors can vary from person to person.
How common is cyclic vomiting syndrome?
CVS is more common in children than adults. Approximately 3 of every 100,000 children have CVS. In most cases in children, episodes start between the ages of 3 and 7. However, the disorder can begin at any age.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS)?
Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) involves sudden, repeated episodes of severe nausea and vomiting. Episodes often unfold like this:
Prodrome phase
: You start feeling nauseated and sweaty in the minutes or hours leading up to the vomiting. For most people, the feeling starts in the early morning hours.
Vomiting phase
: You vomit, sometimes several times an hour. Children with CVS may projectile vomit. The vomiting may last for a few hours or even a few days. The experience can feel so intense that you’re unable to talk to others and need to stay in bed alone.
Recovery phase
: The vomiting and nausea gradually improve.
Well phase
: You return to feeling like yourself again.
Advertisement
Other signs and symptoms of CVS include:
Abdominal pain
.
Diarrhea
.
Dizziness
or
vertigo
.
Drooling
or spitting.
Extreme thirst
.
Loss of appetite
.
Pale skin.
Severe
headaches
and
fatigue
.
Sensitivity to light or sound.
Low-grade
fever
(up to 101 degrees Fahrenheit or 38.33 degrees Celsius).
Retching (dry-heaving), where your vomiting reflex forces you to throw up, but nothing comes out.
What causes cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS)?
There isn’t a single known cause of CVS. Instead, several factors may play a role, including:
Issues with your
brain-gut axis
.
Problems with how your brain communicates with nerves in your gastrointestinal (GI) tract may lead to uncontrollable vomiting. Some scientists call CVS a brain-gut disorder.
Changes or imbalances in your autonomic nervous system
. Your autonomic nervous system controls involuntary activities, like your heartbeat, blood pressure and vomiting reflex. A glitch in the system can lead to vomiting episodes.
Migraine headaches
.
Migraine headaches
appear in up to 80% of children and 25% of adults with CVS. A migraine is significantly more intense than just a bad headache. Like CVS, it usually begins with an uncomfortable feeling that an episode is about to start. Many people with CVS have a family history of migraines.
Abnormal mitochondrial DNA
. Mitochondria power cells. The instructions that tell mitochondria how to work (
DNA
) can become abnormal because of an illness, a
genetic condition
or exposure to drugs or toxins. The nerve cells in your gut require a lot of energy to work correctly. Problems with their power source (mitochondria) may cause uncontrollable vomiting.
What triggers cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS)?
Certain conditions, events and emotional states can trigger a vomiting episode, including:
Seasonal changes (symptoms are more common in fall and winter).
Reactions to foods like chocolate, cheese, caffeine or MSG.
Heightened positive emotions, like excitement (in children).
Panic attacks, stress and anxiety (in adults).
Allergies
,
sinus infections
or the
flu
.
Physical exhaustion.
Prolonged fasting.
Prolonged marijuana use.
Menstrual periods
.
Motion sickness
.
What complications can result from cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS)?
CVS can lead to:
Dehydration
: Vomiting and diarrhea can cause you to lose too much fluid.
Esophagitis
: The vomit (which is acidic) can cause inflammation in your esophagus.
Mallory-Weiss tear
:
Severe muscular contractions from the vomiting can tear the lower end of your esophagus.
Tooth decay
: The vomit can wear away your tooth enamel and cause cavities.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) diagnosed?
Diagnosing CVS involves ruling out other conditions that cause similar symptoms. Your healthcare provider will ask questions about your medical history, family medical history, and your pattern of vomiting and nausea.
You’ll need a
physical exam
and (likely) several tests.
What tests do providers use to diagnose CVS?
There isn’t a single test to diagnose CVS. Instead, your provider may order several tests to exclude other conditions that cause vomiting. Tests include:
Advertisement
Lab tests (
blood
and
urine
tests)
: Lab tests check body fluids for signs of metabolic disorders, mitochondrial disease or problems with your organs that can cause CVS symptoms.
Imaging tests
: Imaging tests can reveal issues with organs in your digestive and nervous systems that cause vomiting. You may need an
abdominal ultrasound
, a brain
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging),
CT scan
(computed tomography scan) or X-rays called an
upper GI series
. You may need a
gastric emptying test
to see how food moves through your digestive system.
Upper endoscopy
:
This test can show problems in your esophagus, stomach or small intestine that may be causing your vomiting episodes.
What conditions can be mistaken for cyclic vomiting syndrome?
A CVS diagnosis involves ruling out common conditions that cause vomiting, including infections, acid reflux (
GERD
) and
stomach ulcers
. Your provider may also need to exclude:
Inflammation
: Swelling and irritation in your stomach (
gastritis
), pancreas (
pancreatitis
) or appendix (
appendicitis
).
Volvulus or malrotation
: Twisting of your intestine.
Ureteropelvic (UPJ) obstruction
: A blockage where your kidney attaches to your bladder.
Metabolic disorders
: Conditions that involve problems with how your body turns food into energy.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) treated?
Treatment for cyclic vomiting syndrome depends on whether you’re experiencing an episode or trying to prevent one from happening.
Prodrome phase (symptom onset)
: When symptoms first start, healthcare providers use medications to manage nausea, reduce stomach acid and relieve migraine symptoms and abdominal pain.
Vomiting phase
: Providers prescribe medicines to manage migraines and reduce your stomach acid and anxiety. You may need to go to a hospital to receive IV fluids and nutrition to prevent dehydration. It’s a good idea to rest in a dark and quiet environment. Calming environments can ease symptoms.
Recovery phase
: You’ll continue to receive IV fluids as needed. You may progress gradually to clear liquids first and then solid foods. Or, you may feel ready for solid foods immediately after the vomiting stops.
Well phase
: You may receive medications to prevent future episodes. You’ll likely need a trial period to test how effective a treatment is.
What medications treat CVS?
Medications stop an episode, reduce its intensity or prevent it from happening. Your prescription depends on your age, how severe your episodes are and how you’ve responded to other forms of treatment.
Medications include:
Anti-migraine medicines.
Anti-nausea medicines.
Anti-seizure medicines
.
Advertisement
You may also benefit from taking supplements, including
coenzyme Q10
,
riboflavin
and
L-carnitine
at doses recommended by your provider. Never start a supplement without getting your provider’s OK first.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have CVS?
Many children with CVS eventually outgrow it but develop severe migraines as adults. Persistent and severe vomiting can disrupt daily life for children and adults alike. Children may have to miss school, and adults may have to miss work. Depending on how severe the vomiting is, you may need to be hospitalized to prevent dehydration.
Working with your provider to find the right treatments and identify your triggers is essential. Everyone’s experience is different. It’s important to find what works for you.
Prevention
Recognizing and avoiding triggers can reduce your risk of a CVS episode.
How can cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) be prevented?
You can reduce your risk of an episode by avoiding triggers and taking medications as prescribed by your healthcare provider. Other tips include:
Treat allergies and sinus problems immediately.
Stay active, but don’t over-exercise.
Avoid food and food additive triggers.
Avoid extreme diets or fasting.
Get the right amount of sleep.
Manage stress and anxiety.
Living With
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Ask your provider:
What tests will I need to determine whether I have CVS?
What medicines will I need to stop or prevent an episode?
What lifestyle changes can I make to avoid my triggers?
What lifestyle changes can I make to improve my symptoms?
When should I contact you or visit the ER when I’m experiencing CVS symptoms?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
CVS may feel as if your gut (and vomiting reflex) has turned against you. It’s a frustrating diagnosis, especially since no single medicine or lifestyle change guarantees you won’t have an episode. Be patient with yourself and your provider as you find treatments that work. It may take some time to identify your triggers, but eventually, most people with CVS get good at learning and avoiding them. In the meantime, some medicines can ease your symptoms when an episode does start.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have issues with your digestive system, you need a team of experts you can trust. Our gastroenterology specialists at Cleveland Clinic can help.
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/02/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us