Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is a rare genetic disorder that leads to brief attacks of muscle weakness or paralysis. High potassium levels cause it. Certain foods, rest after activity or stress may trigger it. But treatments and routine changes can help reduce how many attacks you have.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Movement Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis?
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (hyperKPP or HYPP) causes sudden episodes (attacks) of muscle weakness or temporary paralysis. It happens when potassium levels in your blood get too high.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hyperkalemia
means your blood has more potassium than normal. Potassium is an important mineral that helps muscles contract and work properly. During an attack, the extra potassium can get in the way of muscle control.
Attacks for this rare genetic disorder often last 15 minutes to an hour. But sometimes, they may be longer. The condition can start in childhood, adolescence or early adulthood. Many people notice their first episode before age 20.
Treatment may not stop every episode, but it can make attacks happen less often.
Symptoms and Causes
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis symptoms
HyperKPP mostly affects the muscles in your arms and legs. The symptoms come and go, which means they shouldn’t last forever. Common symptoms include:
Muscle weakness or
paralysis
Muscle
stiffness
Problems
relaxing
After an attack, muscle control usually returns. You might have mild stiffness in your face and hands between attacks.
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis triggers
Certain things may cause hyperKPP symptoms. These may include:
Eating
potassium-rich foods
, like bananas, leafy greens and potatoes
Drastic temperature changes (hot or cold)
Rest after physical activity
Taking potassium supplements
Stress
Triggers are different for each person and aren’t limited to this list. A healthcare provider will give you advice to avoid triggers. Avoiding triggers could prevent future attacks.
Advertisement
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis causes
A change (mutation) of the
SCN4A
gene causes hyperKPP. This gene gives your body instructions to make a protein that regulates sodium channels in your muscles. Sodium channels help move sodium in and out of muscle cells. Your muscles need this to tighten and relax.
In hyperKPP, the
SCN4A
channels don’t work the right way. Sometimes, they stay open too long or don’t close when they should. This allows too much sodium to go into your muscle. The extra sodium causes potassium to leak out of your muscle cells. These changes affect how your muscles contract. This can lead to sudden episodes of weakness or paralysis.
Risk factors
You’re more likely to develop this condition if you have a biological parent with it. HyperKPP passes down in families through an
autosomal dominant
inheritance pattern. This means you only need to get the genetic change from one parent to develop it.
A genetic counselor can help you understand your risk of passing this condition on to your future children through
genetic counseling
.
Some cases may happen randomly. This means you don’t have any history of the condition in your family.
Complications of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
HyperKPP can lead to other health problems over time. Some may be mild, while others can be more serious. Possible complications include:
Attacks that get worse or happen more often as you age, especially after 50
Episodes that affect the muscles used for breathing (this can be fatal)
Long-term muscle pain and fatigue
Worsening and ongoing muscle weakness
A smaller number of people may develop a more serious problem called
myopathy
. This is damage that happens to your muscles over time.
It’s important to talk to your anesthesiologist about this condition prior to any surgery because some anesthetics can lead to complications, like complete paralysis, breathing issues and body temperature fluctuations.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
Your healthcare provider will ask about the symptoms you have and about your biological family health history. They’ll want to know when the episodes started, how long they last and what triggers them.
Tests may help diagnose it. They can also rule out conditions with similar symptoms. Tests may include:
Electromyography
(EMG)
: This test checks how well your muscles and the nerves that control them are working.
Genetic test
: This test looks for a genetic variant in the
SCN4A
gene.
Long exercise test
: In this test, you’ll repeatedly use a muscle. A provider records how the muscle responds.
Potassium blood test
: This test checks potassium levels in your blood.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis treatment
Treatments may help manage symptoms and reduce how often attacks happen, but there isn’t a cure.
To treat attacks when they start, your provider may suggest:
Mild exercise at the beginning of an episode
Eating a carbohydrate snack to lower potassium levels
Using a
beta-agonist
inhaler (like salbutamol) to quickly lower potassium
In rare or severe cases that affect the muscles that help you breathe, you may need treatment in a medical setting with an IV of
calcium gluconate
.
For long-term management, your healthcare provider may recommend:
Avoiding triggers that can cause attacks
Meeting with a dietitian to help you create a customized meal plan
Taking medications to reduce how often attacks happen (like
dichlorphenamide
) or to lower potassium levels (
hydrochlorothiazide
)
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have hyperKPP, you’ll need regular check-ups. These visits help your provider see how symptoms are changing and if your treatment plan is working.
At these visits, the provider may:
Run blood tests to check potassium levels.
Review your symptom history and look for new triggers.
Adjust medicines or meal plan recommendations if needed.
Order an MRI of your muscles every few years if muscle weakness gets worse.
Call your provider sooner if:
Advertisement
Attacks become more frequent or severe.
Weakness doesn’t go away after an attack.
You have breathing problems, trouble swallowing or chest weakness during an episode.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Movement Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have hyperkalemic periodic paralysis?
It’s hard for healthcare providers to know exactly how hyperKPP will affect you over time. The condition doesn’t look the same for everyone. Episodes may become more common as you age. But some people have fewer episodes as they grow older. Your provider can give you a specific prognosis. That way, you’ll know better what to expect.
But living with uncertainty can be stressful. If hyperKPP starts to affect your emotional health, reach out to a mental health provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be scary or confusing when your muscles suddenly stop working. The worry you feel during an attack can be overwhelming and doesn’t just go away when the episode ends.
But hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (hyperKPP or HYPP) is a manageable condition. A healthcare provider can help you treat it so episodes happen less often or don’t last as long. And small changes, like adjusting what you eat and learning your personal triggers, can make a difference over time. Your care team can answer your questions, guide your choices and adjust your treatment as needs change.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parkinson’s disease, essential tremor and dystonia are common movement disorders. And Cleveland Clinic has the expert care and support you need to manage them.
Movement Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment