Smegma: What It Is, Prevention & How To Get Rid of It
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Smegma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Smegma
Smegma is a harmless combination of oils, skin cells, sweat and other fluids that build up around your genitals. It looks like crumbly cheese and usually has a foul odor. The best way to prevent and treat smegma is to regularly wash your genitals and the surrounding areas with soap and water.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Smegma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Smegma?
Smegma (pronounced “SMEG-muh”) is a thick, cheesy-looking secretion around your genitals that collects when you don’t wash them a lot. It can look white or yellow. It’s a combination of:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Oils from your
sebaceous (oil) glands
Dead
skin
cells
Sweat
and other fluids
In
females
, smegma builds up in the skin folds that surround your
urethra
and
vagina
(labia) and around your
clitoris
(clitoral hood).
In
uncircumcised
males, smegma builds up under your
foreskin
.
Smegma is common because it exists naturally. It isn’t a
sexually transmitted infection
(STI). It isn’t harmful. But it can help create an ideal environment for
bacteria
to grow and feed. When bacteria build up on your skin, they make a strong odor.
The oils in smegma help keep the skin around your genitals moist. They also help provide lubrication. Lubrication decreases friction and reduces pain, soreness and discomfort during sexual intercourse.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of smegma
As smegma builds up, it may:
Look like crumbly cheese
Smell bad, like sour milk
Cause irritation or swelling
Cause skin discoloration (red, pink, purple or gray)
Be difficult to pull back your foreskin, which may cause pain when you have an
erection
Cause your clitoral hood to stick to your clitoris (clitoral adhesion)
What is the main cause of smegma?
There isn’t a “main cause” of smegma. Smegma is a combination of oils, dead skin cells, sweat and other fluids.
Is it contagious?
No. It isn’t an STI. You can’t spread smegma to another person through skin-to-skin contact or unprotected sexual intercourse.
Advertisement
Is it bacterial or fungal?
No. Smegma isn’t bacteria, and it isn’t a
skin fungus
. But it can help create an ideal environment for bacteria to grow.
Is it best to avoid it?
In general, yes. Removing smegma by properly washing your genitals with soap and water can help prevent bacteria from building up and reduce irritation and
inflammation
. But it isn’t harmful.
It’s OK to have sexual intercourse if you or your partner has smegma. You don’t need to use
condoms
. But it’s good practice to use a condom if you aren’t sure if you or your partner has an STI. It’s also good practice to talk to your partner if you have smegma and haven’t cleaned it away. If they have any questions, encourage them to talk to a healthcare provider before having sexual intercourse.
Risk factors
Smegma can occur in anyone. But it most commonly appears in males who have foreskin. Your foreskin can trap oils, skin cells and other fluids. This creates an ideal place for smegma to build up.
Smegma usually doesn’t appear before
puberty
. During puberty, your body starts going through more physical changes to reach sexual maturity. It also produces more oils.
It also doesn’t occur as often after
menopause
in females and around age 60 in males. Oil production starts to naturally decline around these times.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose smegma
Smegma is easy to recognize. You don’t necessarily need a healthcare provider to diagnose it. But it’s natural to be nervous about any changes to your genitals. A healthcare provider can usually diagnose smegma during a
physical exam
. They may also recommend
STI testing
to confirm their diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
How is smegma treated?
The best way to treat smegma is to regularly wash your genitals and the surrounding areas until it goes away. The skin in these areas is sensitive. It’s a good idea to use a mild soap that doesn’t have perfumes, dyes or alcohol. Look for products that say “fragrance-free,” “hypoallergenic” or “for sensitive skin.”
If you have foreskin, gently pull it as far back as you can toward your body. Use a clean washcloth or your hands to wash under your foreskin with soap and clean water.
If you have pathologic
phimosis
, you can’t pull your foreskin back. A lot of smegma can develop under your foreskin because you can’t clean under it. You may need to use a steroid cream or circumcision to treat phimosis.
If you’re circumcised, clean your
penis
with soap and water.
If you have a vagina, gently pull apart your labia. Use a clean washcloth or your hands to wash the area with soap and water. Be careful not to get water or soap in your vagina.
Advertisement
After you’re done, thoroughly dry the area with a clean towel. Once you’re dry, put on clean, breathable underwear to help prevent bacterial growth.
How do I clean my child’s uncircumcised skin?
At birth, foreskin attaches completely to the penis. It gradually separates on its own, usually over the first few years. Don’t try to forcefully pull it back before it separates. This can cause pain, swelling or bleeding. But you can gently begin retracting it early on to help it separate.
Before separation, clean only the outside of the foreskin. Never insert cotton swabs or other objects into the opening.
Once the foreskin naturally separates, gently pull it back to wash underneath with mild soap and water. Wipe away any smegma. Cleaning once or twice a week is enough.
Around the time you start potty training, teach your child to gently retract and clean their foreskin during bathtime. Regular washing helps prevent smegma and infections.
Recovery time
If you wash your genitals regularly, smegma usually goes away after a few days.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if smegma doesn’t go away after a few days of regular cleaning or if new symptoms develop, like:
Pain
Discomfort
Discoloration
These may be signs of an STI or another condition that has similar symptoms to smegma.
Advertisement
During your appointment, you may wish to ask questions like:
How do I know if I have smegma?
If I don’t have smegma, what other condition might I have?
How often should I wash my genitals?
Can you recommend a soap?
How do I properly care for my child’s foreskin or
vulva
if they have smegma?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have smegma?
Smegma can make you feel self-conscious. But it’s very rarely serious. Washing and drying your genitals daily should make it go away within a few days.
Additional Common Questions
What is the meaning of smegma?
In Latin, smegma means “detergent or soap.”
In Greek, it comes from the word “smēchein.” Smēchein means “to wash off or clean.”
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be alarming and even nerve-racking to notice changes to your genitals. And it can be downright unpleasant if other symptoms develop, like pain, inflammation or skin discoloration. But smegma is a common condition that can happen to anyone. It isn’t an STI. It goes away with regular cleaning.
It’s a good idea to pay attention to your genitals and wash them regularly. But don’t hesitate to talk to a healthcare provider if you’re unsure of what’s normal. They’re here to help, not judge.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment