Flat Feet (Pes Planus): Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Flat Feet (Pes Planus)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Flat Feet (Pes Planus)
A person with flat feet has no visible arch in the foot when they stand. All babies have flat feet. Arches form during early childhood. If arches don’t develop — or they collapse later in life (fallen arches) — flat feet can cause pain and affect walking. Orthotics and stretching exercises can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Foot Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
Having flat feet can cause ankle instability, leading to pain and other problems when you walk.
What is pes planus (flat foot)?
Pes planus means having flat feet — or one flat foot — with little-to-no arch in the sole. You may be flat footed from childhood, or your feet may have lost their natural arches due to a medical condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Babies are naturally flat footed, but most begin to develop arches when they start walking. If arches never develop, or if they collapse later in life, flat feet can cause pain or other problems with walking.
Why do foot arches matter?
The arches of your feet play an important role in the mechanics of walking upright. This is why they’re unique to human primates. Your arches are made of bones and connective tissues. They:
Act as a springboard and shock absorber
Store and release energy as you walk
Adapt your foot to uneven walking surfaces
Protect
nerves
and
vessels
in the soles of your feet
Are there different types of flat feet (pes planus)?
Some healthcare providers make a distinction between mildly flat feet that don’t cause any issues and the foot deformity they call pes planus. With pes planus, flat arches cause other changes to your foot.
Pes planus means:
The arch on the inner side of your sole is flattened and appears to touch the ground.
The flattened arch causes your heel to point outward and your ankle to roll inward.
Your
talus bone
, a bone on the inner side of your foot, sticks out.
Providers may classify your flat feet as flexible or rigid (sometimes flat or always flat). Flat feet can also be congenital (due to conditions present at birth) or acquired (something that happens later in life).
Advertisement
Types include:
Flexible flat foot.
Flexible flat feet are the most common type. With this type, you can see arches in your feet when you aren’t standing on them, but they disappear when you stand.
Rigid flat foot.
If you have rigid flat feet, your feet have no arches whether you’re standing or sitting. You may find it difficult to flex your feet up and down or side to side. This type is rare.
Congenital flat foot.
Some babies have a
birth defect
that prevents their feet from developing arches. Some hereditary
connective tissue disorders
can make your arches too weak to hold up.
Acquired flat foot (fallen arches).
Also known as progressive collapsing foot deformity, this condition happens in adulthood, or after your feet have developed their natural arches.
Symptoms and Causes
What symptoms do flat feet cause?
Flat feet (pes planus) don’t always cause symptoms for everyone. But they can change the way you walk. They can also transfer too much stress to parts of your lower body that aren’t prepared to bear it.
Early symptoms might include:
Foot pain
after walking
Ankle pain
from
overpronation
Shin splints
from overcompensating
Over time, you might develop:
Gait disorders and abnormalities
Deformities like
bunions
or
hammertoes
Chronic pain
even when you’re not walking
You might begin to feel pain in your:
Knees
Hips
Lower back
You also might be more at risk of secondary conditions like:
Repetitive strain injuries
Ankle instability and sprains
Foot and ankle arthritis
What causes flat feet (pes planus)?
Some flat feet causes are congenital (present at birth). Other causes happen later in life, after your arches have formed normally. This is called progressive collapsing foot deformity, or “fallen arches.”
Congenital causes
Congenital pes planus is due to conditions present at birth. While all babies are flat footed, some won’t ever develop normal arches. The answer to this is in their
genes
, which determine their physical traits.
Some families just have flatter arches than others. But genes can also cause
genetic disorders
or defects that affect how your arches form or prevent them from forming. Some of these conditions include:
Cerebral palsy
Clubfoot
Down syndrome
Ehlers-Danos syndrome
Joint hypermobility syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Tarsal coalition
Acquired flat foot (fallen arches) causes
Acquired pes planus happens when your arches fall flat after forming normally. Arch collapse can happen slowly or rapidly. Diseases and injuries can cause them. Some of these conditions include:
Posterior tibial tendon dysfunction
. This is the most common cause. Chronic
tendonitis
can weaken this important tendon until it breaks down and can no longer support your arch.
Charcot foot
.
Diabetes-related nerve damage
can lead the breakdown of the bones in your foot and compromise the supporting ligaments. This can lead to arch collapse.
Arthritis
. Degenerative types and inflammatory types of arthritis can cause swelling and deformity in the
joints
of your feet. This can throw off the architecture of your foot arches.
Injury
.
Foot fractures
or injuries to your
foot ligaments
may undermine your arch support. Going too long without walking while you recover from an injury can weaken the supporting muscles.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose pes planus?
An
orthopedist
or
podiatrist
can recognize pes planus on a physical exam. They’ll observe the shape and position of your foot, how it moves and how you stand and walk on it.
They’ll ask you about your health history and any prior injuries or conditions that may have caused it. They might take images, like a
foot X-ray
, to confirm pes planus or to look further into the cause.
Management and Treatment
How do healthcare providers treat flat feet?
Many people won’t need any treatment for flat feet. If you don’t have symptoms, there’s no need to fix them. If flat feet cause you occasional, mild aches and pains, you can treat them conservatively with:
Over-the-counter (OTC)
pain relievers
, like
NSAIDs
or
acetaminophen
Physical therapy
exercises that stretch and strengthen your feet
Orthotic shoe inserts
or other walking supports
But flat feet that cause frequent or significant pain or other complications might need additional treatment. Depending on the cause, some people might need surgery to fix the underlying issue.
Can flat feet be fixed?
Sometimes, a mild and recent case of flat feet will correct itself with conservative treatment. In more severe cases, surgery can potentially fix flat feet. But some of the underlying causes are hard to treat.
When you have a chronic disease that contributes to flat feet, like advanced diabetes, arthritis or a connective tissue disease, it’s not always possible to manage it well enough to preserve your arches.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Foot Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can you live normally with flat feet?
Yes. Many people with flat feet don’t have noticeable symptoms or need treatment. Your healthcare provider may recommend nonsurgical treatments if pes planus causes foot pain or other problems.
Wearing special footwear and adding some exercises to your daily routine can easily become your new normal. But if they aren’t helping, don’t keep quiet. Some types of pes planus can keep getting worse.
Prevention
How can I prevent flat feet?
Often, there isn’t anything you can do to prevent flat feet. Staying at a healthy weight may ease pain from flat feet.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Flat feet are common and often no cause for concern. Children with flat feet usually develop arches by about age 10. But sometimes they don’t, and their flat feet may start to cause them discomfort in time.
It’s important to take your symptoms seriously. Some types and causes of flat feet are more severe, and they can cause further problems if left untreated. Consult an orthopedist or podiatrist if you have symptoms.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
An aching foot or heel can bring your favorite activities to a halt. Cleveland Clinic’s foot pain experts are here to help you heal and get back on your feet.
Foot Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/17/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment