Fasting Before Blood Work
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Fasting for Blood Work
Advertisement
Advertisement
Fasting for Blood Work
If you’ve been instructed to fast before a blood test, that means you need to avoid eating and drinking anything but water for a certain amount of time before the test. Fasting time is usually eight to 12 hours, but it varies depending on the test. Not all blood tests require fasting, so check with your provider.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is fasting for blood work?
If your healthcare provider told you to fast for blood work, it means you can’t eat or drink anything except water for a certain amount of time before the
blood test
. While you’re fasting, you also shouldn’t smoke, chew gum or exercise. These things can affect your digestion, which can affect your results.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
We get it. Your tummy is rumbling, or you need that caffeine fix first thing in the morning. But wait just a little longer. If you eat or drink anything except water before your blood work, it can skew the results. Then, you’ll just have to repeat the process over again. Once the test is over, you’re welcome to eat and drink as you please.
Why do you have to fast for blood work?
You fast for blood work to get the most accurate picture of what’s happening inside your body. When you eat and drink, your
bloodstream
temporarily absorbs things like nutrients, sugars and fats. These can alter the levels of the substances the blood test is trying to measure.
Imagine fasting like giving your internal plumbing a temporary flush. By avoiding food and drinks beforehand, your healthcare provider gets a clearer baseline reading of what’s naturally circulating in your blood. This allows for a more precise measurement and a more reliable interpretation of your results.
What blood work do you need to fast for?
Not all blood tests require fasting, but some common ones that might include:
Blood sugar (glucose) tests
.
These diagnose and monitor diabetes, prediabetes and gestational diabetes.
Lipid panel
.
This checks cholesterol and triglyceride levels to assess heart disease risk. Fasting may not always be required, depending on the specific test and your provider’s preference.
Basic metabolic panel (BMP)
.
This comprehensive test looks at a range of electrolytes, blood sugar and kidney function markers.
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) test
.
This liver function test may require fasting to distinguish between causes of elevated GGT levels.
Advertisement
Other blood tests may require fasting, so ask your provider if you aren’t sure whether you should fast before an upcoming test.
How long do you have to fast for blood work?
You typically need to fast for eight to 12 hours before a blood test, but the exact duration can vary depending on the specific test. Your healthcare provider will give you the precise fasting instructions needed to ensure accurate results.
Many people schedule their blood tests for early in the morning. That way, most of the time you spend fasting will be while you’re sleeping.
Can you drink water when fasting for blood work?
Yes, you can
drink water
when fasting for blood work. Healthcare providers recommend drinking water while you’re fasting for a couple of reasons:
Hydration.
Staying hydrated is important for overall health, especially before a blood test. Drinking water helps keep your veins fuller, making it easier for the
phlebotomist
to draw blood.
No interference.
Plain water doesn’t contain calories, sugar or other substances that can affect your blood test results.
Just be sure to stick to plain water. Avoid flavored water, sugary drinks or even water with lemon or lime added, as these can introduce substances that might alter test results.
Can you drink black coffee when fasting for blood work?
You shouldn’t drink any coffee — even
black coffee
— while fasting for blood work. That’s because caffeine itself has the potential to skew results. Black coffee may also contain substances that can affect certain blood test results, especially those related to sugar metabolism.
In addition, coffee is a diuretic, meaning it increases urination. This can lead to
dehydration
, which might make it harder to draw blood and potentially concentrate certain substances in your bloodstream, affecting test accuracy.
Can you take medicine?
Unless your healthcare provider gives you specific instructions otherwise, it’s usually safe to continue taking your prescribed medications during a fasting blood test. But make sure to ask them if you have any questions about the specific medications you take, including any over-the-counter medicines and vitamins or supplements.
What if I mess up and eat or drink?
If you eat or drink anything besides water, tell your provider before the test. The provider will want to know so they can interpret your test results correctly. They may have you reschedule the test for another time to make sure they can get accurate results.
When can I eat and drink again?
You can eat and drink again as soon as your blood is drawn. You may want to bring something along with you so you have something to eat or drink as soon as the test is done.
What else do I need to know about fasting for blood tests?
If you’re not sure if you’re supposed to fast for a blood test, ask your healthcare provider right away. That way, you’ll have time to fast. If you fast before a blood test when you didn’t need to, that can skew your results, as well. Make sure to find out for sure whether or not you need to fast.
Advertisement
If you have any concerns or questions about fasting instructions, don’t hesitate to reach out to the healthcare provider who ordered the test or the lab where the blood draw will take place.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Fasting for blood tests might be a pain, but it’s a simple step to ensure your results are accurate. Think of it like giving your body a clean slate — by avoiding food and drinks for a short time, the test gets a more precise picture of what’s going on inside. Remember, you can still drink water to stay hydrated, and your provider will give you clear instructions on exactly what to avoid and for how long. Just a little planning can go a long way toward a smooth and informative blood test.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/10/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Lab Appointments & Locations