Obturator Hernia: Symptoms, Causes, Diagnosis & Repair
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Obturator Hernia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Obturator Hernia
An obturator hernia occurs when fat or your intestine in your abdomen pushes into the obturator canal in your hip bone. Symptoms include severe belly pain, nausea and vomiting, and pain in your inner thigh. Obturated hernias typically affect women ages 70-90 who have underweight (body mass index of 18.5 or below).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hernia Repair
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
What is an obturator hernia?
An obturator (pronounced “uhb-tr-AY-tr”) hernia occurs when there’s a
hernia
in your obturator canal. This is an open spot in your
pelvis
. This type of hernia can happen if you have weak pelvic floor muscles. The weak muscles let sections of your intestines or fat in your abdomen push into your obturator canal. Obturator hernias typically involve your small intestine but may involve your large intestine.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Obturator hernias are rare. They typically affect women aged 70-90.
This type of hernia can be a serious medical issue. It can block your intestine (
bowel obstruction
). This can happen if the hernia gets stuck in pelvic floor muscles or the obturator canal.
A blocked intestine is a medical emergency. You may need surgery right away to fix it or keep it from happening. Emergency surgery can be a scary experience. Your healthcare team will explain why you need surgery and what you can expect.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of obturated hernia
Obturator hernias cause symptoms like:
Abdominal (belly) pain
that starts in your lower right belly and spreads to your entire belly
Constipation
Distended stomach
Nausea
and
vomiting
Pain that starts in your groin and moves into your inner thigh
Causes of obturator hernia
Obturator hernias happen when you have a weak spot in your
pelvic floor muscles
. The weak spot lets tissue and a section of your intestine push into your obturator canal. Several things increase the risk that this will happen. Common risk factors for obturator hernia include:
Age
. Your pelvic floor muscles weaken as you age. Age also affects the membrane that covers the opening to your obturator canal. Both issues make it easier for tissue or your small intestine to push into your obturator canal.
Chronic constipation
. Constantly straining to poop can weaken your pelvic muscles
.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (
COPD
)
. This condition causes chronic coughing that puts pressure on your abdominal muscles. That pressure can affect your pelvic muscles.
Having underweight
. Weight loss affects the amount of fat in your obturator canal. Losing fat there makes room for a hernia in the canal to get bigger
.
You have underweight if you have a
body mass index
of 18.5 or below.
Advertisement
Complications
Obturator hernia complications include:
Incarcerated obturator hernia
. This happens when a hernia gets stuck in your pelvic muscles. An incarcerated obturator hernia may lead to an obstructed bowel (blocked small intestine).
Strangulated
obturator hernia
. This is when blood can’t get to the intestine inside a hernia. Without blood, the intestinal tissue starts to die (
necrosis
).
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose obturated hernia
A healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms. They’ll do a
physical examination
. They may do the following tests, too:
Howship-Romberg test
. In this test, your provider moves your hip. They’ll ask if moving your hip causes pain in your inner thigh.
Hannington-Kiff test
. In this exam, your provider taps certain places on your
tibia
or
femur
. This test checks to see if the tap makes your hip muscles tighten (contract).
They’ll also do a computed tomography (
CT
) scan to confirm you have an obturator hernia.
Management and Treatment
How is an obturator hernia treated?
Surgery to
repair the hernia
is the only treatment for obturator hernia. A surgeon will make an incision (cut) in your lower abdomen or groin to reach the hernia in your obturator canal. They’ll move the hernia contents back into your lower abdomen. Then, they’ll fix the weak spot in your abdominal muscles. You may have open surgery,
laparoscopic surge
ry or
robotic hernia repair surgery
.
You may have more surgery if you have damage to your intestine. This can happen if you have a strangulated obturator hernia. Your surgeon may do a
colectomy
to remove the damaged section of your intestine.
Surgery complications
All hernia repair surgery may cause the following complications:
Bleeding
Damage to your
obturator nerve
Surgical site infection
Recovery
Your recovery depends on factors like:
The type of hernia repair surgery
. For example, it takes less time to recover from laparoscopic surgery than from open surgery.
If surgery involved a colectomy
. It takes more time to recover from a colectomy than from hernia repair surgery.
Your health
. It will take you longer to recover from surgery if you have conditions like malnutrition or COPD.
But everyone’s situation is different. Your surgeon will explain what to expect and how soon you can return to your daily routine.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hernia Repair
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Hernia repair surgery often cures obturator hernia and eases its symptoms. But it’s not treatment for conditions like malnutrition or COPD. These conditions increase your risk of having an obturator hernia. You may need ongoing medical care and support to help you manage these conditions.
When should I seek care?
You should talk to a healthcare provider if you have belly pain or pain in your thigh that doesn’t go away. These symptoms may mean you have an obturator hernia.
Advertisement
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room right away if you have:
Severe belly pain that comes on very fast
Nausea or vomiting
These symptoms may mean you have a strangulated obturator hernia.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
As we age, we may be inclined to think changes in our bodies are part of growing old. You may think a pain in your belly or shooting pain in your thigh are just more signs of getting older. But those symptoms may mean you have an obturator hernia. These are rare hernias that typically affect women who are in their 70s, 80s and 90s. Talk to a healthcare provider if you have symptoms like belly pain. An obturator hernia may not be the reason why you have symptoms. But sharing your symptoms and concerns with a provider is the first step toward feeling better.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hernias can be painful – Cleveland Clinic’s experts can help. We are leaders in minimally invasive hernia repair, and abdominal wall reconstruction.
Hernia Repair
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us