Black Eye Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Black Eye
Advertisement
Advertisement
Black Eye
A black eye is bruised skin around your eye. A sudden blow to your eye area is a common cause — for example, getting hit with a hard object. The bruising itself should heal within a few weeks. But it’s possible for the trauma that caused the black eye to damage your eye itself or cause other serious issues. See a healthcare provider right away.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Black Eye?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is a Black Eye?
A black eye is purple, blue and/or black bruising on the skin around your eye. Trauma to your face or head is a common cause.
A black eye is
bruising
around your eye that develops after trauma to your face or head. The bruises form on your upper and lower eyelids and the skin around your
eye
. These bruises may look purple, blue and/or black in color. Despite its name, a “black eye” doesn’t mean your eye itself is
injured
. It just refers to the
skin
around your eye.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But there’s a catch — sometimes, the trauma that causes a black eye can do further damage. For example, you might have
broken bones
around your eye or elsewhere in your head. Or there might be damage to your eye itself.
Your eyes are too important to leave to chance. Even if you think you’re fine, don’t just reach for an ice pack and call it a day. See a healthcare provider as soon as possible after getting a black eye (ideally within one to two hours before
swelling
sets in). They’ll check your eyes and surrounding areas for any further damage. And they’ll make sure you get the care you need.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a black eye
Symptoms of a black eye include:
Discolored skin (bruising) around your eye
Pain around your eye area
Swelling around your eye that may get worse after an hour or two and make it hard for you to open your eye
Black eye stages
A black eye can look different as time goes on. Initially, the skin around your eye might look red. Then, it might change to a deeper red. The redness may then shift to purple, yellow, green or black.
If you have a darker skin tone, the bruising may look purple, dark brown or black.
Black eye causes
The most common cause of a black eye is sudden trauma to your eye area. For example, it’s possible to get a black eye if:
Advertisement
A ball hits you in the eye
You walk into a door or other structure
You fall and your face lands on something hard
Someone hits or punches you
You’re in a car accident
This trauma damages tiny
blood vessels
just beneath your skin. When these vessels get hurt, they start to leak blood. The blood builds up under your skin, causing bruising and swelling.
What if I have a sudden black eye without an injury?
Not all black eyes happen due to an injury. It’s also possible to develop a black eye after:
Dental surgery, like having your
wisdom teeth
taken out or getting
dental implants
Facelifts
or
nose surgery
Jaw surgery
You might wonder how surgery in your mouth or somewhere else in your face can cause bruising around your eye. It’s because surgery can cause a bit of blood to leak out. This blood can then move beneath your skin. When it reaches the delicate area around your eyes, it forms a bruise.
Black eyes can also develop as a side effect of a new medication or treatment. If this happens, tell your provider right away. They may want to adjust your treatment plan.
You can also develop bruising or discolored skin due to other medical conditions. Below are some examples.
Spontaneous periocular ecchymosis (SPE)
Although rare, some people develop black eyes out of nowhere — without a history of trauma or facial surgery. Healthcare providers refer to this as spontaneous periocular ecchymosis. Often, both eyes are affected (“
raccoon eyes
”). The
causes are often quite serious
and include:
Amyloidosis
Certain types of
cancer
Increased intracranial pressure
along with
vascular malformations
in your eye area
Migraine
Allergic shiners
It’s possible to develop dark circles that look like black eyes but aren’t actually bruises.
Allergic shiners
are discolored circles under your eyes that form due to nasal congestion. Swelling in the inner lining of your nose slows down blood flow in veins near your eyes. When these veins swell, the skin that covers them turns dark and puffy.
Complications of this condition
A black eye itself doesn’t lead to complications. This is temporary bruising that will heal on its own. But the trauma to your face or head that caused the black eye may lead to other complications, including:
Bleeding in your eye (
hyphema
)
Broken bones around your eye (
orbital fracture
) or elsewhere in your face or head
Dislocated lens
Raised pressure inside your eye (
ocular hypertension
)
Retinal
tears
or
detachment
Vitreous
hemorrhage
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose a black eye
Healthcare providers diagnose a black eye by examining your eye area. They look for the bruising and swelling typical of a black eye. They may also:
Ask you to read letters on a screen to
check your vision
Move their finger from side to side, in front of your face, to see how well your eyes can follow along
Dilate your
pupil
to closely examine the inside of your eye
Gently touch different areas of your face to check for broken bones
Run tests, like an
X-ray
or
CT scan
, to look for broken bones or other issues
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How to treat a black eye
If an injury caused your black eye, you can treat it by using
cold compresses
. These help stop bleeding under your skin and reduce swelling. Here’s what to do:
Gently place a frozen gel pack or a bag of crushed ice over your (closed) eye. Leave it on for about 15 to 20 minutes.
Repeat as often as once per hour.
If you don’t have a gel pack or ice, you can use a bag of frozen veggies — ideally corn or peas, which you can bend into the right shape.
No matter what you use, cover it with a thin towel to avoid harming your skin.
One method
not
to try is putting a slab of raw meat on your eye. Raw meat is covered in
bacteria
that could cause an infection. Plus, there’s no proof it actually does anything to reduce swelling.
If you have a black eye after surgery or for other reasons, ask your provider how best to treat it. They’ll give you advice specific to your situation.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
You should always see a healthcare provider if you have a black eye due to trauma to your eye area. Your provider will check for further damage beyond bruising and make sure you get the necessary treatment. They may just tell you to go home and apply ice — but it’s better to know for sure that bruising is the only concern.
Advertisement
It’s
especially
important to see a provider right away if you have additional symptoms like:
Bleeding from your eye, nose or ears
Changes to the size or shape of your pupil
Changes to your vision, like
double vision
or
vision loss
Dizziness
or
fainting
Headache
that’s severe or won’t go away
Numbness
anywhere in your face
Pain when moving your eye
Trouble moving your eye
Severe pain around your eye
Vomiting
It’s also crucial to see a provider right away if you develop black eyes and can’t identify the cause.
If you develop a black eye after a dental or facial surgery, call the provider who did the surgery. They can explain if this is an expected side effect and what you can do to help with healing.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does a black eye last?
A black eye usually heals within several weeks. But the total healing time can be longer if you have other injuries besides the bruises around your eye. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about what you can expect.
While your eye heals, avoid activities that could cause further injury to your face or head.
Can I heal a black eye overnight?
Unfortunately, there’s no fast fix for a black eye, and you can’t heal it overnight. But applying ice every hour or so within the first 24 hours can help stop the bleeding under your skin and reduce swelling.
Advertisement
Using under-eye concealer or foundation can help make the bruising less noticeable while you heal.
Additional Common Questions
Is it possible to have a delayed black eye after a head injury?
Yes. It’s possible to develop black eyes one to two days after a
skull fracture
. You might not even realize the trauma to your head caused a fracture. So, the black eyes are the first sign of something more serious. See a healthcare provider immediately.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having a black eye can be very upsetting. It’s a painful injury. Plus, it might make you feel self-conscious about your appearance. But black eyes often heal on their own with time and gentle care. It’s never safe to assume the injury is minor, though. Let a healthcare provider check your eye area to make sure nothing more serious is going on.
It’s also important to see a provider if you develop bruising around your eyes with no known cause. This can be a sign of a serious medical condition that needs treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider