Antipsychotic Medications: What They Are, Uses & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Antipsychotic Medications
Advertisement
Advertisement
Antipsychotic Medications
Antipsychotic drugs treat psychosis, a collection of symptoms that affect your ability to tell what’s real and what isn’t. These drugs are a critical part of treating conditions that involve psychosis. Without them, many of these conditions are so disruptive or severe that they need 24/7 psychiatric care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Although you may have side effects, the benefits of taking antipsychotic medications usually outweigh the risk for those who need them.
What are antipsychotics?
Antipsychotic medications are drugs that mainly treat
psychosis
-related conditions and symptoms. But taking an antipsychotic drug doesn’t always mean you have a symptom or condition related to psychosis. That’s because these drugs are very important for treating other conditions, too.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
How do antipsychotics work?
Antipsychotics work by changing how certain signals in your brain — called
neurotransmitters
— affect how you feel and act. If these chemicals are out of balance, you may develop symptoms of psychosis like hallucinations and delusions. Scientists are still learning exactly how antipsychotics help. But by changing the balance of the chemicals in your brain, you may start to have fewer symptoms.
Are there different types of antipsychotics?
There are three main types of antipsychotic medications:
First-generation antipsychotics
These block the way your brain uses several neurotransmitters, especially
dopamine
. They also block
acetylcholine
, histamine and
norepinephrine
from latching onto various receptors.
Second-generation antipsychotics
These medications block receptors like serotonin and dopamine. And they activate other serotonin and dopamine receptors.
Next-generation antipsychotic
This new medication targets psychosis differently. Xanomeline and trospium chloride (Cobenfy™) don’t affect dopamine, so it has no impact on motor function and won’t make you sleepy. It attaches to specific acetylcholine receptors that are only in your brain and affect memory and cognition. In clinical trials, it reduced schizophrenia symptoms. And it had fewer unpleasant side effects than traditional antipsychotics.
Advertisement
First-generation (typical) antipsychotics
Chlorpromazine
: The brand name of this medication (Thorazine®) isn’t available in the U.S., but generic versions are.
Fluphenazine
: The brand names of this medication (Prolixin®, Permitil®) aren’t available in the U.S., but generic versions are.
Haloperidol
(Haldol®)
Loxapine
(Adusuve®)
Molindone
: The brand name of this medication (Moban®) isn’t available in the U.S., but generic versions are.
Perphenazine
: The brand name of this medication (Trilafon®) isn’t available in the U.S., but generic versions are.
Pimozide
(Orap®)
Prochlorperazine
(Compro®)
Thiothixene
: The brand name of this medication (Navane®) isn’t available in the U.S., but generic versions are.
Thoridazine
: The brand name of this medication (Mellaril®) isn’t available in the U.S., but generic versions are.
Trifluoperazine
: The brand name of this medication (Stelazine®) isn’t available in the U.S., but generic versions are.
Second-generation (atypical) antipsychotics
Aripiprazole
(Abilify®, Aristada®)
Asenapine
(Secuado®, Saphris®)
Brexpiprazole
(Rexulti®)
Cariprazine
(Vraylar®)
Clozapine
(Clozaril®, Versacloz®)
Iloperidone
(Fanapt®)
Lumateperone
(Caplyta®)
Lurasidone
(Latuda®)
Olanzapine
(Zyprexa®, Lybalvi®, Symbyax®)
Quetiapine
(Seroquel®)
Paliperidone
(Invega®)
Pimavanserin
(Nuplazid®)
Risperidone
(Perseris®, Risperdal®)
Ziprasidone (Geodon®)
Next-generation antipsychotic
Xanomeline and trospium chloride (Cobenfy™)
What conditions do antipsychotics treat?
Antipsychotics treat mood disorders, including:
Schizophrenia
(and its related spectrum of disorders, including
schizoaffective disorder
and schizophreniform disorder)
Bipolar disorder
Mania
Major depressive disorder
with some psychosis
Delusional disorder
Severe agitation
Borderline personality disorder
Dementia
Delirium
Substance-induced psychotic disorder
Providers may treat other conditions with antipsychotics, but those drugs aren’t their main treatment. These conditions include:
Tourette syndrome
Huntington’s disease
Parkinson’s disease
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Risks / Benefits
What are the potential benefits of antipsychotics?
Antipsychotic medications have several benefits, including:
Treating conditions that are very difficult (if not impossible) to treat with other kinds of medications.
Also, many people with these conditions would need long-term (or even lifelong) care 24/7 without these drugs.
History of research and use.
First- and second-generation antipsychotics have decades of research and study supporting them.
There are many different antipsychotic drugs.
Partner with your healthcare provider to find one that relieves your symptoms with the fewest side effects.
Contributions to other treatment approaches.
Antipsychotics can also make other types of mental health treatments — like
psychotherapy
— more effective.
Advertisement
What are the side effects of antipsychotics?
Antipsychotics are useful, but there are possible drawbacks. Antipsychotic medications can have various side effects and complications, including:
Abnormal movements
Constipation
Dizziness
and sedation
Drug-induced
movement disorders
Drug interactions
Dry mouth
Heart and circulatory problems
High blood sugar
High cholesterol
High prolactin levels
Immune disruption
Jaundice
Painful muscle contractions (
dystonias
)
Tardive dyskinesia
Type 2 diabetes
Urinary retention
Weight gain
Recovery and Outlook
How long can I stay on antipsychotics?
Some antipsychotic medications are for short-term use only. Others, you can take for years. It depends on what medication you take, why you take it and much more. Your healthcare provider is the best person to tell you how long to take one of these medications.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your healthcare provider as soon as possible if you develop any of the following:
High fever
Confusion
Rigid or stiff muscles
Uncontrolled facial movements
Yellowing of your skin or whites of your eyes
If you feel like you or someone you know is in danger of
self-harm
or
suicide
, dial 988 for the
National Suicide and Crisis Lifeline
. Outside the United States, call your local emergency services number.
Additional Common Questions
What is the most commonly prescribed antipsychotic drug?
The most commonly prescribed first-generation antipsychotic drugs are:
Advertisement
Haloperidol
Perphenazine
The most commonly prescribed second-generation antipsychotics are:
Aripiprazole
Olanzapine
Quetiapine
Risperidone
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Psychosis symptoms can happen with many conditions. They affect your understanding of what’s real and what isn’t. They can be severe and disruptive. Antipsychotics are key to treating these symptoms. Sometimes, the benefits are worth the side effects. But your healthcare provider will talk to you about what’s best in your case. Bring a journal of your symptoms, medications, supplements and side effects to every appointment. This may help your care team make sure you’re on the right medications, at the right doses.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/22/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment