Primary Aldosteronism (Conn’s Syndrome): What It Is
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Primary Aldosteronism (Conn’s Syndrome)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Primary Aldosteronism (Conn’s Syndrome)
Primary aldosteronism (Conn’s syndrome) occurs due to overproduction of the hormone aldosterone, which regulates sodium and potassium levels in your blood. Healthcare providers treat this condition with medications and lifestyle changes to manage blood pressure. Some cases require surgery. Most people have an excellent outlook with treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adrenal Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is primary aldosteronism?
Primary aldosteronism, also known as Conn’s syndrome, is a condition that occurs when your
adrenal glands
make too much
aldosterone
. Aldosterone is a steroid
hormone
that helps regulate sodium and potassium in your blood.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
High blood pressure (hypertension)
and low blood potassium levels (
hypokalemia
) are the defining features of primary aldosteronism. People with the condition may have other symptoms, too, like headaches, muscle cramps or excessive thirst.
Untreated primary aldosteronism can lead to serious complications like heart attack and kidney failure. But prompt treatment can manage the condition successfully.
How common is primary aldosteronism?
Primary aldosteronism used to be a rare disorder. But today, 5% to 10% of adults with high blood pressure have it. It’s more common in
women
. Most people with this condition get a diagnosis in their 30s or 40s.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs and symptoms of primary aldosteronism?
People with primary aldosteronism usually develop high blood pressure and low potassium levels. Left unchecked, high blood pressure raises your risk for complications, including
heart attack
and
stroke
, while low potassium can cause heart rhythm irregularities (arrhythmia).
Other primary aldosteronism symptoms may include:
Fatigue
.
Excessive thirst.
Frequent urination
(peeing more than you used to).
Headache
.
Muscle cramps
.
Muscle weakness.
Blurred vision
.
What causes primary aldosteronism?
Primary aldosteronism happens when your adrenal glands produce too much aldosterone. This hormone helps regulate your body’s balance of water, sodium (salt),
blood volume
and blood pressure.
Advertisement
Issues that can cause an overproduction of aldosterone include:
Benign (noncancerous) tumors
in one or both adrenal glands.
Inherited disorders (like
congenital adrenal hyperplasia
).
Adrenal cancer
(rare).
Secondary aldosteronism
Primary aldosteronism occurs when there’s an issue with your adrenal glands themselves. But sometimes, underlying conditions can cause excess aldosterone production. When this happens, providers call it secondary aldosteronism. Conditions related to secondary aldosteronism include:
Liver disease
.
Renal artery stenosis
(a narrowing of the arteries that carry blood to your kidneys).
Heart failure
.
Some types of
kidney cancer
.
Pregnancy.
What are the risk factors for primary aldosteronism?
Anyone can develop primary aldosteronism. But it’s more common in people with:
Low blood potassium levels.
High blood pressure starting before age 30.
High blood pressure requiring three or more medications to manage.
An adrenal tumor.
What are the complications of primary aldosteronism?
If you don’t treat primary aldosteronism, your blood pressure may increase to dangerous levels. It also disrupts the balance of
electrolytes
in your body. (Electrolytes are minerals that help balance the amount of water in your body.)
Electrolyte imbalances
and prolonged high blood pressure increase your risk for serious complications like:
Heart attack or heart failure.
Irregular heartbeat.
Kidney failure
.
Stroke.
Temporary
paralysis
or the inability to move.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is primary aldosteronism diagnosed?
Healthcare providers use
blood tests
to diagnose primary aldosteronism. These tests measure:
Levels of hormones (like aldosterone and
renin
) in your blood.
Electrolytes, including sodium and potassium.
It might take several blood tests to get an accurate diagnosis. This is because many blood pressure medications can interfere with blood test results. To counteract this, your provider might switch up your medication occasionally to ensure accuracy.
What tests will be done to diagnose primary aldosteronism?
Your healthcare provider may recommend further testing to rule out adrenal gland tumors. These tests may include:
Computed tomography (CT) scans
, which use X-rays to create pictures of internal body structures.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
, which uses radio waves and high-powered magnets to visualize the inside of your body.
Management and Treatment
What is the best treatment for primary aldosteronism?
Primary aldosteronism treatment typically involves medication and/or surgery.
Medication
If both adrenal glands produce excess aldosterone, healthcare providers typically treat it with medications like
spironolactone
(Aldactone®) or
eplerenone
(Inspra®), which block the effects of aldosterone.
Surgery
If only one adrenal gland makes excess aldosterone, removing that gland (
adrenalectomy
) is an alternative to medication. In these cases, healthcare providers may suggest surgery.
Advertisement
Even after surgery, you might need medication until your blood pressure returns to normal. Your healthcare provider can tell you what to expect in your situation.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Adrenal Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What are the long-term effects of primary aldosteronism?
Underlying hypertension (high blood pressure) — a hallmark of this condition — increases your risk for stroke, heart failure, kidney disease and other conditions. People with primary aldosteronism usually notice reduced symptoms with treatment. Serious long-term effects typically only occur in those with untreated primary aldosteronism.
Outlook for primary aldosteronism
The outlook for primary aldosteronism is excellent with appropriate treatment. That’s why it’s important to schedule a visit with a provider as soon as you notice symptoms.
Left untreated, primary aldosteronism can lead to life-threatening complications like stroke, heart attack and kidney failure.
Prevention
Can primary aldosteronism be prevented?
Currently, there’s no way to prevent this condition. Monitoring your blood pressure frequently can help spot issues.
How can I lower my risk?
You may be able to reduce your risk for primary aldosteronism by:
Increasing your physical activity.
Limiting alcohol intake.
Reducing sodium in your diet
.
Stopping smoking
.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you develop symptoms like fatigue, excessive thirst or frequent urination, call a healthcare provider. They’ll need to run tests to determine a diagnosis.
Advertisement
Additionally, if you have consistently high blood pressure or low potassium, ask your provider if you should have testing for primary aldosteronism or related conditions.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you’ve received a primary aldosteronism diagnosis, here are some questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What caused this condition?
What tests will I need?
Do I have an adrenal gland tumor?
Do I have any underlying conditions that could cause my symptoms?
What treatment do you recommend?
Should I monitor my blood pressure at home?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Lots of people need medication to manage high blood pressure. But if you start to notice that you’re always tired or thirsty, or you’re peeing more than you used to, it could be more than hypertension. If this sounds familiar, it’s time to talk to your healthcare provider. They can run tests to find out if there’s something else going on. Primary aldosteronism can cause a wide range of worrisome symptoms. But it’s curable with treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your hormones are out of balance, so are you. Cleveland Clinic experts can diagnose and treat some adrenal disorders to help you feel like yourself again.
Adrenal Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/22/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes