Chelation Therapy Procedure
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Chelation Therapy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chelation Therapy
Chelation therapy treats heavy metal poisoning. It’s not FDA-approved for other conditions like heart disease or autism. You receive an injection in a healthcare provider’s office or take pills by mouth. The medication binds to heavy metals to clear them out of your body when you go to the bathroom. You may have side effects like stomach upset.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is chelation therapy?
Chelation therapy is a treatment for
heavy metal poisoning
that removes metals from your body to prevent them from harming you. It always requires a prescription from a healthcare provider. It’s dangerous to try chelation therapy on your own with over-the-counter products that claim to remove metals from your body. You can only do chelation therapy safely under the care of a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Heavy metals are toxic to your body once they reach certain levels and may damage your brain, liver or other organs. If the results of a
heavy metal test
show you have unhealthy levels of a certain metal, your healthcare provider may recommend treatment.
Not everyone needs chelation therapy. For example, your provider may recommend ways to avoid exposure to certain metals. But sometimes, avoiding exposure isn’t possible or doesn’t bring down your levels enough. In those cases, your provider may recommend chelation therapy.
You may receive injections in your provider’s office. In some cases, your provider may prescribe pills you take by mouth at home (following careful instructions). In either case, you receive medications containing chelating agents. Chelating agents are substances that bind with the metals inside your body and force them to leave through your poop or pee.
What conditions are treated with chelation therapy?
As of December 2024, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has only approved chelation for treating heavy metal poisoning. In other words, it treats conditions involving a buildup of heavy metals in your body. Left inside your body, these metals can damage your organs and lead to life-threatening complications.
Advertisement
Specific conditions that chelation therapy can help treat include:
Hemochromatosis (iron overload)
Lead poisoning
Mercury poisoning
Thalassemia
Wilson disease
There are many reasons why you might have excess metals in your body. For example:
Your home or work environment might expose you to higher levels of metals like lead or mercury.
You might have a medical condition that requires
blood transfusions
over a long period of time. Receiving multiple blood transfusions can lead to a buildup of extra iron in your body.
Some people are born with
genetic conditions
that cause metals like copper to build up in their bodies.
What are unapproved uses of chelation therapy?
The
FDA has issued warnings
about unapproved uses of chelation therapy. This is when a provider, company or other source offers chelation therapy to treat various conditions like:
Alzheimer’s disease
Autism spectrum disorder
Diabetes
Heart disease and its risk factors, including
atherosclerosis
, high
cholesterol
and
high blood pressure
Parkinson’s disease
Most healthcare providers view these unapproved uses as misleading and even dangerous. That’s because chelation for purposes other than treating heavy metal poisoning may harm you. It may also delay or prevent you from receiving evidence-based treatments that really can help you, or even save your life.
Treatment Details
What happens during chelation therapy?
Your healthcare provider prescribes medications for you to remove harmful heavy metals from your body. Chelation may involve:
An injection into your vein or muscle
A pill that you take by mouth
The FDA has approved several different medications (containing chelating agents) to treat heavy metal poisoning. Medications are available to help remove arsenic, copper, iron, gold, lead and mercury.
Your provider will prescribe the appropriate medication for you based on the type of metal that’s building up inside your body. They’ll also determine the proper dose for you to have the maximum benefit with the least possible side effects. Your provider may adjust the dose as you go through treatment.
How long will I need this treatment?
You may need chelation therapy for just a short time or for longer depending on what’s causing the heavy metals to build up. Your provider will tell you the details of your individual treatment plan.
You may need certain tests at regular intervals to check how well the treatment is working. For example, if you’re having iron chelation therapy, you may need a yearly
MRI
of your liver to see the levels of iron in your body. This helps your provider decide the proper dose of medications and when treatment can stop.
Advertisement
Risks / Benefits
What are the potential benefits of chelation therapy?
Chelation therapy is sometimes the best or only way to remove toxic heavy metals from your body. Removing these metals can protect your organs from serious and sometimes life-threatening damage.
What are the side effects of chelation therapy?
Your healthcare provider will explain the possible side effects of the specific medication you receive. Common side effects of chelation therapy include:
Fever
Headache
High or low
blood pressure
Muscle pain
Nausea and vomiting
Pain at the injection site
Severe reactions include:
Heart failure
Kidney
damage
Low blood pressure
Trouble breathing
Respiratory failure
Seizures
Recovery and Outlook
How long will it take for me to feel better?
Your recovery and outlook depend on many factors, including the type of heavy metal poisoning you have and its cause. Your healthcare provider is the best person to ask about what you can expect going forward.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your provider if you have:
Any side effects from chelation therapy
Questions or concerns about your treatment plan
Additional Common Questions
Can I do chelation therapy at home?
It’s only safe to do chelation therapy at home if your provider prescribes you medication to treat heavy metal poisoning (like iron overload). It’s never safe to use chelation products you can get without a prescription. These include dietary supplements, nasal sprays, clay baths or suppositories. The FDA hasn’t approved of these products.
Advertisement
Can chelation therapy treat autism?
No, chelation therapy isn’t safe or appropriate for treating autism. Chelation therapy treats heavy metal poisoning.
The FDA
warns
against
using chelation to try and treat or cure autism. There’s
zero scientific evidence
that chelation helps autistic people. There
is
, however, evidence that inappropriate uses of chelation have caused
serious side effects or even death
.
Autism
is a difference in how your child’s brain works, and it’s something they’re born with. It’s not a disease, and there’s no “cure.” Instead, qualified healthcare providers offer a
range of therapies
that help your child build skills. Chelation has no place in these therapies.
Why is chelation therapy controversial?
Some people claim that chelation therapy can treat a wide range of conditions — from autism to heart disease. But most healthcare providers disagree with these claims. Let’s take a closer look at the heart disease controversy.
Chelation therapy removes heavy metals like lead and iron from your bloodstream. The chelating agents bind to these metals and send them out of your body through your pee. Advocates of chelation therapy for heart disease believe that the chemical cocktail also can remove
plaque
from clogged arteries in the same way. But there’s no proof this theory is true. And most
heart doctors
strongly disagree with it.
Advertisement
The main study
that showed possible benefits of chelation for heart disease had
serious design flaws
. This means we can’t trust its results. It’s a bit like putting a cup in your garden to measure rainfall but then watering your garden at the same time. You couldn’t really say how much water in the cup came from rain and how much came from the hose.
So, the scientists who did that controversial study decided to try again. But their second study (
published in 2024
) didn’t show any benefits of chelation. Instead, it provides evidence that chelation does
not
help with heart disease.
The bottom line? Chelation shouldn’t be used to treat heart disease. It doesn’t work and could cause serious side effects.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Chelation therapy is an important treatment option for people with heavy metal poisoning. If your provider prescribes this therapy, follow their guidance closely and let them know if you have any side effects.
You might hear chelation can help cleanse your body of heavy metals or treat conditions like autism or heart disease. There’s no scientific evidence to back up these claims. Using chelation for these purposes is unsafe and can delay you or your child from getting proper care. Talk to your healthcare provider about safe and effective treatments and therapies.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider