Thyrotoxicosis: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Thyrotoxicosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Thyrotoxicosis
Thyrotoxicosis is a treatable condition that happens when you have too much thyroid hormone in your body. Common symptoms include unexplained weight loss, a rapid heart rate and shakiness. The treatment for thyrotoxicosis depends on what’s causing it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is thyrotoxicosis?
Thyrotoxicosis happens when you have too much
thyroid hormone
in your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Thyroid hormone is the
hormone
that controls your body’s
metabolism
— the process in which your body transforms the food you eat into energy. With thyrotoxicosis, your metabolism becomes too fast, causing symptoms that can affect your entire body. You may feel like your body’s in overdrive or that you don’t have control over it.
An overactive
thyroid
gland (
hyperthyroidism
) is the most common cause of thyrotoxicosis. But there are other ways you can have too much thyroid hormone in your body.
Is thyrotoxicosis life-threatening?
Despite having the word “toxic” in its name, only severe cases of thyrotoxicosis are life-threatening. This is called
thyroid storm
(thyroid crisis), and it’s rare. A sudden event or illness (like surgery or an infection) is the most common trigger of thyroid storm. It can also happen if you’re on anti-thyroid medication and suddenly stop taking it.
It’s still important to get treatment for mild to moderate thyrotoxicosis, though. Untreated or undertreated thyrotoxicosis can lead to certain health issues.
Symptoms and Causes
Thyrotoxicosis happens when you have too much thyroid hormone in your body.
What are the symptoms of thyrotoxicosis?
Symptoms of thyrotoxicosis are generally the same in mild and moderate cases. But they’re more intense the more severe the thyrotoxicosis is.
Signs and symptoms of mild and moderate thyrotoxicosis include:
Advertisement
Unexplained weight loss
.
Irregular heartbeat (
arrhythmia
).
Rapid heart rate (
tachycardia
) — usually more than 100 beats per minute.
Shakiness.
Feeling nervous, anxious and/or irritable.
Increased sensitivity to heat.
Menstrual period changes
, like lighter or missed periods.
It’s important to see your healthcare provider if you have these symptoms.
A severe case of thyrotoxicosis is a thyroid storm, or thyroid crisis. It’s rare. But it’s life-threatening and requires immediate medical attention.
Symptoms of thyroid storm are more intense. For example, your heart rate may be over 140 beats per minute, and you may feel very agitated and confused. You may also have a high
fever
and even lose consciousness.
What causes thyrotoxicosis?
Many conditions and situations can cause thyrotoxicosis, including:
Hyperthyroidism
: Hyperthyroidism happens when your thyroid makes and releases too much thyroid hormone. It’s the most common cause of thyrotoxicosis. Causes of hyperthyroidism include
Graves’ disease
(an
autoimmune condition
) and overactive
thyroid nodules
(toxic multinodular
goiter
).
Thyroid inflammation (
thyroiditis
)
: Certain
bacterial
and
fungal infections
,
immune system
issues and medications (like
lithium
and
interferons
) can cause thyroid
inflammation
(swelling). The inflammation causes your thyroid to leak stored thyroid hormone, resulting in higher levels of hormones than your body needs. Thyroiditis can also happen after giving birth (
postpartum thyroiditis
).
Excess thyroid medication
: Consuming excess thyroid medication (
levothyroxine
) can cause thyrotoxicosis. This can happen if you have
hypothyroidism
(underactive thyroid) and take too much of your thyroid medication, whether accidentally or intentionally.
Consuming thyroid hormone from food
: You can also have too much thyroid hormone in your body by consuming beef that’s contaminated with thyroid tissue from the cow’s neck. This is often called “hamburger thyrotoxicosis,” and it’s a very rare cause of thyrotoxicosis.
What are the risk factors for thyrotoxicosis?
Each cause of thyrotoxicosis has certain risk factors. In general, risk factors for thyrotoxicosis include:
Having a biological family history of
thyroid disease
, especially Graves’ disease.
Being
female
.
Being over the age of 60.
Having certain autoimmune diseases, like
Type 1 diabetes
,
pernicious anemia
and
Addison’s disease
.
Having just delivered a baby.
Having access to thyroid medication (levothyroxine) can also be a risk factor for thyrotoxicosis. Someone in your household may accidentally consume it or someone with
factitious disorder
may take it intentionally.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is thyrotoxicosis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose thyrotoxicosis if blood tests show that you have elevated thyroid hormone levels and low or undetectable levels of
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
.
If you have thyrotoxicosis, your provider will also need to figure out what’s causing it, which could lead to another diagnosis. The following tests and assessments can lead to a diagnosis:
A
physical exam
: To start, your provider will do a physical exam to check for signs of thyrotoxicosis, like a rapid heart rate and shakiness (tremor).
Thyroid blood tests
: Blood tests can check your thyroid hormone levels. When you have thyrotoxicosis, levels of the thyroid hormones
triiodothyronine (T3)
and
thyroxine (T4)
are above normal and TSH is lower than normal. Thyroid
antibody
blood tests can also check if Graves’ disease is the cause.
Imaging tests
: Various imaging tests of your thyroid can help diagnose the cause of thyrotoxicosis. They include a thyroid
ultrasound
and a radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) test and scan. Your provider will go over the options and processes with you and recommend the test they think is best.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for thyrotoxicosis?
The treatment for thyrotoxicosis depends on the underlying cause. Your healthcare provider will need to find the cause to recommend the best treatment for you.
Treatment may include:
Anti-thyroid medications
:
Methimazole
and
propylthiouracil (PTU)
block your thyroid from making hormones. These medications can treat many cases of hyperthyroidism.
Radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy
: RAI therapy destroys overactive thyroid cells. This usually leads to permanent destruction of your thyroid, which then causes hypothyroidism. Because of this, you’ll likely have to take replacement thyroid hormone medication for the rest of your life.
Surgery
: In some cases, your provider may recommend removing your thyroid gland through surgery (
thyroidectomy
). This will correct thyrotoxicosis that’s caused by an overactive thyroid gland, but it’ll usually cause long-term hypothyroidism.
Beta-blockers
: These medications can help manage thyrotoxicosis symptoms — like rapid heartbeat, nervousness and shakiness — in the short term. But they don’t change the level of hormones in your blood.
Glucocorticoids (
corticosteroids
)
: These medications can help with inflammation and pain if you have thyroiditis.
If outside sources of thyroid hormone are causing thyrotoxicosis — like medications or contaminated beef — thyrotoxicosis should go away once the excess hormones have cleared your system. Your provider may have you do follow-up blood tests to make sure your thyroid hormone levels have returned to a healthy range.
Advertisement
You need treatment for thyroid storm (severe thyrotoxicosis) in a hospital.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for people with thyrotoxicosis?
The prognosis (outlook) for people with thyrotoxicosis is generally good if they receive treatment for it. There are several effective forms of treatment for thyrotoxicosis. Just like all treatments, they each have advantages and disadvantages. Together, you and your healthcare provider will determine the best plan for you.
What are the complications of thyrotoxicosis?
Complications from untreated or undertreated thyrotoxicosis include:
Atrial fibrillation
(Afib).
Congestive
heart failure
.
Ischemic stroke
.
Osteoporosis
.
Muscle weakness.
These complications most commonly affect people who have untreated hyperthyroidism, especially Graves’ disease.
Thyroid storm can lead to serious complications if you receive delayed or no treatment, including
seizures
, cardiovascular collapse and
death
.
Prevention
Can I prevent thyrotoxicosis?
Most cases of thyrotoxicosis aren’t preventable.
If you’re taking thyroid medication (levothyroxine), you can prevent thyrotoxicosis by never taking more than your healthcare provider prescribes. Taking too much thyroid medication can lead to thyrotoxicosis. It’s also important to store your medication safely away from children and pets.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider for thyrotoxicosis?
If you’re experiencing symptoms of thyrotoxicosis, it’s important to see your healthcare provider so they can figure out the cause and recommend proper treatment.
Advertisement
If you have chronic thyrotoxicosis (usually a form of hyperthyroidism), you should see your provider regularly to make sure your treatment is working well.
What questions should I ask my provider?
If you’ve received a thyrotoxicosis diagnosis, it may be helpful to ask your provider the following questions:
What’s causing my case of thyrotoxicosis?
What treatment plan do you recommend?
What are the pros and cons of my treatment plan for thyrotoxicosis?
Can I get thyrotoxicosis again?
Am I at risk for thyroid storm?
Is this kind of thyrotoxicosis hereditary?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Although it may sound scary, thyrotoxicosis is a manageable and treatable condition. If you’re experiencing symptoms of thyrotoxicosis — like your bodily functions are going too fast — see your healthcare provider. They can have you undergo some simple tests and recommend treatment to get your body back into balance.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s experienced healthcare providers treat all kinds of thyroid disorders, including issues that cause hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/07/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes