Stargardt Disease: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Stargardt Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Stargardt Disease
Stargardt disease is a genetic condition that damages the macula in your eye. Over time, the damage reduces or eliminates your ability to see what’s right in front of you. There’s no treatment that can reverse Stargardt disease. But your eye doctor will suggest ways to protect your eyes and manage symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Retinal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Stargardt Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
What Is Stargardt Disease?
Stargardt disease is progressive. This means symptoms get worse over time.
Stargardt disease is an eye condition that affects the
macula
and side parts of the
retinas
in your eyes. The macula is the part of your retina that lets you see objects directly in front of you (your central vision). Stargardt disease makes you lose your central vision over time. It can also affect your
peripheral vision
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Stargardt disease is a type of
macular degeneration
. Most people with macular degeneration develop it later in life (after age 60). This is called age-related macular degeneration. Stargardt disease usually affects children and adults younger than 20. That’s why healthcare providers sometimes call it juvenile macular degeneration or juvenile macular dystrophy. It’s also known as fundus flavimaculatus when it affects the edges of your retina.
Stargardt disease happens when your body can’t get rid of a fatty yellow pigment called lipofuscin. If you have Stargardt disease, your body makes too much of it. The extra lipofuscin collects in your retina. It damages special cells called
photoreceptors
. Eventually, the damage permanently affects your
vision
.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Stargardt disease
Stargardt disease will cause noticeable changes in your
eyes
and vision, including:
Blind spots
or cloudy areas in your vision
Blurry vision
Light sensitivity
New
color blindness
Trouble adjusting to changes in lighting
Worsened
night vision
Stargardt disease symptoms are usually progressive. This means they get worse over time. Eventually, you’ll lose some or all of your central vision. You might still be able to see out of the sides of your eyes. But you won’t be able to clearly see objects directly in front of you.
Advertisement
Stargardt disease causes
Stargardt disease is a
genetic condition
. It happens when there’s a
genetic change
in the
ABCA4
gene. This
gene
helps your retinas work correctly.
Stargardt disease is hereditary. Biological parents pass it to their children. Stargardt disease is passed through families in an
autosomal recessive
pattern. That means both biological parents need to have a changed
ABCA4
gene for their biological children to develop Stargardt disease.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Stargardt disease
An
eye doctor
will diagnose Stargardt disease. They’ll give you an
eye exam
to check your vision and eye health. Tell your provider when you first noticed changes in your vision or other symptoms.
You might need a few tests, including:
Electroretinography (ERG)
Fluorescein angiography
Fundus photography
and fundus autofluorescent photography
Genetic testing
Optical coherence tomography (OCT)
Stargardt disease stages
Your eye care specialist may classify Stargardt disease with stages as it progresses, including:
Stage 1.
Flecks of excess lipofuscin form in your macula. You might have mild symptoms.
Stage 2.
The flecks have built up enough to spread beyond your macula to other areas of your retina around it. Symptoms will be more noticeable.
Stage 3.
The flecks have absorbed back into your macula and damaged it (they cause atrophy). This will cause worsening symptoms.
Stage 4.
The atrophy in your macula is severe enough to erase some or all of your central vision.
Management and Treatment
How is Stargardt disease treated?
There’s no treatment to reverse Stargardt disease or the damage it causes. Your eye care specialist will suggest ways to manage symptoms and slow down the vision loss, including:
Avoiding dietary supplements that contain
vitamin A
(getting too much vitamin A may speed up vision loss if you have Stargardt disease)
Glasses
,
contacts
and/or specific
low vision
aids
Quitting
smoking
(and other forms of nicotine, like
vaping
)
Wearing a hat or sunglasses to protect your eyes when you go outside
Is Stargardt disease curable?
Your eye care specialist can help you manage Stargardt disease, but you can’t cure it.
Researchers are conducting
clinical trials
to find ways to treat all types of macular degeneration (including Stargardt disease). Ask your eye care specialist if you’d be a good fit for a clinical trial. This can help you get access to new, experimental treatments.
When should I seek care?
Visit a healthcare provider or eye care specialist as soon as you notice any changes in your eyes or vision. Stargardt disease can share symptoms with other, more common conditions. It’s important to get any eye issue diagnosed as soon as possible.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Retinal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Stargardt disease?
You should expect to lose your central vision. Most people experience vision loss slowly over several years. It sometimes takes decades. But it can happen faster. How your
ABCA4
gene is changed can affect how quickly you lose your vision. This can also control how much of your vision you lose. Your eye doctor will help you understand what to expect.
Advertisement
You’ll need regular eye exams to monitor changes in your eyes. Ask your eye care specialist how often you should schedule routine exams and any follow-up tests.
Living With
How do I take care of myself with Stargardt disease?
You can take care of yourself in many ways by eating a nutritious diet and getting enough exercise. Don’t smoke. Deal with stress as it comes. Keep your regular schedule of appointments with your healthcare providers.
When should I see my healthcare provider if I have Stargardt disease?
Your
eye care specialists
will want to see you on a regular basis. Make sure you keep those appointments. However, if you have any changes in vision or any type of pain, you should contact your provider right away.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider if I have Stargardt disease?
Here are some questions you may want to ask your provider if you have Stargardt disease:
Can you suggest a support group for me?
Am I eligible to take part in a clinical trial?
Should I speak to a genetic counselor?
Can you suggest things that will help me
cope with low vision
?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with Stargardt disease can be scary. Anything that affects your vision is. But your eye care specialist will help you adjust to changes in your sight over time. They’ll suggest ways to protect your eyes and help you feel safe and comfortable.
There isn’t a cure for Stargardt disease now, but researchers are always looking for new treatments. Ask your provider about participating in a clinical trial if you’re interested.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your eyes are one of your most important senses. If something goes wrong, it can change your world. Cleveland Clinic can help treat all types of retinal disease.
Retinal Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment