Heart Inflammation (Carditis): Causes & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Heart Inflammation (Carditis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Heart Inflammation (Carditis)
Heart inflammation happens after you have an injury or infection in your heart. This rare condition can be mild, serious or in between the two extremes. Mild cases don’t need treatment, and medication helps with all three types of carditis. Recovery can take many weeks. If you have a bad case, you may need procedures or a medical device.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Carditis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Carditis?
Types of heart inflammation (carditis) have different names, based on which part of your heart they affect.
Carditis (heart inflammation) is a condition that happens when your heart is hurt or infected. This can happen to your heart’s muscle, the sac around your heart or the lining of your heart’s chambers.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
For some people, inflammation of the heart happens without warning. For others, it takes longer. Some people have severe symptoms, while others barely have any symptoms. The degree of
inflammation
can also vary from person to person, depending on individual factors and causes.
Types of this condition
Carditis affects three different areas of your heart. All three types of heart inflammation are rare:
Endocarditis
: Bacteria infect the lining of the heart chambers your blood goes through and the valves that control blood flow between those chambers. It can go to other parts of your body and infect those areas, too.
Myocarditis
: This harms the muscle that makes your heart pump. Inflamed heart muscle has a harder time pumping blood.
Pericarditis
: This affects the sac (pericardium) around the outside of your heart. When inflamed, your pericardium’s two layers get thicker. They also brush against each other and your heart muscle.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of carditis
Common symptoms for all three types of heart inflammation include chest pain, shortness of breath and fever.
Other signs of carditis are more specific to the type you have, like:
Pain in your belly, blood in your pee or night sweats (with endocarditis)
Swelling in your legs or feet, heart palpitations or extreme tiredness (with myocarditis)
A fast heartbeat and chest pain that gets better when you sit up and lean forward (with pericarditis)
Advertisement
When a virus causes heart inflammation, you can have symptoms from the virus first.
Carditis causes
Infections
— usually from viruses or bacteria — cause most cases of heart inflammation. These can range from HIV or COVID-19 to herpes and others.
Lyme disease
bacteria can lead to Lyme carditis.
Rheumatic fever
can cause rheumatic carditis.
Other causes of an inflamed heart include:
Autoimmune diseases
like rheumatoid arthritis or lupus
Chest injury or trauma
Harmful things in your environment, like lead
Medicines for depression, seizures, certain heart issues or cancer
Medical problems like a heart attack, cancer or
uremia
Risk factors
People in any age group can get heart inflammation, but it’s more common in
males
. Certain medical issues or treatments put you at a higher risk of an inflamed heart. These include:
Diabetes
HIV/AIDS
Eating disorders
Procedures that require a catheter in your vein
Radiation therapy for cancer
Heart devices like
pacemakers
or
replacement valves
Open-heart surgery
How to lower your risk
You can’t change your age or the medical conditions you have that put you at risk for heart inflammation. But there are a few things you can control, including:
Limiting how many beverages with alcohol you drink
Not using recreational IV drugs.
Taking good care of your teeth
Keeping your skin clean to prevent infections
If you’re at high risk for endocarditis, your healthcare provider can prescribe antibiotics. You take these before going to the dentist or having surgery. You’re at high risk if you’ve had endocarditis before, had a valve replaced or have had a specific
heart issue since birth
.
You can get carditis more than once, so be on the lookout for symptoms.
Complications of this condition
A mild case of pericarditis or myocarditis can go away on its own. But some complications of heart inflammation are serious and can be life-limiting. Without treatment, heart inflammation can cause:
Blood clots
Coronary heart disease
Heart muscle disease (cardiomyopathy)
Heart failure
Abnormal heart rhythms
Fainting
Worse infections that can spread throughout your body (from endocarditis)
Lung problems (from myocarditis)
Too much fluid building up around your heart (from pericarditis)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose carditis
To detect carditis, your healthcare provider will perform a physical exam and collect your medical history. They’ll do blood tests and other tests to help them rule out a
heart attack
and find the infection’s source. Your provider will also check for fluid around your heart. They’ll look at how well your heart is functioning and see if it’s working normally.
Tests include:
Advertisement
Cardiac computed tomography
(CT)
Chest X-ray
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Echocardiography
Heart MRI
Positron emission tomography
(PET) scan
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Treatment for carditis varies. Medications can help you fight infections and keep your immune system and heart from working too hard. If you have more serious complications, you may need procedures or medical devices.
Medicines
Medicines for heart inflammation may vary depending on which part of your heart is inflamed. Medications you take may include:
Corticosteroids
Antibiotics
Antifungal drugs
Anti-inflammatory drugs
Heart failure medicines
Blood thinners
IV immunoglobulin
Procedures
For some cases of carditis, you may need a procedure or surgery to:
Drain extra fluid (pericardial effusion) from your pericardium or remove part of the sac
Remove an infected device or tissue
Put in a pacemaker, ICD or left ventricular assist device (LVAD)
Perform a heart transplant
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you get any new symptoms while you’re recovering. Since chest pain is a common symptom of carditis and a heart attack, you may not know which one is happening. To be safe, call 911 (or your local emergency service number) if you’re having chest pain.
When you visit your provider, you may want to ask:
Advertisement
Which type of heart inflammation do I have?
Do you know what caused it?
Which treatment is best for me?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have heart inflammation?
It can take several weeks or years to recover from some types of heart inflammation. Once you see your healthcare provider, be sure to follow their instructions for taking medicines they prescribed. You’ll also need follow-up appointments throughout your recovery. These may include repeat blood tests or imaging.
Follow-up visits are important because carditis can come back months or years later.
Carditis can be mild, life-threatening or somewhere in between. The prognosis (outlook) is generally good when you get treatment quickly. You might not even need treatment for a mild case. After treatment, you might not have issues, or you might still need medicine. You may need a heart transplant at some point.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Feeling a pain in your chest or having a hard time breathing makes you stop what you’re doing. If you think you have carditis, don’t wait to get help. You’ll have the best outcome if you catch heart inflammation early.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment