Growing Pains in Kids: Symptoms & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Growing Pains
Advertisement
Advertisement
Growing Pains
Growing pains are achy or cramping pains that kids might experience, usually in their legs. They often happen later in the day or at night, affect both legs, and get better with rest. Experts aren’t sure what causes growing pains, since we know now that it doesn’t have to do with growth. Massage, warm baths and pain relievers might help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Growing Pains?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Are Growing Pains?
Learn more about growing pains from Lainie Holman, MD.
Growing pains are
achy
or cramping feelings that some kids get in their legs. They usually happen in the afternoon or evening and are better by morning.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Growing pains don’t damage your body, but experts aren’t sure what causes them. They’re called “growing pains” because people used to think they happened when your
bones
were growing quickly. It turns out the pain isn’t related to growing, but the name stuck.
Kids can start having growing pains as young as 3. They’re most common in kids 12 and under.
Are growing pains real?
Yes, growing pains are real — your child isn’t imagining their aching legs. But “growing pains” isn’t a great name for them, since they aren’t related to growth.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of growing pains
Kids usually feel growing pains
in their legs
(like their shins, calves, thighs or behind their knees). Sometimes, your child’s arms might hurt too. The pain:
Usually affects both sides of their body
Comes on later in the day or during the night
Lasts for several minutes or for hours at a time
Is usually intermittent — it might go away for days or weeks and come back
Might awaken your child from sleep
Goes away by morning or with rest
Might be more likely to happen on days when they have a lot of physical activity
Doesn’t come with any other symptoms, like swelling, redness or limping
Doesn’t stop your child from participating in activities
What do growing pains feel like?
Many kids say growing pains are a deep cramping or aching pain. But they can feel different for each child. The pain might be mild or severe.
Advertisement
Causes of growing pains
Experts aren’t really sure what causes growing pains. Some possible causes experts have suggested include:
Increased physical activity, leading to overuse of
muscles
Hypermobility
,
flat feet
,
scoliosis
or other body differences that can put stress on your body
Vitamin D deficiency
or
low bone density
, which can cause issues with your bones and muscles
Anxiety
or emotional distress, which can cause muscle aches,
headaches
and
abdominal pain
There might be a genetic factor to growing pains, too — you might be more likely to experience them if your parents or siblings had them.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose growing pains
There’s no specific test to diagnose growing pains. A healthcare provider will perform a
physical examination
and ask about your child’s symptoms. They might ask:
Where the pain is located
What it feels like
When it started
What your child was doing the day it started
How often it happens
If anything makes the pain better or worse
How long the pain lasts
Your provider might get blood tests or imaging (like
X-rays
or an
MRI
) to rule out other conditions, especially if the description of the pain doesn’t sound like growing pains. For instance:
If it only affects one side of your child’s body
If it doesn’t get better with rest
If your child has other symptoms, like swelling or redness
If your child has
joint pain
Management and Treatment
How are growing pains treated?
There’s no specific treatment for growing pains. To help relieve the pain, your child’s healthcare provider might suggest:
Gentle massage
Muscle stretches
A heating pad
Warm baths
Over-the-counter pain medications, like
acetaminophen
(Tylenol®) or
ibuprofen
(Advil®, Motrin®)
Different amounts of physical activity
Physical therapy
Orthotics
(shoe inserts)
Mixing up sports or types of physical activities to work different muscle groups
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should always check with a healthcare provider if your child has unexplained pain. They can confirm if they’re likely to be growing pains or if they need to look into it further.
Talk to a healthcare provider right away if your child develops:
Severe pain
A lump in a muscle
Limping
Redness with pain
Dark-colored pee
(urine)
Swelling that doesn’t get better or gets worse after 24 hours
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long do growing pains last?
Kids can have growing pains on and off for months or years after they first experience them. Most kids stop having them by age 12 or so, but some teenagers experience them, too.
What can I expect if my child has growing pains?
While not dangerous, frequent episodes of pain can have a major impact on your child and your family’s daily routine. They might miss sleep or avoid physical activity if it makes them hurt later. You may have to try a few different remedies to find what works best.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Even though growing pains are common, they can still be frustrating to both parents and kids — especially when there’s no clear explanation as to why they happen. A healthcare provider can give you suggestions for ways to relieve the pain. You can help get your child through by listening to them and letting them know that you’re there to help.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us