Sensory Processing Disorder (SPD): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Sensory Processing Disorder (SPD)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sensory Processing Disorder (SPD)
Sensory processing disorder (SPD) is a difference in the way your brain processes sensory information. There are different types of this disorder. For example, you may be overwhelmed or under-responsive to certain sensory experiences, like sounds or touch. Occupational therapists can help children and adults with SPD adapt to sensory issues that affect their daily lives.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is sensory processing disorder?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is sensory processing disorder?
Sensory processing disorder (SPD) is a difference in the way your
brain
understands and responds to information from your senses. This includes what you see, hear, smell, taste and touch. It can also affect your movement.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers and parents typically identify SPD in children. But it can also affect adults. SPD commonly affects people with neurodevelopmental and
neurodivergent
conditions, like
autism spectrum disorder
and
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
. But you can also have SPD without any other condition.
Currently, SPD isn’t an official medical diagnosis. But providers recognize the benefits of identifying SPD and using therapy to manage it, especially if it affects your ability to function day to day.
Researchers
estimate that about 1 to 3 out of every 20 people in the general U.S. population have sensory processing disorder. These estimates are higher for people with neurodevelopmental conditions.
Types of sensory processing disorder
There are different types of sensory processing disorders, including:
Sensory over-responsivity (SOR)
. In this type, you’re overly sensitive to sensory information. You may respond too much, too soon or for too long to sensory information that most people can tolerate.
Sensory under-responsivity (SUR)
. Here, you need more sensory information than usual for it to have an impact. You may be unaware of sensory information and/or have a delay before responding, compared to most people.
Sensory craving (SC)
. In this type, you need and seek out sensory information for stimulation. But getting the stimulation results in disorganization and doesn’t satisfy the craving.
Sensory discrimination disorder
. This type includes difficulty interpreting subtle qualities of sensory information. There are several subtypes. For example, auditory discrimination disorder makes it difficult to understand the things you hear.
Postural disorder
. With this type, you have issues perceiving your body’s position in space. You may have difficulty stabilizing your body during movement or at rest without core stability.
Dyspraxia
. This version causes a wide range of issues with movement and coordination. It can affect your
gross
and/or
fine motor skills
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Sensory processing disorder (SPD) is a group of conditions that affect how your brain processes sensory information, like sights, sounds, smells, tastes, movement and touch.
Symptoms of sensory processing disorder
Symptoms vary based on the type of SPD. There are a lot of different symptoms, but some of the most common include:
Constantly bumping into things (clumsiness)
Feeling discomfort in certain types of clothing and fabric
Gagging when eating certain food textures
Needing to constantly touch things
Not recognizing personal space
Reacting to sudden movements, touches, loud noises and/or bright lights
Trouble using fine motor skills
Sensory processing disorder can affect one of your senses or multiple senses. They can also vary in severity or intensity.
Sensory processing disorder causes
Researchers don’t yet know the cause of sensory processing disorder. Studies show that
genetics
and environmental factors likely play a role.
Risk factors of sensory processing disorder
There’s a strong link between sensory processing disorder and neurodivergence. There’s also a link between certain
mental health conditions
. SPD commonly happens with (coexists with) the following conditions:
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
ADHD
Bipolar disorder
Developmental delays
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (DMDD)
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
Schizophrenia
Specific
learning disorders
You may have SPD without any other neurodevelopmental or psychiatric conditions.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose sensory processing disorder
As SPD isn’t yet an official medical condition, it tends to be under-diagnosed due to a lack of precise diagnostic criteria. But healthcare providers are recognizing it — and the benefits of treating it — more and more.
If you notice that your child’s sensory behavior isn’t typical, your child’s
pediatrician
may refer you to an
occupational therapist
. These professionals can assess your child for SPD by watching them interact with certain sensory experiences. They’ll also ask about your child’s symptoms, behavior and medical history to help in the diagnosis. Your pediatrician may also refer you to other specialists, depending on your child’s specific needs.
Management and Treatment
How is sensory processing disorder treated?
There’s no cure for sensory processing disorder. But various types of
occupational therapy
can help manage the symptoms of SPD, especially if they affect your or your child’s daily life.
Occupational therapists (and
pediatric occupational therapists
) provide treatment to help you:
Meet developmental milestones (for children), like fine and gross motor skills
Improve self-care and activities of daily living
Improve play and social skills
Improve self-regulation skills and behavior
SPD can impact all aspects of life. Occupational therapists offer strategies for coping with sensory challenges for all ages.
Sensory integration therapy
Sensory integration therapy provides essential sensory input and experiences that will help you or your child learn to adapt. This is the most common and effective type of therapy for SPD. You’ll work with an occupational therapist for it.
Advertisement
It typically involves doing specific sensory activities tailored to your needs, which help regulate your sensory response. You can learn to interact with your senses without becoming overwhelmed. Additionally, you can learn coping skills for overcoming everyday interactions with certain sensory information.
Studies show that sensory integration therapy increases concentration, improves behavior and decreases anxiety levels.
Routine sensory activities at home and school
For school-age children, your child’s occupational therapist may recommend incorporating routine sensory activities and tools at home and school, alongside sensory integration therapy.
These activities and tools can help your child stay focused and organized during the day. They’re customized to your child’s unique needs.
For example, during school, a child with SPD may need:
Access to headphones to block out background noises while they work
Access to fidget toys
A designated break to do a sensory activity, like walking, spinning or swinging
Your child’s occupational therapist will recommend specific strategies for them.
Occupational therapy for fine and gross motor skills
If your child has dyspraxia or postural disorder, they may need help strengthening fine and/or gross motor skills.
An occupational therapist will work with your child to develop these skills. Fine motor skills include things like handwriting, fastening buttons and using scissors. Gross motor skills include things like climbing stairs, throwing a ball and riding a bike.
Advertisement
When should I see a healthcare provider?
If you or your child have a sensory processing disorder, you’ll likely need to see an occupational therapist regularly to receive ongoing therapy. As children age, their environments and learning challenges change, so their therapy may need to change as well.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It may be helpful to ask your healthcare provider the following questions:
What does therapy look like for SPD?
What can I do at home to help SPD?
What can I expect for my (or my child’s) future?
Can you help me find out if my insurance will cover SPD therapy?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a sensory processing disorder?
It can be daunting to live with sensory processing disorder — whether you’re a child or an adult. It can also be challenging for loved ones. But the good news is that therapy can help you or your child cope with sensory issues.
SPD affects each person differently, so being adaptable and understanding is essential. If your child has SPD, it’s important to advocate for them to ensure they get the best care. Advocating for care — and accommodations at school — can help them have the best possible quality of life.
You and your family may also want to consider joining a support group to meet others who can relate to your experiences.
Without proper care, unmanaged SPD increases your child’s risk of depression, behavioral issues and social isolation.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
We all experience the world around us differently. Many people don’t think about all the sensory information they experience at any given time. But for people with sensory processing disorder (SPD), it can make everyday life challenging.
The more you learn about SPD, the more you can understand how your child experiences their environment and what their triggers are. And you may be able to connect with them in a way you hadn’t been able to before.
Know that occupational therapists can help you or your child adapt to and cope with sensory issues. They know that SPD affects everyone differently and will tailor a therapy plan unique to you or your child.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your child has a neurological condition, you want them to have the best care. At Cleveland Clinic Children’s, we offer compassionate, personalized treatment.
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment