Muscle Memory: What It Is & How It Works
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Muscle Memory
Advertisement
Advertisement
Muscle Memory
Muscle memory is an automatic movement that you don’t have to think about doing. It could include playing an instrument, dancing or scrolling on your phone. Your muscles do a lot of the work but your brain stores the memory. Research is ongoing to understand more about how long these memories last.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
What is muscle memory?
Muscle memory is your ability to move in a particular way without thinking about it. You develop this type of
memory
through repetition and practice — doing the same task over and over again.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Let’s say the last time you rode a bicycle was when you were a kid. You used to ride to school every day. But as an adult, you haven’t had time to take your bicycle out of storage in the garage. If you decide to hop back on the bicycle today, you may feel a little shaky at first, but your body automatically knows what to do.
Other examples of muscle memory include:
Typing on a keyboard.
Driving a car.
Tying your shoes.
It’s a type of long-term memory, housed under implicit or non-declarative memory. It’s a form of procedural memory.
How does muscle memory work?
Your
brain
and skeletal
muscles
work together to learn movements that eventually become automatic.
You train your muscles to do a task. As your muscles don’t have the capacity to retain memories like your brain does, they increase the amount of muscle fiber nuclei (myonuclei) within the trained muscle cells. Think of these as crew members on a boat. The more crew members rowing the boat, the better it will perform in a race. As myonuclei increase, so does your muscle mass. This helps you build strength so you can perform the task with ease.
What are the stages of muscle memory?
Your muscle memory works in phases or stages. You need to physically perform a task several times until the task becomes automatic. This is how your procedural memory learns. The phases include:
Advertisement
Cognitive phase.
You think about doing the task as you do it. For example: You count the steps of the dance as you move your body.
Associative phase.
The task improves with repetition and practice. You don’t need to think as much about the steps of the task in order to complete it. For example, you replay the same song several times and practice the dance from start to finish to improve your dancing skills. It becomes easier to do the more you do it.
Autonomous phase.
You’ve practiced the task enough that you no longer have to think about it to do it. It happens automatically. For example, when the song plays, you start dancing.
How long does muscle memory take to establish?
There isn’t a set amount of time that’s right for everyone. A lot of factors go into the length of time it could take for you to learn something until the behavior becomes automatic, including:
Complexity
: How difficult the task is
Frequency
: How often you practice
Experience
: How familiar you are with the task
How long does muscle memory last?
The exact length of time is unknown. In some cases, you may have it your entire life. Research is ongoing to learn more about how long you can retain muscle memory.
How long does muscle memory take to come back?
The amount of time it takes varies from person to person. Having previously learned a skill means that you could significantly reduce your relearning time. The knowledge of the skill is in your brain, but your muscles need retraining to get in shape again.
For example, if you played basketball regularly but stopped playing at the end of a season, you’ll still be able to pick up a basketball and shoot hoops in your free time. Your brain still remembers how to play and your muscles still have the myonuclei within previously trained muscle cells. You still have the motor memory that allows you to pick up the ball and dribble it. But your speed and accuracy may not be where it used to be without practice.
Many factors go into the amount of time you’ll need to get back into physical shape, including:
How much time you took off.
Your general health.
Your physical activity level.
Where is muscle memory stored?
You store your muscle memory in your brain, not your muscles. Long-term memories form in your
hippocampus
(in your
temporal lobe
). Muscle memory is a type of non-declarative, procedural memory. These are stored in your
frontal lobe
(motor cortex),
cerebellum
and forebrain (striatum).
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Athletes are aware of how important muscle memory is, especially if they need to take time off the field or court to recover from an injury. But muscle memory isn’t just for athletes. You probably noticed yourself reaching for a coffee cup in the wrong cabinet after moving because you have a routine each morning and your brain reacts automatically.
Advertisement
Your brain and muscles need to work together so you can go about your day as expected. If you’re having trouble getting back to your activities or fitness level after a break, let a healthcare provider know.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a neurological condition, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Neurology Care for Adults
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment