Pyomyositis: Causes, Diagnosis, Treatment & Complications
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pyomyositis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pyomyositis
Pyomyositis is a bacterial infection that can cause an abscess in your muscles, most commonly, your thigh muscles. The bacteria Staphylococcus aureus (a staph infection) is the most common cause. Symptoms include pain, swelling and fever. Providers treat pyomyositis with antibiotics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Pyomyositis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Pyomyositis?
Healthcare providers can see polymyositis abscesses using imaging like MRI or CT scans.
Pyomyositis (“pi-oh-my-oh-SIGH-tis") is a rare
bacterial infection
in your
muscles
. It causes an
abscess
— a swollen, pus-filled area — to form. Pyomyositis most commonly affects muscles in your lower body, like your
thigh
or pelvic muscles.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Since the abscess is deep in your muscle, you usually can’t see it just by looking at your body. It might cause pain or, eventually, swelling or a hard lump you can feel through your skin. You might have a hard time using the affected muscle like you normally would. For example, if you have an abscess in your thigh muscle, you might develop a limp.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of pyomyositis
Symptoms include:
Fever
and
chills
Pain
, tenderness or cramps in the affected muscle
Swelling, redness or a hard lump under your skin
Limited use of the affected muscle (like difficulty walking)
Drop in blood pressure (
shock
), which may make you weak or dizzy
Stages of pyomyositis
Healthcare providers determine what stage of pyomyositis you have based on how severe or widespread the infection is.
Stage 1:
The affected muscle is painfully
inflamed
. Sometimes, a lump or hard area forms.
Stage 2:
A pus-filled abscess forms. You might have severe pain, swelling and fever. This stage can last one to three weeks. Most people are diagnosed in stage 2.
Stage 3:
The infection spreads throughout your body, causing additional abscesses. This can lead to severe complications, including organ failure.
Causes
The bacteria
Staphylococcus aureus
(a
staph infection
) causes most cases of pyomyositis.
Group A
Streptococcus
can also cause it
.
Experts aren’t sure exactly how these bacteria get into your muscles to cause pyomyositis— you don’t seem to need a break in your skin to get an infection.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Pyomyositis is more common in tropical areas of the world, but you can get it no matter where you live. You might be at a higher risk if you have:
A
weakened or suppressed immune system
Diabetes
A skin infection
A recently injured muscle or history of intense exercise
A history of injected drug use
Complications
If left untreated, the bacterial infection that causes pyomyositis can spread throughout your body. This can lead to
septic shock
, organ damage and death.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose pyomyositis
Healthcare providers use an
MRI
— images of the inside of your body — to diagnose pyomyositis. They might also use
blood tests
or a
bacterial culture
to look for an infection.
It can be hard for providers to diagnose because its symptoms often look like other, more common issues. Depending on your symptoms, they may do additional tests or imaging while determining the cause.
Management and Treatment
How is pyomyositis treated?
Providers treat pyomyositis with
antibiotics
. They also may need to drain the abscess. In severe cases, you might need surgery to completely get rid of the infection.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you have an unexplained fever or muscle pain that doesn’t go away. Let them know if you’ve had any recent injuries or if you have any risk factors for pyomyositis.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have pyomyositis?
When caught in stages 1 or 2, pyomyositis is often treatable with antibiotics. You’ll get them through an IV in your arm or take them by mouth for at least a week. You might need more extensive treatment if the infection has spread to the rest of your body. Pyomyositis can be fatal without treatment
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between myositis and pyomyositis?
Myositis
is muscle inflammation that can have many causes. An infection causes pyomyositis, specifically.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Pyomyositis is a rare muscle infection. But it can be serious if left untreated for too long. Be sure to talk to a healthcare provider if you have any unexplained muscle pain, especially if it’s getting worse or you have other symptoms, like swelling. Many common conditions can have similar symptoms to pyomyositis, so it might take time to get to the bottom of it. It can be frustrating when it takes a long time to figure out the cause of your symptoms. Pyomyositis is often curable once diagnosed.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment