Pulmonary Fibrosis: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Pulmonary Fibrosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pulmonary Fibrosis
Pulmonary fibrosis is scarring in your lungs. It can make it hard to expand your lungs and get enough oxygen to your body. It can be idiopathic (without a known cause) or result from autoimmune diseases, environmental factors or medications. Pulmonary fibrosis usually gets worse over time, but how quickly it gets worse is different for everyone.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Pulmonary Fibrosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Pulmonary Fibrosis?
Pulmonary fibrosis makes it hard to expand your lungs. You might feel short of breath or get tired with everyday activities.
Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) is a scarring and thickening in your
lungs
that makes it hard to breathe deeply. It’s a type of
interstitial lung disease
, which affects the tissue between the air sacs in your lungs (alveoli).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hard, stiff lung tissues don’t expand as well as they should. If you have pulmonary fibrosis, you may get
short of breath
during daily tasks that never seemed tiring before. Pulmonary fibrosis is permanent and usually gets progressively worse over time (called progressive pulmonary fibrosis).
What is idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis?
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is lung scarring without a known cause. Most cases of pulmonary fibrosis are idiopathic.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis?
Pulmonary fibrosis symptoms include:
Shortness of breath, especially during or soon after exertion
Breathing in short, shallow spurts
Dry
cough
that doesn’t go away
Fatigue
Unexplained weight loss
Clubbed fingers
Bluish, gray or white skin around your lips, eyes or nails (
cyanosis
)
What causes pulmonary fibrosis?
Experts think pulmonary fibrosis happens when your lungs don’t heal properly from damage or
inflammation
. Specific causes include:
Connective tissue disease
. These include
rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
,
lupus
and
scleroderma
.
Environmental exposures.
Substances that can cause lung scarring include asbestos, silica and beryllium.
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
— a type of allergy to certain molds, bacteria or bits of bird feathers or droppings — can also cause it.
Granulomatous disease
. These include
sarcoidosis
or
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
.
Medications or treatments
. These include amiodarone, nitrofurantoin, methotrexate and
radiation therapy
.
Smoking
.
Advertisement
In most cases, the specific cause is unknown.
What are the risk factors for pulmonary fibrosis?
In addition to the causes above, you might also be at a higher risk for pulmonary fibrosis if you:
Are 65 or older
Are
male
Have a family member with pulmonary fibrosis
Have certain conditions caused by
changes in your DNA
, like dyskeratosis congenita (a rare type of
bone marrow failure
)
What are the complications of pulmonary fibrosis?
Scarred lung tissues have a hard time getting oxygen to the rest of your body and can make your heart work harder. This can lead to complications that include:
Low oxygen in your blood (
hypoxemia
) and tissues (
hypoxia
)
High blood pressure in your lungs (
pulmonary hypertension
)
Collapsed lung
Lung infections
Respiratory failure
Heart failure
Diagnosis and Tests
How is pulmonary fibrosis diagnosed?
It might take a number of tests and imaging procedures to diagnose pulmonary fibrosis. Your provider will listen to your lungs and get
pulmonary function tests
to understand how your lungs are working. They’ll check for and rule out other conditions that affect your heart and lungs.
Tests and procedures
Specific tests and procedures providers might use to diagnose pulmonary fibrosis include:
Chest X-ray
High-resolution CT (HRCT) scan
Pulmonary (lung) function tests
Blood tests
, including an
arterial blood gas
Bronchoscopy
Biopsy
They may also use an
echocardiogram
to diagnose or rule out issues with your heart.
Management and Treatment
Can pulmonary fibrosis be cured?
No, there isn’t a cure for pulmonary fibrosis. Treatment focuses on easing symptoms, slowing down progression, and improving your quality of life.
Treatments for pulmonary fibrosis could include:
Antifibrotic medications.
Nintedanib
(OFEV®) or
pirfenidone
(Esbriet®) may slow down lung scarring and preserve lung function.
Corticosteroids
. These are sometimes used to reduce inflammation.
Oxygen therapy
.
Your provider will prescribe extra oxygen if you don’t have enough of it getting to your blood or tissues. It’s delivered through a mask or tube in your nose.
Pulmonary rehabilitation
.
Breathing exercises and physical therapy can make your lungs stronger and breathing easier.
Lung transplant
.
Some people with fibrosis are eligible for a lung transplant.
Clinical trials
. If you’re interested, your provider can help you join a research study of new medicines that can potentially help people.
You may also need medications to treat underlying causes (like autoimmune disease) or conditions that make scarring worse (like
GERD
).
How do I take care of myself?
If you have a PF diagnosis, it might be harder to fight off or recover from infections.
Washing your hands
frequently, disinfecting surfaces and avoiding crowded places — especially during cold and
flu
season, and when
COVID-19
cases are high — might help you avoid getting sick frequently. Getting recommended
vaccinations
, like those for pneumonia, the flu, RSV, and COVID can also help minimize your risk.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have shortness of breath or get tired more easily with everyday tasks than you used to. Early diagnosis and treatment can help slow down the progression of lung disease.
If you have a connective tissue or granulomatous disease, talk to your healthcare provider about whether there are ways to reduce your risk of fibrosis.
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 or go to the emergency room if you experience:
Severe or sudden difficulty breathing
Chest pain
Confusion
or altered mental state
Bluish skin, lips or nails
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It might be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:
What caused this scarring?
What are my treatment options?
How do I take my medication?
When should I follow up with you?
Am I eligible for lung transplantation?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have pulmonary fibrosis?
Lung scarring is nearly always permanent (unless caused by a medication and caught early). If you have an underlying disease, management of it might help prevent further damage. If the cause is unknown, your healthcare provider will treat your symptoms and try to prevent more damage.
Healthcare providers can’t easily predict how pulmonary fibrosis will progress. Your symptoms may get worse very slowly, over years. In some cases, the disease may lead to severe symptoms quickly (over months).
Advertisement
How long can a person live with pulmonary fibrosis?
The life expectancy of someone with the most common form, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, is
three to five years
. But life expectancies for people with PF have been getting longer in recent years.
Prevention
Can pulmonary fibrosis be prevented?
Many causes of pulmonary fibrosis aren’t preventable. You can reduce your risk of lung scarring from environmental exposures by:
Avoiding substances that can harm your lungs, such as asbestos, metal dust or chemicals, and wearing a respirator (a mask that filters particles from the air) if you have to work with them
Avoiding things that can cause chronic allergic reactions, like hay, grain, bird droppings or feathers, and heating and cooling systems — and wearing a respirator mask if you have to work with them
Not smoking or
quitting smoking
Additional Common Questions
What are the stages of pulmonary fibrosis?
While there’s no official staging system for pulmonary fibrosis, some providers may describe pulmonary fibrosis as mild, moderate, severe or very severe. They base this diagnosis on your symptoms, lung function tests and imaging.
At what age does pulmonary fibrosis start?
Most cases of pulmonary fibrosis are diagnosed in people 65 and older.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out you have pulmonary fibrosis can be life-changing. You might feel uncertain about your future, or like the rug’s been pulled out from under you. Finding a support system in loved ones or in others with the same diagnosis can help.
Advertisement
It’s important to remember that every case of PF is different, and no one can tell you what your future holds. Treatment can sometimes slow down the progression of pulmonary fibrosis and improve your quality of life. Have honest conversations with your provider about what you can expect in your specific situation.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breathing issues can affect your life in many ways. Cleveland Clinic’s respiratory therapy program treats your symptoms so you can feel better day to day.
Respiratory Therapy
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment