Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS)
ME/CFS is severe fatigue and exhaustion that lasts at least six months or longer. You might feel joint and muscle pain, headache and flu-like symptoms. Rest doesn’t help. It can prevent you from completing your daily routine or getting out of bed. Treatment options like medications, sleep habit changes or activity management may help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS)?
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a chronic illness that causes extreme tiredness that doesn’t improve with rest. It often gets worse after physical or mental activity. It can make daily tasks difficult. In some cases, even getting out of bed can feel impossible.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
With fatigue, symptoms feel like you have the
flu
. They can come and go, varying in intensity over time. Treatment options are available to manage ME/CFS.
Symptoms and Causes
ME/CFS symptoms can look and feel like the flu. They often trigger after an infection.
Symptoms of ME/CFS
ME/CFS symptoms include:
Severe fatigue that doesn’t get better with rest or
sleep
Difficulty sleeping (falling or staying asleep)
Headaches
Joint pain
Muscle aches
Trouble with thinking, attention, concentration and
memory
Other symptoms include:
Dizziness and fainting
Chills
IBS
, painful bloating, gas,
constipation
and diarrhea
Mood swings
and irritability
Night sweats
Swollen lymph nodes
Tingling or numbness in your feet, hands or face
Vision problems
Weakness
Symptoms differ widely from person to person. They usually last for six months or longer. They may worsen after physical activity or mental effort. This is known as post-exertional malaise.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome causes
The exact cause of ME/CFS isn’t known. But studies show that these might be involved:
Immune system changes
: Like some
autoimmune conditions
, ME/CFS may cause your
immune system
to attack healthy parts of your body by mistake.
Problems with energy production
: Your cells may have trouble converting food into energy, leaving less fuel for your brain and muscles.
Genetic factors
: This condition may run in biological families. This might mean it’s a
genetic condition
. More research is needed to identify the specific gene involved.
Advertisement
Research suggests the infections might trigger or cause a flare-up of symptoms:
Epstein-Barr virus
Ross River virus
C. burnetti
COVID-19
Stress (physical or emotional) may also trigger symptoms.
Risk factors of ME/CFS
While anyone can develop this condition, it’s more common among:
Adults (ages 40 to 60)
Adolescents (ages 10 to 19)
Females
Complications of ME/CFS
The fatigue from ME/CFS makes daily activities hard to do. Things like completing your routine or having the energy to get through the work or school day can be very difficult. You may need to make changes or ask for help to adjust to these symptoms.
ME/CFS can also lead to mental health challenges, like
depression
and
anxiety
. If you’re feeling down or overwhelmed, talk to a healthcare provider. There are treatments available that can help you feel better.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose ME/CFS
Healthcare providers diagnose ME/CFS after a physical exam,
neurological exam
and mental health evaluation. There’s no single test for ME/CFS. But lab tests, like blood or urine tests, can help rule out other conditions with similar symptoms.
The diagnostic criteria for ME/CFS, or the things that your physician will look for during an exam, include:
Severe fatigue that lasts at least six months (it doesn’t improve with rest or sleep)
Difficulty getting restful sleep
Fatigue that gets worse after mental or physical activity
Trouble sitting up without feeling symptoms (orthostatic intolerance) and/or problems with thinking or memory (cognitive function)
Getting a diagnosis can take time. Your doctor may need to run multiple tests, but not all at once. That process can be frustrating, especially when you’re already not feeling well. But try to stick with it. A clear diagnosis is the first step toward treatment that’s tailored to your body’s needs.
Management and Treatment
How is myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome treated?
Treatment for ME/CFS may include:
Changing your
sleeping habits
: You can try sticking to a regular sleep schedule, avoiding long naps, limiting electronics in the bedroom, and steering clear of caffeine and alcohol before bed.
Taking medications
: Medications may be recommended for
pain
,
depression
,
infections
,
immune support
or
fatigue
.
Research
into new treatments is ongoing.
Pacing activities
: Pacing is a technique that helps you balance activities and rest to avoid symptom flare-ups. Work with your provider to find your limits and plan around them to prevent getting too tired.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have ME/CFS symptoms, contact a healthcare provider, especially if the symptoms last six months or more. They’ll evaluate your symptoms and create a treatment plan to help you feel better.
If you’re undergoing treatment, your doctor will schedule regular check-ins. This is to make sure treatment is working well and you don’t have any side effects. Let them know if you have any questions or concerns.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have ME/CFS?
There’s no cure for ME/CFS. But your
care team
can help manage symptoms with treatments that fit your lifestyle. While many people see improvement, some may not return to their previous level of health or activity. The condition affects everyone differently.
Making routine changes isn’t easy, and sticking with them can be tough. Your physician may recommend
cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT) to help you cope and support your mental well-being as you adjust.
What is the life expectancy of someone with myalgic encephalomyelitis?
Life expectancy with ME/CFS can vary. Some people live a typical
lifespan
, while others may have a shorter one.
Research
suggests a higher risk of
suicide
, often linked to mental health challenges.
If you have concerns about your future, talk to your physician. They can give you the most up-to-date information on your case.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) can feel like you’re carrying around a weight all day. You’re constantly exhausted. And even after rest, you still don’t wake up feeling refreshed.
If this sounds familiar, talk to a healthcare provider. There are treatments that can help you manage symptoms. Finding what works best might take time, but don’t give up. Some days may be harder than others, and that’s OK. What matters is knowing that support and tools are out there, and they can make a real difference.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment