Lymphangioma, Lymphatic Malformations: Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Lymphangioma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Lymphangioma
A lymphangioma, or lymphatic malformation, is a noncancerous, fluid-filled cyst that can form under your newborn’s skin, often on their head or neck. These cysts develop when lymph fluid backs up and doesn’t flow normally through your baby’s lymphatic system. Most lymphangiomas don’t need treatment. Some are associated with genetic conditions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is A Lymphangioma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is A Lymphangioma?
A lymphangioma, or lymphatic malformation, is a cyst under your baby’s skin. A cystic hygroma is one type.
A lymphangioma, or lymphatic malformation, is a rare, noncancerous (benign) fluid-filled bump under your baby’s skin. A buildup of overgrown lymph vessels causes these masses, or cysts, to form.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Lymph vessels (or channels) are part of your
lymphatic system
. They’re responsible for moving a colorless fluid called
lymph
through your tissues and bloodstream. If your baby has a blockage in their lymph vessels, fluid can collect and create a cyst.
Most lymphangiomas appear between birth and the age of 2. They usually form on your baby’s head or neck, but can develop anywhere on their body. They can be tiny bumps or large growths. Some larger malformations can cause deformities and may damage nearby vital organs. But most lymphangiomas don’t require treatment.
Types of lymphatic malformations
Healthcare providers classify lymphangiomas based on their size, depth and location. There are three main types.
Macrocystic lymphatic malformation (cystic hygroma)
Macrocystic lymphatic malformations are large, soft masses most often found deep within your baby’s neck, face, armpits or chest. They appear reddish-blue and can grow so large that they obstruct your baby’s airway at birth. Half of all babies born with this type of malformation have a chromosomal disorder, like Down syndrome,
Noonan syndrome
or
Turner syndrome
.
Microcystic lymphatic malformation (lymphangioma circumscriptum)
Microcystic lymphatic malformations are smaller, pimple-sized cysts most often found closer to the surface of your baby’s skin. They appear on their arms, legs, chest, armpits and mouth. They may vary in color, ranging from clear to pink to black. This type of malformation may be congenital (present at birth) or appear a few years later (acquired).
Advertisement
Mixed lymphatic malformation
Mixed lymphangiomas are simply a combination of macrocystic lymphatic malformations and microcystic lymphatic malformations.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a lymphangioma
Lymphatic malformations don’t normally cause pain and shouldn’t be itchy. These cysts are almost always noncancerous (benign) and are rarely life-threatening. These cases depend on the size and location of the cyst, especially if it blocks or puts pressure on a vital organ. Lymphangiomas that affect your baby’s:
Bones
: May cause bone loss or bone overgrowth
Chest
: May cause chest pain, shortness of breath (
dyspnea
) or wheezing
Eyes
: May cause bulging eyes (
proptosis
) or double vision (
diplopia
)
Gastrointestinal tract or pelvis
: May cause
bladder blockage
, constipation or frequent infections
Mouth or windpipe (trachea)
: May cause feeding problems, shortness of breath (dyspnea), speech issues or trouble swallowing (
dysphagia
)
Lymphatic malformations are usually found in only one area of your child’s body, but sometimes, they’re widespread. When this occurs in your child’s bones and soft tissues, it’s called
lymphangiomatosis
.
Lymphangioma causes
Scientists don’t know the exact cause of lymphatic malformations. But they happen when your child’s lymphatic system doesn’t form properly during fetal development.
Your body has a network of vessels, tissues and organs that carry lymph — which contains white blood cells called
lymphocytes
— through your bloodstream and tissues. This network is the lymphatic system, and it controls how much fluid is in your body to help your immune system function properly. Like a hose carrying water, your lymphatic system is constantly flowing.
Sometimes, the fluid in a lymph vessel backs up, similar to a kink in a hose. This kink causes a pool of lymph to collect in front of the blockage. As a result, the pool of lymph appears as a liquid-filled bump under your baby’s skin (cyst).
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose lymphangiomas
Depending on the size of the lymphangioma, your healthcare provider may be able to detect it on a prenatal ultrasound.
After your baby is born, your provider will perform a physical exam. They’ll carefully look over the cyst and look for signs of any genetic conditions. They may also ask you questions about your medical history.
Tests that are used
Your healthcare provider may use certain tests to confirm a lymphangioma diagnosis. They can learn more about the size and what caused the growth using the following tests:
Biopsy
CT scan
MRI
Ultrasound
If your child has signs or symptoms of a genetic disease, they may suggest genetic testing. This looks for gene changes (variants), which can also help them determine treatment.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How do you treat lymphangiomas?
Most of the time, lymphatic malformations don’t need treatment because they’re noncancerous growths that may go away on their own. In this case, your child’s healthcare provider will keep an eye on it and watch for any changes (“watch and wait” approach).
Treatment might be necessary if the cyst is large and blocking a vital organ. The type of lymphangioma treatment will depend on its size and location, and may include:
Cryotherapy
: Healthcare providers can use extreme cold to freeze and remove abnormal tissue.
Laser therapy
: Providers can use certain forms of laser therapy to treat lymphatic malformations.
Medications
: Your baby’s provider may use medications like sirolimus,
sildenafil
or
propranolol
to treat a lymphangioma.
Percutaneous drainage
: In some cases, your baby’s provider might make a cut (incision) in the lymphangioma to drain the fluid.
Radiofrequency ablation
: Your baby’s provider might decide to deliver high-frequency radio waves through a small needle into the lymphangioma to destroy it.
Sclerotherapy
: Your baby’s provider can sometimes inject a solution (sclerosing agent) into the lymphatic malformation to cause scarring, eventually shrinking it.
Surgical removal (excision)
: Your baby’s provider might choose surgery as the best option to remove as much of the lymphangioma as possible.
Advertisement
Complications of the treatment
Surgical removal of lymphatic malformations is often unsuccessful. They tend to grow back because they start deep beneath the surface of your child’s skin. It can be very difficult to locate and remove all the affected lymphatic cells. Studies have reported that
more than 30%
of lymphangiomas recur (come back). Cysts that are closer to the surface of your child’s skin have a lower chance of returning because most cells are easy to remove.
There’s also a high risk of infection after surgery that could complicate the healing process. Taking steps to prevent infection by cleaning and caring for the surgical site will lead to the best outcome.
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
Your child should see their healthcare provider if their lymphangioma:
Becomes infected after surgery (leaks yellow or clear pus)
Changes color
Changes shape or size
Feels warm to the touch
Prevents your child from moving normally or using part of their body
What questions should I ask my child’s healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your child’s provider include:
Does my child’s lymphangioma need removal?
What are the odds that my child’s lymphangioma will return after surgery?
What should I do if my child injures their lymphangioma?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has a lymphatic malformation?
The majority of lymphangiomas aren’t life-threatening and won’t cause any health problems for your child. Rarely, the location and size of a cyst can put pressure on a vital organ, causing problems with the way it functions. In that case, they’ll need treatment. But most lymphangiomas don’t require treatment.
Advertisement
As your child’s caretaker, monitor their lymphatic malformation. Reach out to their healthcare provider if you notice changes to the size, color or location of the cyst, or if it prevents your child from moving normally.
Prevention
Can lymphatic malformations be prevented?
You can’t prevent lymphangiomas from forming because they’re the result of the abnormal development of your child’s lymphatic system. In some cases, lymphangiomas occur as part of an underlying genetic condition. If you plan on becoming pregnant and want to understand your risk of having a child with a genetic condition, ask your healthcare provider about talking with a genetic counselor.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may be concerned when a lymphangioma shows up on a prenatal ultrasound. You’re probably worried about the health impacts it may have on your baby. But rest assured, most lymphatic malformations are harmless, noncancerous cysts. They’re simply what makes your child unique.
Some cysts require treatment, and others are associated with genetic conditions. But your healthcare provider will walk you through your options and be with you every step of the way.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider