Squamous Metaplasia: Causes, Symptoms and Treatments
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Squamous Metaplasia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Squamous Metaplasia
Changes to epithelial cells that line organs, glands and skin cause squamous metaplasia. It may be a noncancerous or precancerous condition. In women with HPV, squamous metaplasia raises the risk of cervical dysplasia and cervical cancer. Regular screenings can detect cell changes that may indicate the onset of cancer.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Living With
Overview
What is squamous metaplasia?
Squamous metaplasia refers to noncancerous (benign) changes in squamous cells in your epithelium. The epithelium is a thin tissue that lines glands and organs, including your skin.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Squamous cells exist throughout your body. In rare instances, squamous metaplasia can become cancerous (malignant).
What does squamous metaplasia mean?
It may be easier to understand this condition when you break down its meaning:
Squamous
(SKWAY-mess) refers to the small, scale-like cells that make up your epithelium.
Metaplasia
(meh-tuh-PLAY-zhuh) refers to cells that change into a different type of cell. This new cell type isn’t usually found in the tissue where it develops.
What are the types of squamous metaplasia?
Healthcare providers classify squamous metaplasia by how these cells change. Squamous metaplasia may be:
Keratinizing (leukoplakia):
In this type, your cells make too much keratin (a protein) as they move from one epithelial layer to the next. In healthy squamous cells, this protein helps form tissue, hair,
skin
and nails. Keratin also makes up the lining of organs and glands.
Nonkeratinizing:
Your cells don’t accumulate large amounts of protein (keratinization).
Is squamous metaplasia precancerous?
Nonkeratinizing squamous metaplasia is a noncancerous condition. It won’t become cancerous.
Keratinizing squamous metaplasia may be precancerous. This means the condition may develop into
cancer
if not treated.
What happens if squamous metaplasia becomes cancer?
Untreated keratinizing squamous metaplasia first turns into dysplasia. Dysplasia means there’s an increase in abnormal cells in tissues or organs.
Advertisement
If left untreated, dysplasia can become neoplasia. Irregular cells grow uncontrollably, forming a neoplasm or tumor. A tumor may be cancerous or noncancerous.
When squamous cells become cancerous,
squamous cell carcinoma
occurs. You may be familiar with squamous cell carcinoma as a type of
skin cancer
. But the cutaneous (skin) form is only one type. Squamous cells are also in the mucous membranes that line your mouth, nose, airways and cervix.
What is cervical squamous metaplasia?
Squamous metaplasia can affect any part of your epithelium. It most commonly develops in the mucus-making cells that line your endocervix, a part of the
female reproductive system
. This passageway inside your cervix connects your uterus and vagina.
Nonkeratinizing cervical squamous metaplasia is common in
women
and is considered a normal difference. More than 8 in 10 people of childbearing age have it, as do 3 in 4 people in
menopause
. This common cell change doesn’t increase cancer risk.
Some people who have
human papillomavirus
(HPV) develop precancerous cervical squamous metaplasia. HPV is the most common
sexually transmitted disease
(STD). Cervical squamous metaplasia may develop into
cervical dysplasia (cervical intraepithelial neoplasia)
. Left untreated, these cell changes can cause
cervical cancer
.
Where else does squamous metaplasia develop?
Squamous metaplasia may also develop in your:
Bladder and
urinary system
.
Digestive system
.
Mouth, tongue and tonsils.
Respiratory system
.
Skin.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes squamous metaplasia?
Experts don’t know why some cells change, causing squamous metaplasia. These factors may increase your risk for developing certain types:
Hormone therapy and
radiation therapy
to treat
prostate cancer
can cause squamous metaplasia in your urethra. This tube carries pee (urine) from your bladder out of your body.
HPV can lead to cervical squamous metaplasia.
Longstanding urinary catheterization and frequent
urinary tract infections
(UTIs) or
kidney stones
can cause bladder squamous metaplasia.
Smoking
and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) increase your risk of bronchial squamous metaplasia.
Vitamin A deficiency can cause squamous metaplasia in your airways.
What are the symptoms of squamous metaplasia?
Symptoms of squamous metaplasia vary depending on the affected area. Many people have no noticeable signs.
People with bladder squamous metaplasia may experience urge incontinence (an urgent need to pee).
Cervical squamous metaplasia may cause
cervicitis
. This
inflammation
of your cervix doesn’t always cause symptoms. When symptoms occur, they include:
Foul-smelling
vaginal discharge
or irritation.
Painful sex (dyspareunia)
.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is squamous metaplasia diagnosed?
Testing for squamous metaplasia varies depending on the affected area. Healthcare providers screen for cervical cancers using
Pap smears
to check for changes to cervical and endocervical cells and HPV tests to detect if you’ve had prior exposure. If the test results indicate risk for precancerous changes, you may be referred for a
colposcopy
to examine cervical tissue cells.
For other types of squamous metaplasia, your provider may perform a
biopsy
to remove cells from the affected area. A specialist (pathologist) examines these cells under a microscope for signs of cell changes or disease.
Management and Treatment
How is squamous metaplasia treated?
Nonkeratinizing squamous metaplasia rarely needs treatment. But keratinizing squamous metaplasia can increase cancer risk.
Your healthcare provider will conduct regular tests to check for signs of cancer. If cell changes indicate a problem, your provider will select the best treatment based on the affected body area.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Living With
What should I ask my provider?
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What caused the squamous metaplasia?
Am I at risk for cancer? How can I lower this risk?
Do I need treatment?
How often should I get screenings?
Should I look out for signs of complications?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Squamous metaplasia is a noncancerous change in the cells that make up the tissue lining for organs and glands (epithelium). Most people have nonkeratinizing cervical squamous metaplasia. This condition doesn’t increase cancer risk. Keratinizing squamous metaplasia can turn into dysplasia, which may lead to cancer. Your healthcare provider will perform ongoing tests to check for changes in cells that may indicate cancer.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/15/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment