What Is An Oncologist? Types & What They Do
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Oncologist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Oncologist
An oncologist specializes in diagnosing and treating cancer. They’ll identify treatment options and discuss each option’s benefits and side effects. They’ll also oversee your treatment and manage your post-treatment care. Many oncologists go through training to provide a particular type of cancer treatment, like surgery or radiation therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is an oncologist?
An oncologist is a cancer doctor. These healthcare providers specialize in oncology — the branch of medicine that focuses on diagnosing,
staging
and treating
cancer
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A visit to an oncologist gives you an opportunity to talk with a specialist who understands what you’re going through. Oncologists also have experience in helping people cope with the
stress
and
anxiety
a possible cancer diagnosis can bring. They’re ready to help, and they’ll walk with you every step of the way.
What does an oncologist do?
Oncologists can:
Run tests to diagnose cancer
Offer a second opinion on a previous diagnosis
Identify
treatment
options
Discuss each option’s benefits and side effects
Oversee cancer treatment
Manage post-treatment care
Does seeing an oncologist mean I have cancer?
Seeing an oncologist doesn’t necessarily mean you have cancer. An oncologist gets involved if you have symptoms that might be cancer. If your healthcare provider refers you to an oncologist, don’t wait to schedule an appointment. The sooner you get a diagnosis, the better. Many cancers are more treatable in the early stages.
Types of oncologists
Cancer is a complex disease. People with cancer often need multiple oncologists on their healthcare team. This multidisciplinary approach allows each specialist to focus on a different area of your treatment with a common goal of collaborative, compassionate care.
Some oncologists specialize in certain treatments:
Surgical oncologists
. If your biopsy shows cancer cells, this healthcare provider will do surgery to remove cancer that hasn’t spread. They’ll remove your
tumor
and surrounding tissues. They’ll also help you prepare for and recover from your surgery.
Medical oncologists
. These providers treat cancer using
chemotherapy
,
hormonal therapies
,
immunotherapy
and other targeted treatments. People often think of the medical oncologist as their primary cancer doctor. This is because they typically see them the most often. Most medical oncologists also specialize in
hematology
(the diagnosis and treatment of
blood disorders
and
blood cancers
).
Radiation oncologists
. These healthcare providers use
radiation therapy
to treat cancer. Radiation can shrink tumors before surgery or kill remaining cancer cells after surgery. You might have radiation as a stand-alone treatment or in combination with other therapies.
Advertisement
Other oncologists specialize in diagnosing and treating certain kinds of cancer:
Gynecologic oncologists
. These healthcare providers treat gynecologic cancers like
cervical cancer
,
uterine cancer
and
ovarian cancer
.
Pediatric oncologists
. These oncologists treat cancers that are more common in children than in adults, like childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia
,
Ewing sarcoma
and
childhood brain tumors
.
Neurological oncologist
. These specialists treat people who have
brain tumors
and cancers that affect the
nervous system
.
What should I expect during my first visit to an oncologist?
Meeting with an oncologist for the first time can bring a sudden sense of uncertainty. Do I have cancer? How long have I had it? What will my life look like now? If these are the questions racing through your mind, you’re not alone. Your oncologist is here to help you navigate these emotions.
During your first visit, your oncologist will:
Ask you to describe your symptoms in detail
Do a
physical examination
Review your medical records, including family history and any past or current health conditions
Run any necessary tests (like imaging tests or lab work) to learn more about your symptoms
Determine whether you need a
biopsy
Once your oncologist gathers the information they need, they’ll:
Discuss the results of your tests
Send their findings to the healthcare provider who referred you
Tell you whether you have cancer and if so, what kind
Talk to you about different treatment options
Listen to your concerns and anxieties
Give you resources that can offer support and additional information
Your first oncology visit may take up to three hours. Besides talking with your medical oncologist, you might also meet with counselors,
social workers
or other oncology specialists.
Follow-up oncology visits
You’ll see your oncologist regularly during cancer treatment. How often you have appointments depends on the type of cancer you have and your current treatment regimen. During your first visit, your oncologist can tell you what to expect.
Questions to ask my oncologist
Here are some questions you might want to ask your oncologist:
Where is my tumor?
How big is it?
What stage of cancer do I have?
What’s the survival rate for people with my diagnosis?
How long will my treatment take?
Will I be able to work during treatment?
Will treatment affect my fertility?
Do I need additional testing?
How often will I have follow-up visits?
How can I take care of myself during treatment?
Are there support groups available?
How do I tell my family about my diagnosis?
Advertisement
When should I call my oncologist?
If you’ve already started cancer treatment with an oncologist, some things warrant an immediate phone call to your provider. Call your oncologist right away if you develop:
A
fever
over 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius)
Any new symptoms
Sudden changes to existing symptoms
Pain that doesn’t go away with medication
Signs of
stroke
(sudden facial weakness, confusion,
dizziness
, severe
headache
and vision issues)
Signs of
heart attack
(
chest pain
, nausea,
shortness of breath
and/or shoulder pain)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
What education do you need to become an oncologist?
All oncologist educations begin with obtaining a bachelor’s degree and a medical degree. Oncologists who specialize in medical oncology, surgical oncology, radiation oncology or hematology oncology complete residencies and fellowship programs before obtaining licensure and certification. All in all, it takes about 14 to 16 years to become an oncologist.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might be anxious about seeing an oncologist because you’re worried you could have cancer. And if you’re diagnosed with cancer, you may wonder what your future looks like. It’s normal to feel frustrated, too, because you have questions for which there are no easy, black-and-white answers. Your oncologist understands those emotions, and they’re here to help however they can.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/25/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials