Leprosy: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Leprosy (Hansen’s Disease)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Leprosy (Hansen’s Disease)
Leprosy (Hansen’s disease) is a bacterial infection that can damage your nerves, muscles, eyes, skin and respiratory tract. It can cause permanent paralysis, blindness, and damage to your hands, feet and face. There’s no need to isolate from others as it doesn’t spread easily. It’s curable with antibiotics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Leprosy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Leprosy?
Leprosy can affect your skin, nerves, muscles, eyes and respiratory system. It can cause serious complications.
Leprosy is a
bacterial infection
that damages your
nerves
, muscles, skin, eyes and respiratory tract. It can cause patches of pale or
discolored skin
, loss of sensation (
numbness
) and permanent disabilities.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Leprosy was once a mysterious disease that created a lot of fear. People with leprosy were often treated unfairly and isolated from others. We now know the cause and that it’s a treatable disease. It doesn’t spread easily from person to person.
Leprosy is also called Hansen’s disease. Some people prefer that name because of the stigma associated with the word “leprosy.”
Does leprosy still exist?
Yes, leprosy still exists today. About 200,000 people are diagnosed around the world each year. It’s rare in the U.S.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of leprosy (Hansen’s disease)
Symptoms of leprosy include:
Patches of skin, often with raised edges, that are different from areas around them — they might be discolored, pale, red, thick, stiff, swollen or numb
Red or purple nodules or lumps
Painless ulcers or sores on the bottom of your feet
Enlarged nerves
Weakness or
paralysis
Loss of eyebrows or eyelashes
Vision loss or other eye issues
Leprosy develops slowly. It takes several years — sometimes, decades — to develop symptoms after exposure.
Leprosy causes
Mycobacterium leprae
bacteria
cause leprosy. Experts don’t fully understand how the disease spreads, but they think it’s transmitted through airborne droplets when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
Is leprosy contagious?
Yes, leprosy is contagious (spreads from person to person). But it’s not easy to get. You have to spend a long time — many months — in close contact with someone to get leprosy. Most people’s
immune systems
fight it off. You’re not contagious if you’re receiving treatment.
Advertisement
Risk factors
You’re at higher risk for leprosy if you live in areas where it spreads. This includes parts of Asia, Africa and South America.
Leprosy complications
Complications of leprosy include:
Permanent paralysis
Permanent damage to your hands and feet that makes them difficult to use
Permanent change to your appearance
Shortening of your toes and fingers
Ulcers that won’t heal
Blindness
Chronic pain
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose leprosy
A healthcare provider diagnoses leprosy by doing a physical exam, looking at your skin and getting a nerve or
skin biopsy
. They may also get
blood tests
or perform tests of your nerves or muscles (like
nerve conduction tests
).
Depending on your symptoms, a provider might diagnose you with:
Tuberculoid (paucibacillary) leprosy.
This type usually has mild symptoms. You may have only a few areas of pale or reddish skin, mild muscle weakness or areas that feel numb.
Lepromatous (multibacillary) leprosy.
This type of leprosy causes widespread sores and lesions affecting your nerves, skin and organs.
Borderline (dimorphus) leprosy.
Symptoms of this type of leprosy fall somewhere in between tuberculoid and lepromatous leprosy symptoms.
Management and Treatment
How is leprosy treated?
Leprosy is curable. Healthcare providers use a combination of three
antibiotics
, known as multidrug therapy (MDT), to kill the bacteria. Antibiotics to treat leprosy include:
Dapsone
Rifampin
Clofazimine
You’ll have to take these medications for six to 12 months. Take all medications as prescribed, even when your symptoms start to improve. There’s no need to isolate from others while in treatment.
A provider might also recommend surgery to remove nodules and help with nerve damage.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Any time you develop skin sores, numbness or muscle weakness, it’s important to schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider. They can determine if your symptoms are due to leprosy or another health condition.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have leprosy?
If you’ve been diagnosed with leprosy, get treatment right away. The sooner you begin treatment, the less likely it is that you’ll have severe or lasting symptoms. Your provider will continue to monitor you over the next couple of years.
Antibiotics can cure the infection, but nerve damage and disabilities caused by leprosy can be permanent. They may get worse even years after treatment.
What is the life expectancy of a person with leprosy?
When treated, someone with a mild form of leprosy can expect to live about as long as someone without it. If left untreated for too long, leprosy can lead to severe complications and death.
Prevention
Can leprosy be prevented?
It’s not easy to contract leprosy. If you’re in close contact with someone who has it, your provider may recommend getting tested yearly to make sure you can treat an infection early, before you have any symptoms.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Do leprosy colonies still exist?
Yes, some leprosy communities still exist. In the past, misunderstanding and fear around the disease led to the belief that people with leprosy needed to be isolated from others. Now, we know that that isn’t true. Most people are treated on an outpatient (at home) basis. But some people still live in the communities, either due to stigma or because they’ve made it their home over many years.
Is leprosy an STD?
No, leprosy isn’t a
sexually transmitted infection
(STI). It’s thought to infect your respiratory tract.
Do armadillos carry leprosy?
Yes, some do. A species of armadillo native to the southern U.S. and Mexico can carry leprosy and spread it to humans.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Leprosy was shrouded in mystery for centuries. This led to fear and misunderstanding. Today, we understand the cause. We know that leprosy is curable — and not even very contagious. Unfortunately, the stigma around it often remains. Healthcare professionals around the world work every day to end the stigma and change the way people think about leprosy.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment