Sex Therapist: What They Do and When To See One
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Sex Therapist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sex Therapist
A sex therapist is a licensed professional who can help with the mental or emotional aspects of sex-related issues. They have a thorough understanding of human sexuality and use psychotherapy (talk therapy) to help you work through sexual issues. Sex therapists work with individuals and romantic/sexual partners.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is a sex therapist?
A sex therapist is a licensed healthcare provider who helps you address any emotional or mental roadblocks that are causing or are related to sexual issues. A sex therapist could be a social worker, medical doctor or
psychologist
, but they must have specialized training in sexual health and sexual problems.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A sex therapist can work with individuals or partners to help them resolve sexual difficulties, such as performance anxiety or intimacy issues.
What does a sex therapist do?
Sex therapists can help treat many kinds of sexual dysfunction that have psychological causes or impacts. They can also help with life and relationship issues related to sex. Therapists do this in a supportive, nonjudgmental and safe environment.
It’s important to know that sex therapists don’t treat physical or medical conditions that affect sex, such as
low testosterone
, for example. You may need to see a primary healthcare provider, gynecologist or
urologist
for any sexual function issues first to see if there are any underlying physical causes.
Sex therapists use an assortment of evidence-based treatments to help people improve their sex lives. Most often, they use
psychotherapy
(commonly known as talk therapy), which involves building a talking relationship to establish and assess your feelings, thoughts and behaviors. Types of psychotherapy for sex therapy may include:
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
.
Emotion-based therapy.
Mindfulness-based interventions.
Couples communication techniques.
Sex therapists prioritize confidentiality and maintaining your privacy. In fact, it’s a part of their professional code of ethics. Therapists who violate patient confidentiality risk losing their ability to practice therapy in the future.
Advertisement
What can you see a sex therapist for?
Sexual activity (including intercourse, outercourse and
masturbation
) is a complex experience that involves emotional, mental and physical components. If you want and desire sex, sexual function is an important contributor to your quality of life. It’s associated with physical and mental well-being and relationship satisfaction.
Healthcare providers and sex educators break sexual activity down into four phases known as the
sexual response cycle
:
Desire (libido).
Arousal (excitement).
Orgasm
.
Resolution.
Sexual issues can arise at any point during this cycle. Knowing how you respond mentally and physically during each phase can improve your sexual experience and help you pinpoint causes of
sexual dysfunction
.
A sex therapist can help with the mental and emotional aspects of various forms of sexual dysfunction, including:
Lack of desire.
Lack of arousal.
Difficulty having an orgasm (anorgasmia).
Pain during sex (dyspareunia)
, such as from
vaginismus
.
Difficulty getting or keeping an erection (
erectile dysfunction
).
Premature ejaculation
,
delayed ejaculation
or other
ejaculation
.
Sex therapists can also help you work through challenges such as:
Sex education and correcting miseducation.
Sexual trauma.
Feelings of anxiety, fear or shame related to sex.
Issues around cultural, religious and societal views of sex.
Improving communication about sex and intimacy between you and your partner(s).
Mismatched sexual desire between partners.
Relationship issues stemming from sexual difficulties.
Poor body image and its relation to sex.
Coping with and living with
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
.
Hypersexual disorder (sex addiction).
Pornography addiction.
What happens during a sex therapy session?
During sessions, you and your sex therapist will work together to identify and change thoughts and behaviors that are interfering with your sexual life. You may see your therapist by yourself or with your romantic or sexual partner(s).
Your therapist may ask you questions about your:
Health and sexual background.
Sex education.
Beliefs about sex.
Specific sexual concerns.
Talking about sex can be awkward or uncomfortable. Sex therapists recognize this and do their best to make you feel comfortable. As conversation is the main part of psychotherapy, you need to be actively involved in the therapy. The trust and relationship between you and your therapist are essential to working together effectively and benefiting from the therapy.
Your sex therapists may assign homework — activities and exercises that you do in the privacy of your home. This may involve experimentation, such as role playing, or exercises to build trust and intimacy — whether with yourself or with your partner(s).
It’s important to know that sex therapy sessions don’t involve any physical contact or sexual activity between you and your therapist. If you feel uncomfortable with any aspect of therapy, you should tell your therapist or stop seeing them and file a complaint.
Advertisement
What is the difference between a sex therapist and a sex counselor?
Both sex therapists and sex counselors must be certified through the American Association of Sexuality Educators, Counselors and Therapists (AASECT). They both have extensive training in human sexuality.
The difference is in how the two experts address sexual concerns. Sex therapists use psychotherapy (talk therapy) to help people with sexual issues — whether they’re simple or more complex. Sex counselors take more of an action-based approach by offering education and techniques to address short-term problems.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
How do you become a sex therapist?
To become a sex therapist, you must complete/obtain:
Undergraduate education at a college or university, resulting in a Bachelor’s degree.
Master’s degree, in addition to two years of post-degree clinical experience OR a Doctoral degree in addition to one year of post-degree clinical experience. The advanced clinical degree must include psychotherapy training, and you must complete at least 90 hours of academic coursework in sexuality education.
Associate license in the state in which you’ll be practicing sex therapy.
How long does it take to become a sex therapist?
It usually takes at least nine years to become a certified sex therapist. This includes undergraduate education, an advanced clinical degree and clinical experience.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Talking about sex or sexual issues can be difficult. Know that a sex therapist can help you better understand and work through sex-related roadblocks that are preventing you from living a full and healthy life. They’re experts in their field and have up-to-date knowledge on research and therapy strategies that can help you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/12/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment