Tuberculosis: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tuberculosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial infection that usually affects your lungs. It can also spread to other organs. It’s treatable with medications but can be fatal if not treated.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Tuberculosis
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Tuberculosis
Your lungs are infected with tuberculosis bacteria when you have tuberculosis.
Tuberculosis (TB) is an illness caused by a
bacterial infection
. It commonly affects your lungs, but it can also affect other areas of your body like your spine, brain or kidneys.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Not everyone who’s infected with TB gets sick. If you’re infected but have no symptoms, it’s called inactive tuberculosis, or latent TB. TB is dormant (sleeping) inside your body. As many as 13 million people in the U.S. have latent TB. Some people can have a latent TB infection for a lifetime, without ever developing symptoms (active TB).
But TB can become active if your
immune system
becomes weakened. A weakened immune system may not be able to stop the bacteria from growing.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of tuberculosis
Active TB symptoms include:
Bad
cough
(lasting longer than two weeks)
Chest pain
Coughing up blood
or sputum (
mucus
)
Fatigue
or weakness
Loss of appetite
Weight loss
Chills
Fever
Night sweats
You won’t have symptoms if you have inactive TB. But you might have a positive TB test.
Tuberculosis causes
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
bacteria
cause TB. The germs spread through the air and can infect your lungs when you breathe them in. Sometimes, they also infect other parts of your body.
Types
The most common type of TB is pulmonary (lung) tuberculosis. But the bacterium can also affect other parts of your body (extrapulmonary tuberculosis). You might also hear about miliary tuberculosis, which can spread throughout your body and cause:
Meningitis
, an inflammation of the lining of your brain
Pott’s disease
, also called spinal tuberculosis or tuberculosis spondylitis
Addison’s disease
, an adrenal gland condition
Hepatitis
, liver inflammation
Scrofula
, swollen lymph nodes in your neck
Advertisement
How does tuberculosis spread?
TB can spread when a person with active TB coughs, sneezes, talks, sings or laughs. Only people with an active lung infection are contagious. You usually have to spend a lot of time in contact with someone who’s contagious to catch TB. Most people who breathe in TB bacteria can fight the bacteria and stop it from growing. This causes a latent TB infection.
Risk factors
You might be at a higher risk for TB exposure if you:
Are a resident or employee in group settings where TB can spread, such as jails, hospices, skilled nursing facilities, shelters and other healthcare facilities
Work in a mycobacteriology laboratory
Have lived in a region where TB is common, like Latin America, the Caribbean, Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe and Russia
Have been in contact with someone who’s known or suspected to have TB disease
You might be at a higher risk for getting active TB if you:
Inject intravenous drugs
Have an immature, impaired or
weakened immune system
(including babies and children)
Have kidney disease,
diabetes
or other chronic (long-term) illness
Have received an organ transplant
Are on chemotherapy treatment for cancer
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose tuberculosis
Healthcare providers use a
skin or blood test
to diagnose TB. You might also need:
Lab tests on sputum and lung fluid
Chest X-ray
Computed tomography (CT) scans
Management and Treatment
How is tuberculosis treated?
Healthcare providers treat both active and inactive tuberculosis with specific kinds of antibiotics. You’ll likely need to take a combination of medications to get rid of the infection.
You’ll have to take these medications for a long time — several months. You must take them exactly as your provider prescribes to get rid of all the bacteria. It’s very important to finish your entire prescription.
TB medications
Specific medications your provider might prescribe include:
Isoniazid (Hyzyd®)
Rifampin (Rifadin®)
Ethambutol (Myambutol®)
Pyrazinamide (Zinamide®)
Rifapentine (Priftin®)
Recovery time
You might start having more energy and fewer symptoms within a few weeks of starting treatment. But it’ll take longer than that to complete it. You’ll need to take your medications for at least six to nine months.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’ve been exposed to TB, you should talk to your healthcare provider right away. They can talk to you about options for getting tested. It’s important to get tested if you’ve developed any symptoms — you could pass TB on to others.
If you’re taking medications to treat TB, talk to your provider about any side effects. Some side effects can be serious.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Prevention
Can tuberculosis be prevented?
You can reduce your risk of contracting and spreading TB by:
Washing your hands
thoroughly and often
Coughing into your elbow or covering your mouth when you cough
Avoiding close contact with other people
Making sure you take all your medications as prescribed
Not returning to work or school until you’ve been cleared by your healthcare provider
Advertisement
In the hospital, the most important measures to stop the spread of TB are having proper ventilation and using personal protective equipment.
Is there a vaccine for tuberculosis?
Some countries (but not the U.S.) use a TB vaccine called Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG). It’s mostly given to children in countries with high rates of TB.
Additional Common Questions
How common is tuberculosis?
In 2020, about 10 million people became ill with TB throughout the world, and about 1.5 million people died from it. TB was once the leading cause of death in the U.S., but with new treatments, the number of cases fell rapidly in the 1940s and 1950s. There were 7,860 tuberculosis cases reported in the U.S. in 2021.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
TB is responsible for many deaths around the world. But it’s treatable if you take medications as your healthcare provider directs. Make sure you contact your healthcare provider if you think you’ve been exposed to, or have symptoms of, TB.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment