Mpox Vaccine: Administration, Side Effects & Effectiveness
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Mpox Vaccine
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mpox Vaccine
The mpox vaccine (JYNNEOS) reduces your risk of getting mpox, a viral illness that causes a painful rash. You get it in two shots, four weeks apart. It’s recommended for people who are at a higher risk of being exposed to mpox.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is the Mpox Vaccine?
Treatment Details
What Is the Mpox Vaccine?
The mpox vaccine is a shot that reduces your risk of the viral illness
mpox
. There are a few different types of mpox vaccines, but the
MVA-BN (JYNNEOS™) vaccine
is recommended in the U.S. You receive two doses 28 days apart.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The vaccine uses a virus similar to mpox (MVA-BN, a version of vaccinia virus) to get your immune system to recognize mpox. That way, if you’re later infected with mpox, your body should have the tools to fight it off so you don’t get sick or don’t get as severely sick. Scientists weaken the virus for use in the vaccine, so it can’t make more copies of itself or make you sick.
Treatment Details
How do you get the mpox vaccine?
A provider gives you the vaccine as a shot. They can give it either between the top layers of your skin (intradermal) or into the layer of fat under your skin (subcutaneous). Providers usually give intradermal shots in your forearm and subcutaneous shots in the back of your upper arm.
How often do I need it?
To be fully vaccinated, you’ll receive two doses at least 28 days apart. You generally don’t need additional doses. If your job puts you at a higher risk for exposure to mpox, you may need an additional dose after 10 years.
What are the mpox vaccine recommendations?
Recommendations for getting mpox vaccines are based on who’s at a higher risk. Your provider might recommend getting vaccinated if you’ve been exposed to mpox, or if you’re likely to be exposed to it. You might be at higher risk if you:
Have been in close contact with someone with mpox
Live in an area where mpox is spreading
Have traveled to or will travel to an area where mpox is spreading
Work in healthcare (caring for people with mpox or diagnosing it in a lab)
Have been diagnosed with one or more
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
in the past six months
Have had sex with more than one person in the past six months
Have had sex at a sex club, bathhouse or another commercial sex venue in the past six months
Have a sex partner who’s at a higher risk
Advertisement
Talk to a healthcare provider if you’re wondering if you should get vaccinated. They can talk with you about the most up-to-date recommendations. Let them know if:
You have a
weakened immune system
You’re pregnant or could be pregnant
You’re breastfeeding
You’ve recently had mpox
Sharing this information helps your provider plan the safest care for you.
Side effects and risks
Side effects of the mpox vaccine may include:
Pain, swelling, itching, redness or discoloration where you got the shot
Tiredness
Headache
Muscle aches
Fever
Nausea
Chills
Rarely, the vaccine may cause an
allergic reaction
. Go to the nearest ER or call 911 (or your local emergency service number) if you have symptoms of a severe allergic reaction, including:
Swelling of your face, tongue or throat
Difficulty breathing
Dizziness
Weakness
Fast heart rate
Hives
Will it leave a scar?
The intradermal vaccination may cause a raised scar (
keloid
) to develop. Talk to the provider giving the shot if you’re concerned about a scar. You can request a subcutaneous vaccination or talk to them about getting the shot in a concealed spot on your body.
How effective is the mpox vaccine?
Some studies suggest that two doses of the MVA-BN mpox vaccine are around
82% effective
at preventing mpox if you get them before being exposed to mpox. Others report that two doses are up to
99% effective
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Mpox vaccines offer a way to help protect yourself from the painful rash and complications of mpox. Talk to your healthcare provider if you want to understand whether you’re at a higher risk or have any questions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment