Diuretics (Water Pills): Types, Uses & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Diuretics
Advertisement
Advertisement
Diuretics
Diuretics, or water pills, help your kidneys put extra salt and water into your pee (urine). This is how diuretics clear extra fluid out and bring down your blood pressure. Diuretics also help when you have too much fluid collecting because of heart failure or other medical problems.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What is a diuretic?
Diuretics ― also known as water pills ― are medicines that help you move extra fluid and salt out of your body. They make you pee more frequently, which is why you should take them in the morning if you can. You may need to take diuretics once or twice a day at the same time each day.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Water pills make your
kidneys
take away your body’s extra salt and water by putting them into your urine (pee). By clearing out extra fluids from your body, diuretics lower the amount of fluid in your
blood
that your
heart
has to pump. This helps people whose kidneys aren’t working well or who have swelling (edema), heart failure or high blood pressure.
When you have
heart failure
, your heart can’t pump as well as it should, allowing
fluids to build up
. So having less fluid to pump eases the demand on your heart. Having less fluid that needs to get through your blood vessels helps reduce
blood pressure
. Water pills also help your
blood vessels
get wider, which is another way they help lower your blood pressure.
People usually take diuretics by swallowing pills, but your healthcare provider can give some of these medicines through an IV in your arm during a hospital stay.
Types of diuretics
Types of diuretics include:
Thiazide diuretics
(
hydrochlorothiazide
or
chlorthalidone
)
Loop diuretics
(
furosemide
or
bumetanide
) — providers prefer these potent drugs for people with a low GFR (
glomerular filtration rate
)
Potassium-sparing diuretics
(triamterene
or
amiloride
) — these don’t let you lose too much potassium
Two types in one pill
(triamterene and hydrochlorothiazide
) — these keep you from losing too much potassium
Advertisement
Different diuretics work by affecting certain parts of your kidneys to keep them from reabsorbing salt. Thiazide diuretics and potassium-sparing diuretics work in one part of your kidney. Loop diuretics work in another.
Thiazide diuretics are the most common diuretics that Americans use to treat
high blood pressure
. Out of this type, hydrochlorothiazide is the drug providers prescribe most often.
What do diuretics treat?
Diuretic medications can help with:
High blood pressure
Heart failure
Cardiomyopathy
(heart muscle disease)
Pulmonary edema
(fluid buildup in your lungs)
Ascites
(fluid buildup in your belly)
Kidney failure
Nephrotic syndrome
(too much protein in your pee)
High
intraocular pressure
(fluid buildup in your eye)
Increased intracranial pressure
(fluid buildup in your brain)
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of a diuretic?
Diuretic pills give many people good results, especially for treating high blood pressure. Also, people generally don’t have bad side effects with diuretics. Some natural options, like
herbal supplements
, may help, but water pills can provide more reliable results. Although the caffeine in
natural diuretics
like coffee or tea makes you pee more, the effects don’t last long.
What are the side effects?
Possible side effects of diuretics include:
Upset stomach,
gas
or
diarrhea
Loss of appetite
Hair loss
Fatigue
Headache
Gout
Difficulty getting an erection
Low potassium
(for some types)
Muscle cramps
Higher blood sugar in people with
diabetes
Unbalanced
electrolytes
Most people can take diuretics without getting serious problems from them. But your healthcare provider will want to make sure your kidneys are working right and your potassium level is normal when you’re taking water pills. If you’re pregnant,
breastfeeding
or having problems with your kidneys or
liver
, discuss the risks of diuretics with your provider.
Diuretic drugs make you pee more often than you would if you weren’t taking one. If you’re taking too high a dose of a diuretic or not drinking enough fluids, you can get
dehydrated
. If you don’t drink enough fluids, diuretics can lead to
constipation
.
Recovery and Outlook
How soon do diuretics start working?
Diuretics usually start working an hour or two after you take them. They affect you less as the day goes on, with hardly any effect after six hours for some. It might take a couple of weeks for your blood pressure to decrease.
How can I take care of myself while taking a diuretic?
While you’re taking a water pill, you can take care of yourself in these ways:
Limit the amount of
salt you eat
.
Make sure you don’t get dehydrated.
Get blood or urine tests your provider orders to check
kidney function
.
Check with your provider instead of changing your dose on your own.
Keep follow-up appointments with your provider.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider when you have diuretic side effects that bother you, like:
Advertisement
Heart palpitations
Dizziness
Dehydration
You should also let your provider know if you plan to become
pregnant
(or learn that you are) so they can find the safest
blood pressure medicine
for you.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a prescription for a medicine that’s new to you can make you uneasy. You may wonder how a water pill will affect your daily life. It can take a little time to get used to peeing more than you used to. But that just means a diuretic is working. Keep taking the same dose on schedule unless your provider tells you to change what you’re doing. If the diuretic you’re taking is giving you side effects, ask your provider if you can switch to a different medicine.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/04/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment