Tumor (Neoplasm): Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tumor
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tumor
A tumor (neoplasm) is a solid mass of tissue that forms when abnormal cells group together. They can form most anywhere in your body, including your bones, skin, tissue, organs and glands. Many tumors are benign, which means they’re not cancer. You may or may not need treatment for them. Cancerous, or malignant, tumors require cancer treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Unlike benign tumors, cancerous tumors can use routes like your bloodstream and lymphatic system to spread to distant organs.
What is a tumor?
A tumor, or neoplasm, is a mass of abnormal cells that form in your body. Tumors can affect tissues, glands, organs,
skin
and
bone
. They can be big or small. You can have a single tumor or more than one.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Many people hear the word “tumor” and immediately think “
cancer
.” But many neoplasms are benign (noncancerous). Your healthcare provider can explain what having a tumor means for your health (including how serious it is) based on the type.
Types of tumors
The three main types of tumors are:
Malignant (cancerous) tumors
:
This type can spread into nearby tissue, glands and other parts of your body. The new tumors that have spread are called
metastases
, or “mets,” and can
come back
after treatment. Some malignant neoplasms are
curable
, while others are life-threatening.
Benign (noncancerous) tumors
: This type isn’t cancerous and is rarely life-threatening. They’re localized, which means they don’t typically affect nearby tissue or spread to other parts of your body. Many noncancerous tumors don’t need treatment. But some press on other body parts and cause health issues that require medical care.
Precancerous tumors
: This type can become cancerous if it isn’t treated. Healthcare providers sometimes describe the cells in a precancerous neoplasm with words like “hyperplasia,” which means the cells are dividing rapidly. “Dysplasia” means cells are abnormal and dividing fast. Providers monitor these growths closely and provide treatment as needed.
Advertisement
Tumors vs. cysts
It’s easy to confuse tumors and cysts because they’re both unexpected growths. But they’re not the same. A tumor is a solid mass of tissue. It may or may not be cancerous. A cyst is a small sac that may contain fluid, air or other tissue. Most cysts aren’t cancerous.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a tumor?
Tumor symptoms vary depending on where it develops, how big it is and whether it’s cancerous. You may be able to feel the mass, as with a
breast lump
. You may be able to see a bump or a raised, abnormal area of skin if the neoplasm is close to your skin’s surface. But you can’t always tell you if you have a tumor just by looking or feeling for one.
In some cases, tumors cause symptoms like:
Fatigue
.
Fever
or
chills
.
Night sweats
.
Loss of appetite
or
unexplained weight loss
.
Painful lump (but not all tumors cause pain).
What does a tumor feel like?
The tumors that you can detect through touch often feel like a new bump or lump. Cancerous tumors are more likely to feel firm to the touch than benign lumps or cysts. They may also feel less movable. Still, this isn’t always the case. The only way to know for sure whether a lump is a tumor or a cyst— malignant or benign — is to have a healthcare provider check it.
What causes tumors?
Tumors form when abnormal cells pile up, creating an overgrowth, or mass.
Your body constantly makes new cells to replace old or damaged ones that die off. For a neoplasm to form, the cells don’t die off as expected. Or, new cells grow and multiply faster than they should. The cells accumulate, causing the tumor to grow.
Risk factors
Tumors can affect anyone. The specific factors that increase your chances of developing a neoplasm vary based on the type. But general risk factors for tumors include:
Gene mutations
(changes), such as mutated
BRCA genes
.
Inherited conditions, such as
Lynch syndrome
and
neurofibromatosis
(NFS).
Family history of certain types of cancer like
breast cancer
or
prostate cancer
.
Smoking
or exposure to
secondhand smoke
.
Consuming too much alcohol (
alcohol use disorder
).
Exposure to toxins like benzene or
asbestos
.
Previous radiation exposure.
Viruses like
HPV
.
Having
obesity
.
What are the complications of tumors?
Complications of tumors may include:
Placing pressure on organs
: Benign tumors may grow and put pressure on organs. For example, large
mediastinal tumors
, which form in your chest area, can impact organs like your windpipe, heart or lungs. Cancerous tumors can also place pressure on organs.
Excess hormone production
: Endocrine tumors may cause your body to overproduce
hormones
.
Hormone imbalances
can cause a range of unpleasant symptoms.
Cancer spread
: With cancerous neoplasms, cancer cells can break away from the original tumor and travel via your
circulatory system
or
lymphatic system
to settle in a new location, like an organ or gland. Cancer that spreads is more challenging to treat and send into
remission
(no signs or symptoms of cancer).
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How are tumors diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will perform a
biopsy
to determine whether a tumor is cancerous. A biopsy involves removing cell samples from the neoplasm. A
pathologist
examines the samples in a lab to make a diagnosis. If a tumor is in an area that’s difficult to reach, your provider may remove the entire tumor and then do a biopsy.
You may also get:
Blood tests
: Tests may check for
tumor markers
, or specific proteins or chemicals that mean you may have a certain type of malignant tumor.
Imaging scans
: Depending on where the neoplasm is located, you may need an
X-ray
,
CT scan
,
MRI
or
positron emission tomography (PET) scan
so your healthcare provider can identify the tumor inside your body.
Management and Treatment
How are tumors treated?
Treatments for a tumor depend on many factors, including the type (malignant or benign) and location.
Many noncancerous tumors don’t need treatment. But some can continue to grow. For example, benign
brain tumors
can press against healthy tissue, affecting
vision
or speech. If this happens, your healthcare provider may recommend surgery to remove the tumor.
Treatments for cancerous tumors include:
Surgery to remove the tumor.
Radiation therapy
to destroy abnormal cells with high-powered X-rays.
Ablation therapy
to destroy abnormal cells with extremely hot or cold substances.
Embolization
to block blood flow that’s providing
nourishment for tumors
.
Chemotherapy
to shrink the tumor before surgery or destroy lingering abnormal cells after surgery.
Hormone therapy
to block hormones fueling tumor growth.
Immunotherapy
to engage your
immune system
to fight cancer.
Targeted therapy
to slow or stop the growth of cancer cells.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for tumors?
The outlook is usually excellent for precancerous and benign tumors. If a tumor is precancerous, your provider can monitor its growth or remove it before it causes issues. Most benign neoplasms don’t require treatment unless they place pressure on sensitive tissue or organs.
For malignant tumors, your outlook depends on many factors, like tumor type and its
stage
(how advanced it is). Some are curable with surgery while others tend to grow fast and spread quickly. Malignant neoplasms that have spread are harder to treat.
Prevention
Can tumors be prevented?
Most tumors occur for no known reason, so you can’t always prevent them. Still, you can potentially reduce your risk if you:
Quit smoking
.
Drink alcohol moderately
or avoid it altogether.
Eat balanced meals that contain
nutrient-rich foods
.
Stay physically active.
Maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Reduce your risk of HPV by getting the
vaccine
and practicing
safer sex
.
You can catch malignant tumors early (when they respond best to treatment) by getting all recommended age-appropriate screenings, including:
Mammograms
(starting between ages 40 to 50 if you’re average risk for breast cancer).
Prostate exams
(starting between ages 45 to 50 depending on your risk)
Colonoscopies
(starting at age 45 if you’re average risk for colon cancer).
Advertisement
Living With
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You should call a healthcare provider if you notice a new or changing lump anywhere on your body. You should also contact them if you experience:
Extreme fatigue.
Severe pain that interferes with sleep or daily activities.
Unexplained weight loss.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of tumor do I have?
Is the tumor malignant or benign?
What’s the best treatment for me?
What are the treatment risks and side effects?
Should I look out for signs of complications?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that you have a tumor can feel unsettling and scary. But you should know that many tumors are benign and don’t need treatment. If a tumor is cancerous, there are a lot of treatment options. Receiving prompt treatment can make a big difference when it comes to your outlook. Cancer therapies can destroy cancer cells, prevent them from spreading and lower the risk of cancer coming back. Often, people live many years after receiving treatment for cancerous tumors. Your healthcare provider will discuss your treatment options with you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/26/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials