Sudden Cardiac Death: Signs and Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Sudden Cardiac Death
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sudden Cardiac Death
Sudden cardiac death can happen when you don’t get immediate help for a cardiac arrest. Your heart stops beating because of an electrical issue and you lose consciousness. Without CPR, death can happen within minutes because the organs you rely on to keep you alive aren’t getting enough oxygen.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is sudden cardiac death?
Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is sudden, unexpected death within an hour due to a
heart
issue. Performing
CPR
can double someone’s chances of surviving.
Cardiac arrest
can lead to sudden cardiac death.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What happens during sudden cardiac death?
When you have a sudden cardiac arrest, your heart stops
pumping oxygen-rich blood
out to your body. This means your organs can’t receive any oxygen, which they need to function and keep you alive. Without immediate help to get oxygen to your brain and other vital organs, this is fatal. At that point, it becomes sudden cardiac death.
How common is sudden cardiac death?
Sudden cardiac death is the leading cause of natural death in the United States. It causes half of all
heart disease
deaths.
Every year, more than 356,000 people in the United States have a cardiac arrest outside a hospital. Only about 10% of them survive, even with
paramedic
treatment.
Sudden cardiac death affects
males
twice as often as it does females. It’s rare in children, affecting only 1 to 2 per 100,000 children each year.
Symptoms and Causes
Are there signs before sudden cardiac death?
Yes, some sudden cardiac death symptoms may happen hours or weeks before sudden cardiac death, like:
Abnormal
vital signs
.
Heart attack
.
Severe infections (
sepsis
).
Fatigue.
Shortness of breath
.
Chest pain
.
Fainting
.
Heart palpitations
.
If you notice any of these, seek emergency care right away.
What causes sudden cardiac death?
Coronary artery disease
is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death.
An
abnormal heart rhythm
(arrhythmia) most often causes sudden cardiac death in people younger than 35.
Congenital (since birth) heart issues
or genetic conditions that affect your
heart’s electrical system
often cause the arrhythmia.
Advertisement
Most professional sports programs screen athletes for the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in that population. In the United States, that’s
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(a thickened heart muscle that especially affects your ventricles). Sudden cardiac death in athletes is rare (about 1 to 6 in 100,000 athletes younger than 35).
In people 35 and older, the cause of sudden cardiac death is more often related to coronary artery disease.
Besides coronary artery disease and arrhythmia, other sudden cardiac death causes include
cardiomyopathy
from having:
Alcohol use disorder
.
Obesity
.
Genetic disorders of your heart muscle, including hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.
What are the risk factors for sudden cardiac death?
Sudden cardiac death has many risk factors. But you’re more likely to have a higher risk as you age and if you’re Black and male. Certain genetic causes of heart disease like hypertrophic cardiomyopathy also increase the risk of sudden cardiac death.
Many factors can increase your risk of sudden cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac death. The two leading risk factors include:
Previous heart attack:
Your risk of sudden cardiac death is higher after a heart attack.
Coronary artery disease:
Risk factors for coronary artery disease include smoking, family history of cardiovascular disease,
high cholesterol
or an enlarged heart.
Other risk factors include having:
A prior episode of sudden cardiac arrest.
A family history of sudden cardiac arrest or sudden cardiac death.
A personal or family history of certain abnormal heart rhythms, including
long QT syndrome
,
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
and ventricular tachycardia.
Ventricular tachycardia
or
ventricular fibrillation
after a heart attack.
A history of congenital (since birth) heart issues or blood vessel abnormalities.
A history of
syncope
(fainting episodes of unknown cause).
Heart failure
(when your heart’s pumping power is weaker than normal). People with heart failure are six to nine times more likely than most people to have
ventricular arrhythmias
that can lead to sudden cardiac arrest.
Dilated cardiomyopathy
(causes about 10% of sudden cardiac deaths). Scarring and damage to your heart muscle increase the chance of abnormal heart rhythms. This can also lead to heart failure.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Significant changes in blood levels of potassium and magnesium.
Obesity.
Diabetes
.
A history of taking recreational drugs or drugs that can cause arrhythmias.
If you have any of these risk factors, talk with a healthcare provider about how to reduce your risk.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is sudden cardiac death diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can confirm sudden cardiac death after ruling out death from other causes. They may suspect sudden cardiac arrest leading to sudden cardiac death if you:
Weren’t breathing.
Didn’t have a pulse.
Weren’t conscious.
Prevention
How can I lower my risk of sudden cardiac death?
You can reduce your risk in many ways, like:
Keeping your regular follow-up appointments with your healthcare provider.
Making healthy lifestyle changes such as getting to a weight that’s healthy for you, being physically active and eating a low-fat diet.
Avoiding all tobacco products.
Taking medications your healthcare provider prescribes for high cholesterol or arrhythmia.
Getting an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (
ICD
) if your healthcare provider recommends it.
Having procedures or surgery your provider recommends, like
angioplasty
or
catheter ablation
.
Having
genetic testing
(if your provider recommends it) to look for potential causes of sudden cardiac death.
Teaching your family the importance of immediate care and learning CPR.
Competitive athletes should undergo prescreening annually for a heart condition. This should include an evaluation of their personal and family history (updated each year) and a
physical exam
. Their sports physician may recommend more testing if the first evaluation has any concerning findings.
Advertisement
If your healthcare provider suspects a heart problem, you should get a referral to a
cardiologist
.
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between a heart attack and sudden cardiac death?
A heart attack is an issue with oxygen-rich blood reaching your heart muscle. Sudden cardiac death happens when someone can’t revive you after your heart stops beating.
A blockage in your
coronary arteries
(which supply blood to your heart muscle) causes a heart attack. An electrical issue with your heart’s signaling system causes a sudden cardiac arrest and possibly sudden cardiac death. While a heart attack can lead to sudden cardiac death, there are other causes of sudden cardiac death.
How quick is sudden cardiac death?
A cardiac arrest leaves you without enough blood flow to your brain. This can make you unconscious in just seconds. Sudden cardiac death can happen in a few minutes.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Losing a loved one suddenly can be one of the hardest times in your life. But if your loved one died from a heart issue that runs in families, you may want to ask your provider about your risk for that heart issue. Taking steps now may protect you and your family from another loss.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/27/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment