Asplenia: What It Means, Complications & Vaccines Needed
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Asplenia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Asplenia
Your spleen helps your body filter your blood and fight germs like bacteria. If you have asplenia, your spleen is missing or doesn’t work like it should. This makes it more likely that you’ll get sick, and infections can be more dangerous. Vaccines, preventive antibiotics and early treatment of infections are key to staying safe and healthy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Asplenia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Asplenia?
Asplenia means you’re missing your
spleen
or your spleen doesn’t work correctly. Your spleen is a vital organ in your
lymphatic system
. It has several important jobs. One of its roles is to protect your body from germs, like bacteria.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
If you don’t have a spleen, your body has trouble fighting certain bacteria. These bacteria have outer protective coverings. That makes them
resistant to antibiotics
. They include:
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
Neisseria meningitidis
These bacteria can cause serious infections. They can lead to severe complications if you have asplenia. The risk of developing a life-threatening bacterial infection is higher in children with asplenia than in adults. But you can protect yourself and your loved ones by getting vaccinated and taking preventive
antibiotics
.
Types of asplenia
There are two main types of asplenia:
Anatomic asplenia:
This is when you don’t have a spleen. You may have had it surgically removed (
splenectomy
). Or it might have been missing from birth.
Functional asplenia:
This means you have a spleen, but it doesn’t work properly. This is often due to health conditions, like sickle cell disease or celiac disease.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of asplenia?
Asplenia itself usually doesn’t cause any noticeable symptoms. It’s more important to look out for signs of an infection. An infection can be dangerous if you have asplenia. If you develop any of the following symptoms, reach out to your healthcare provider or go to the nearest emergency room right away:
Advertisement
Fever
Chills
Rapid heart rate
Fatigue
Confusion
Irritability
What causes asplenia?
The cause of asplenia depends on the type (anatomical or functional).
Anatomical asplenia
There are a couple reasons why you might not have a spleen:
Surgical removal (splenectomy):
A healthcare provider may need to remove your spleen due to trauma or injury. For example, a car accident may have caused a
ruptured spleen
. Rarely, providers use splenectomy to treat certain medical conditions.
Congenital asplenia:
This means you were born without a spleen. A genetic change (variation) in the
RPSA
gene (responsible for creating proteins) may lead to this condition. Sometimes, it occurs as part of a rare syndrome, like
heterotaxy
.
Functional asplenia
Certain medical conditions can damage your spleen. Examples include:
Sickle cell disease
Celiac disease
Lupus
Advanced HIV infection
Liver disease
What are the complications of asplenia?
Asplenia increases your risk of developing serious bacterial infections, including:
Pneumococcal disease
Haemophilus influenzae
type b (Hib)
Meningococcal disease
These infections can lead to severe complications, including
sepsis
, organ failure and death.
Other complications of asplenia may include:
Increased bleeding risk:
Your spleen plays a role in storing platelets. You need platelets for blood clotting. Without a spleen, you have a slightly higher risk of bleeding.
Autoimmune issues:
Asplenia can upset the balance of your immune system. This can lead to autoimmune disorders. These conditions cause your body to attack its own tissues.
Thrombosis
:
Asplenia can sometimes cause thrombosis. This occurs when blood clots form in your veins or arteries.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose asplenia
Your healthcare provider will ask about any symptoms you have and your medical history. They’ll want to know if you have a biological family history of asplenia. Your provider will also perform a physical exam. The exam might not reveal signs of asplenia itself. But it can help your provider figure out if you have any underlying conditions or infections.
Tests that are used
Your provider will use imaging tests to see whether or not you have a spleen. If you do, the images can show the size and shape of your spleen. These tests may include:
Ultrasound
CT scan
MRI scan
Your provider may also request a spleen scintigraphy. This is a specialized
nuclear medicine imaging
test. Your provider injects a small amount of radioactive material into your vein. If you have a spleen, it’ll absorb the material. If you don’t have a spleen, the material won’t be absorbed. Your provider will be able to see a “cold spot” on the scan.
Imaging tests can confirm if you don’t have a spleen. But they can’t tell how well your spleen is working. So, your provider may order a complete blood count (CBC). This test can show abnormalities in your red blood cells that may mean you have asplenia.
Management and Treatment
What are the treatment options for asplenia?
Asplenia itself isn’t treatable. Treatment involves preventing the serious infections that it can cause. Your healthcare provider will suggest vaccines and special antibiotics.
Advertisement
Vaccination
Your provider will recommend vaccines that help protect you from certain bacteria. These bacteria can cause life-threatening infections in people who aren’t vaccinated. These vaccines include:
Pneumococcal vaccine
Haemophilus influenzae
type b vaccine
Meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine
Depending on the reason for asplenia, you may get these vaccines as an infant. You can also get them later in life.
You also have an increased risk of developing influenza. So, your provider will recommend getting a seasonal flu vaccine.
Antibiotics
Your provider may recommend a
prophylactic
(preventive) antibiotic. These antibiotics help reduce your chances of developing a serious infection. You’ll take a regular, low dose of the medication. These antibiotics are especially useful for children younger than 5, since they have a higher likelihood of disease.
Your provider will also prescribe antibiotics to treat an infection. If you have any symptoms of infection — like fever, chills or fatigue — get medical care as soon as possible by going to the nearest emergency department. Early and aggressive antibiotic treatment is vital due to your increased risk of serious complications.
When should I see my healthcare provider if I have asplenia?
If you have asplenia, see your healthcare provider:
Advertisement
If you have any symptoms of infection:
A basic infection can be life-threatening. Early diagnosis and treatment with antibiotics are critical.
Before certain medical procedures or dental work:
Your provider might recommend antibiotics beforehand to reduce your infection risk.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for asplenia?
Asplenia is a lifelong disease. But your prognosis (outlook) is generally good if you manage the condition properly. Talk to your healthcare provider. Stay up to date on their recommended vaccines and antibiotics. Make sure to seek medical care at the first sign of an infection. Without taking steps to reduce your risk of bacterial infections, your prognosis is poor.
Prevention
How can I lower my risk of complications from asplenia?
In addition to vaccination and antibiotics, there are ways you can reduce your risk. These include:
Maintain good hygiene:
Wash your hands often and avoid close contact with people who are sick.
Wear a medical alert bracelet:
In case of an emergency, this informs healthcare providers about your condition.
Early medical attention:
Seek prompt medical care if you experience any symptoms of infection.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Asplenia changes the way your body handles infections. But it doesn’t take away your ability to live a healthy, full life. The most important step is to be proactive. Follow your provider’s advice about vaccines and preventive antibiotics.
Advertisement
Take any signs of infection seriously. Quick action can stop a minor illness from becoming something more serious. By making these habits part of your routine, you can protect your health and feel more confident managing life with asplenia.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us