Arthritis in Foot & Ankle: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Foot and Ankle Arthritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Foot and Ankle Arthritis
There are more than 30 joints in your feet and ankles, and arthritis can affect any of them. Natural wear and tear, health conditions and injuries can cause it. A healthcare provider will suggest ways to manage symptoms like pain, stiffness or reduced range of motion.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Arthritis can make it hard or painful to move or use your feet and ankles.
What is foot and ankle arthritis?
Foot and ankle arthritis is any type of
arthritis
that affects
joints
in your feet and ankles.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
These joints naturally wear down as you age. Lots of people develop arthritis after normal, lifelong wear and tear. Some health conditions and injuries can also cause arthritis in your feet and ankles.
Each of your feet has 26 bones and more than 30 joints. Arthritis can affect any of them, including your toes.
Your
ankle joints
are where your lower legs meet your feet. It’s common for arthritis to develop where any of the bones in your ankle meet.
Visit a healthcare provider if you’re experiencing
foot pain
or
ankle pain
that’s severe enough to affect your day-to-day routine, or if you feel like you can’t move or use your feet and ankles as well as usual.
Types of foot and ankle arthritis
There are more than 100 different types of arthritis. Some of the most common types that involve feet and ankles include:
Osteoarthritis
.
Rheumatoid arthritis
.
Gout
.
Post-traumatic arthritis
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are foot and ankle arthritis symptoms?
The most common foot and ankle arthritis symptoms include:
Joint pain
.
Stiffness or a reduced range of motion (how far you can move your ankle, foot or toes).
Swelling (inflammation)
.
Skin discoloration.
Tenderness or sensitivity to touch around a joint.
A feeling of heat or warmth near your joints.
What are the signs of arthritis in your feet and ankles?
Arthritis usually develops slowly over time, so you won’t suddenly know you have it. You might start noticing you’re feeling the same kind of pain or other symptoms in the same spot in your foot or ankle.
Advertisement
It might be hard to move or walk if you have arthritis in your feet and ankles. Stiffness might get better once you start moving. It’s usually worse first thing in the morning or if you’ve been sitting or lying down for a long time.
Some types of arthritis cause symptoms in waves that come and go, called flares or flare-ups. Others make your joints feel painful or stiff all the time, or after being physically active.
Which part of the foot hurts with arthritis?
Where you notice signs of arthritis depends on which type you have, and which joints it affects. It’s possible to have arthritis in any section of your foot, including your:
Hindfoot (heel).
Midfoot (the middle section of your foot, including the top of your foot and the arch on the bottom).
Forefoot (the ball of your foot and your toes).
What causes foot and ankle arthritis?
What causes arthritis in your feet or ankles depends on which type you have:
Osteoarthritis
happens naturally as you age. A lifetime of using your joints can eventually wear down their
cartilage
cushioning.
Your
immune system
can cause
rheumatoid arthritis
by attacking your joints and causing inflammation.
Having too much uric acid in your blood (
hyperuricemia
) causes
gout
.
What are the risk factors?
Anyone can develop arthritis in their feet or ankles, but some factors may make you more likely to, including:
Tobacco use:
Smoking
and using other tobacco products increases your overall arthritis risk.
Family history:
You may be more likely to develop arthritis if members of your biological family have it.
Foot and ankle injuries:
You might be more likely to have arthritis if you’ve experienced foot and
ankle injuries
, especially if you’ve re-injured the same joint more than once.
Other health conditions:
Having an
autoimmune disease
,
obesity
or any condition that affects your joints increases the chance you'll develop arthritis.
Some people have a higher arthritis risk, including:
People older than 50.
Men
.
Athletes, especially those who play sports that put a lot of stress on their feet and ankles.
People who have physically demanding jobs or do work that requires them to be on their feet a lot.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose foot and ankle arthritis?
A healthcare provider will diagnose arthritis in your feet and ankles with a
physical exam
. You might need to see a
podiatrist
. They’ll examine your feet, ankles and toes and ask about your symptoms. Tell your provider when you first noticed symptoms like pain and stiffness, and if any activities or times of day make them worse. Tell your provider if you feel symptoms in one or both feet.
Advertisement
Your provider may ask you which type of shoes you wear most often, and if any kinds of shoes make your symptoms worse. They may watch how you walk or move (a gait analysis).
Your provider will probably check your range of motion (how far you can move a joint). They may compare one joint’s range of motion to other, unaffected joints in your other foot or ankle.
Arthritis tests
Your provider might use imaging tests to take pictures of your joints, including:
Foot X-ray
.
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging).
CT scan
(computed tomography scan).
Your provider may use
blood tests
to check your uric acid levels if they think you have gout. Blood tests can also show signs of infections or autoimmune diseases.
Management and Treatment
What is the best pain relief for arthritic feet?
Which treatments you’ll need depends on what’s causing the arthritis, which type you have and which joints in your feet and ankles it affects.
The most common arthritis treatments include:
Over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers:
Over-the-counter
NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) or acetaminophen reduce inflammation and relieve pain. Don’t take these medications for more than 10 days in a row without talking to your provider.
Corticosteroids
:
Corticosteroids are prescription anti-inflammatory medications. Your provider might give you
cortisone shots
directly into your affected joints.
Orthotics
:
Orthotics are shoe inserts that you can buy over the counter or have custom-made. Your provider will tell you which kind you’ll need and how often to wear them. They might also suggest that you wear (or avoid) certain types of shoes to support your feet and ankles.
Surgery:
Your provider will usually only suggest surgery for arthritis if you’re experiencing severe symptoms that affect your quality of life, and if nonsurgical treatments haven’t worked. You might need an
arthroscopy
to manage early-stage arthritis in your feet or ankles before it can severely damage them. Your provider or surgeon will tell you which type of surgery you’ll need and what to expect.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can arthritis in feet be cured?
There’s no cure for arthritis, but your healthcare provider will help you find treatments that reduce how much (and how often) arthritis impacts your daily routine.
Some people with arthritis experience more severe symptoms as they age. Ask your provider how often you should have follow-up visits to check for changes in your feet or ankles.
Is walking good for arthritis in your feet?
Staying active is one of the best ways to relieve arthritis symptoms. Don’t force yourself to do anything that causes severe pain, but moving your body can reduce pain and stiffness and prevent symptoms from getting worse.
You don’t need to become an ultramarathoner or Olympic weightlifter. Walking, swimming, riding a bike, stretching or doing yoga are all great ways to support joints in your feet and ankles (and your whole body).
Talk to your provider about exercises that are good for you. They’ll suggest options that help you safely stay active.
Prevention
How can I prevent foot and ankle arthritis?
Some types of arthritis happen naturally or because of health conditions you can’t control, so there’s not always a way to prevent it. However, you can lower your chances of developing arthritis by:
Avoiding tobacco products.
Following an eating and physical activity plan that's healthy for you.
Doing low-impact exercise.
Always wearing proper protective equipment and footwear for any work, sports or physical activity.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit your healthcare provider if you experience any of the following symptoms:
Severe foot or ankle pain (especially if it lasts more than a week).
Stiffness that’s getting worse, especially if you suddenly can’t move your feet or ankles as well as usual.
Worsening or more frequent flare-ups of your usual symptoms.
Which questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
Which type of arthritis do I have?
Which treatments will I need?
Will I need surgery?
How often will I need follow-up exams?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Your feet and ankles carry you through your daily routine. No matter what’s causing it, arthritis symptoms like pain, stiffness and reduced mobility are frustrating at best. At their worst, they can affect how much you enjoy your favorite activities.
Don’t ignore pain or other symptoms in your feet and ankles. The occasional ache or pain is normal (especially after a long day or intense workout), but you shouldn’t constantly feel uncomfortable. Visit a healthcare provider as soon as you notice new or worsening symptoms that don’t get better on their own.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/27/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment