Hemorrhagic Stroke: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hemorrhagic Stroke
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hemorrhagic Stroke
Hemorrhagic strokes are medical emergencies. They happen when a blood vessel in your brain breaks and bleeds. They require immediate treatment and can be fatal. Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) immediately if you think you’re experiencing symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Hemorrhagic strokes happen when a blood vessel in your brain breaks (ruptures) and bleeds.
What is a hemorrhagic stroke?
A hemorrhagic stroke is a life-threatening emergency that happens when a
blood vessel
in your brain breaks (ruptures) and bleeds. A “
hemorrhage
” is the medical term for bleeding inside your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The bleeding disrupts normal circulation in your
brain
and prevents it from getting the blood and oxygen it needs to survive and function. The stroke also adds extra pressure inside your brain, which can damage or kill brain cells.
Hemorrhagic (pronounced “hem-or-AJ-ICK”) strokes are particularly dangerous because they cause severe symptoms that get worse quickly. Without fast medical attention, these
strokes
often cause permanent brain damage and can be fatal.
If you think you or someone you’re with is having a stroke,
immediately call 911 (or your local emergency services number)
. The sooner someone is diagnosed and treated, the more likely it is they’ll survive a stroke. Every second counts.
Symptoms and Causes
What are hemorrhagic stroke symptoms?
The symptoms of a hemorrhagic stroke can include one or more of the following:
Thunderclap headaches
Light sensitivity (photophobia)
Dizziness
or
vertigo
Trouble understanding or speaking (aphasia)
Slurred or garbled speaking (dysarthria)
One-sided weakness or
paralysis
Loss of senses, like
vision
,
hearing
and touch
Neck stiffness
Nausea
and
vomiting
Seizures
Passing out or fainting
Coma
What are the warning signs of a hemorrhagic stroke?
Hemorrhagic strokes can cause lots of different symptoms. To recognize the warning signs in yourself or a loved one, remember the acronym
BE
FAST
:
Advertisement
Balance:
Watch for a sudden loss of balance.
Eyes:
Look out for
sudden vision loss
or changes in one or both
eyes
.
Face:
Smile. Look for a droop on one or both sides of your face.
Arms:
Raise both arms. If you’re having a stroke, one arm may not move, sag or be very weak.
Speech:
You might slur your speech or have trouble choosing the right words.
Time:
Time is critical — call for help immediately. If possible, look at your watch, phone or a clock to track when symptoms start. Telling a healthcare provider when symptoms began can help them know which treatments are best for you.
Transient ischemic attack
A
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
— sometimes called a “mini-stroke” — is like a stroke, but the effects are temporary. These are often warning signs that a person has a very high risk of having a true stroke soon. A person who has a TIA needs emergency medical care as soon as possible.
What causes hemorrhagic strokes?
Anything that damages or breaks blood vessels in your brain can cause a hemorrhagic stroke. Having
high blood pressure (hypertension)
is the most common cause. That’s especially true if your blood pressure is very high or stays high for a long time.
Other conditions that can cause a hemorrhagic stroke include:
Brain aneurysms
Brain tumors
Moyamoya disease
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy
Head injuries
COVID-19
Ischemic strokes
that cause bleeding during or after the stroke
Types of hemorrhagic strokes
Hemorrhagic stroke can happen in one of two ways:
Bleeding inside your brain (
intracerebral hemorrhage
):
When a blood vessel inside your brain ruptures it puts pressure on the brain tissue from the inside.
Bleeding into the space between your brain and its outer covering (
subarachnoid hemorrhage
):
Your brain is surrounded by a thin, protective layer called the arachnoid membrane. The space between that membrane and your brain is the subarachnoid space. If any blood vessels that pass through the arachnoid membrane break, bleeding can fill up the subarachnoid space. That causes pressure inside your skull pressing on your brain from outside it.
What are the risk factors?
Anyone can experience a hemorrhagic stroke, but you have a higher risk if you:
Are older than 65
Smoke
(or use other forms of tobacco)
Use recreational or nonprescription drugs
You may have a higher stroke risk if you have a health condition that affects your
circulatory system
, including:
High blood pressure (hypertension)
Alcohol use disorder
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
Migraine headaches
(especially migraines with
auras
)
Diabetes
Diagnosis and Tests
How are hemorrhagic strokes diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose a hemorrhagic stroke with a
neurological exam
and tests, including:
CT scan
Blood tests
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
MRI
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What are the two main treatments for hemorrhagic strokes?
The two main treatments for hemorrhagic strokes are medications and surgery.
Hemorrhagic stroke medications
There are many medications that providers use to treat hemorrhagic strokes. They work in one of two ways:
Clotting support:
Many people think clotting in your blood is only a bad thing (and
blood clots
can
be very dangerous). But clotting is your body’s natural way to stop bleeding. Your providers might give you medications like vitamin K therapy or
prothrombin complex concentrate
to increase your body’s ability to stop the bleeding in your brain.
Blood pressure management:
Keeping your blood pressure at a safe level can slow the brain bleed. It can also help your blood safely clot and seal the damaged blood vessel. Your provider may start you on an intravenous (IV) blood pressure medication to keep your blood pressure in a safe range.
Hemorrhagic stroke surgery
Accumulated blood from a stroke puts too much pressure on brain tissue around the bleeding blood vessel. You might need emergency surgery if the stroke increases your
intracranial pressure
. Your surgeon will remove the extra blood and relieve the pressure buildup on your brain.
Stroke rehabilitation
Stroke rehab is an important part of treating a hemorrhagic stroke. You’ll need rehab to help you adjust to changes in your brain and body. You might need to regain abilities or adjust to new or different disabilities. You might need a combination of:
Advertisement
Speech therapy
to regain or improve your language and speaking abilities. It can help you control the muscles that help you talk, breathe, eat and swallow.
Physical therapy
to strengthen your muscles, improve your balance and regain use of your arms and legs.
Occupational therapy
to help you safely complete your daily tasks, especially chores or activities that need precise body movements.
Cognitive therapy
to help improve your memory, concentration and other mental abilities.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy after a hemorrhagic stroke?
It’s hard for experts to estimate a life expectancy or survival rate for hemorrhagic strokes. That’s because everyone’s body and health are unique.
Strokes can be fatal, and they can cause permanent disabilities. But there’s no one standard recovery timeline or outlook that’s accurate for everyone.
Hemorrhagic strokes are more likely to be fatal than
ischemic strokes
. But that doesn’t mean you’ll definitely have a worse outcome than any other person.
Everyone’s body responds differently to a stroke. What you can expect (the prognosis) after a stroke depends on a few factors, including:
Which areas of your brain it affected.
How quickly it was treated.
Your overall health.
Your provider will tell you what to expect. They’ll help you set recovery goals and expectations that fit your unique health and situation.
Advertisement
Prevention
How can I prevent a hemorrhagic stroke?
Maintaining a healthy blood pressure level is the most important way to prevent a hemorrhagic stroke. If you have high blood pressure, your healthcare provider can help you manage it. They’ll suggest medications and changes to your daily routine that can keep your blood pressure in a safe range.
Other things you can do to reduce your risk of having a hemorrhagic stroke include:
Managing other health conditions you may have.
Eating plenty of healthy foods and maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you.
Getting plenty of physical activity.
Visiting a healthcare provider for checkups every year (or as often as they suggest).
Stopping smoking
.
Living With
How do I take care of myself after a hemorrhagic stroke?
Recovering and rehabbing after a stroke is hard work. Once you and your provider finalize your treatment plan, follow it as closely as possible. In general, you should:
Take your medications:
Taking your medicine as often as your provider suggests will help your body heal. Managing your blood pressure is extremely important.
Go to your rehab and other therapy appointments:
Tell your therapists if anything makes you feel unsafe or uncomfortable. Rehab is hard work, but you shouldn’t be in constant pain or discomfort.
Remember your mental health:
Depression
and
anxiety
are extremely common after a stroke. You’re not weak or a quitter for feeling sad or upset. Your emotional health can be just as important as how your physical body is doing. Talk to your provider or a mental health professional if you feel like you need help processing anything during your recovery.
When should I go to the emergency room?
Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) if you think you’re experiencing stroke symptoms again. Another stroke has an even higher risk of being fatal or causing severe complications. Don’t wait to call for help.
People who’ve had a stroke have an increased risk of other potentially serious complications, including:
Pulmonary embolism
.
Heart attack
.
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
.
Call emergency services or go to the ER if you think you’re experiencing any symptoms of these complications.
Which questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
How do I take my medication?
How long will I need therapy?
Which changes to my daily routine will I need to make?
Which signs or symptoms of another stroke should I watch out for?
When should I follow up with you?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hemorrhagic strokes can have a big impact on your life. Anything that can permanently affect your brain can be scary. If you think you’re experiencing stroke symptoms, get help right away. The faster a provider diagnoses and treats it, the better.
Once you’re safe and stable, you’ll start rehab. It’s hard work, but it’s worth it. Don’t ignore how you’re feeling, and share any frustrations with your providers and therapists. Your recovery might happen in small steps, but don’t forget to celebrate all of your successes.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
After a stroke, it’s essential to get treated right away. Cleveland Clinic’s stroke care specialists can help you manage recovery and improve your quality of life.
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/07/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment