Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus. The most common symptoms are cough, shortness of breath and fever. It can cause serious illness and lead to pneumonia and kidney failure. Most cases have happened in the Arabian Peninsula.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Middle East Respiratory Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Middle East Respiratory Syndrome?
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a severe respiratory illness caused by a
virus
. It can cause
pneumonia
and
organ failure
. It often spreads in hospitals or to other people in the same household. It can also spread from camels to people.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most cases of MERS happen in Saudi Arabia and surrounding countries. But there have been cases in other countries around the world.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Middle East respiratory syndrome
MERS symptoms include:
Cough
Fever
Shortness of breath
Diarrhea
Nausea
and
vomiting
What causes Middle East respiratory syndrome?
MERS-CoV, a type of coronavirus, causes MERS. Coronaviruses also cause
COVID-19
and
common colds
.
You can get MERS from contact with infected
respiratory
fluids, like
mucus
and spit (
saliva
). It can spread:
Through close contact with someone who has it
Through close contact with camels, like grooming
From drinking raw camel milk or eating raw camel meat
It most commonly spreads in hospitals, through family members or through people who live in the same household.
Risk factors
You’re at a higher risk of MERS infection if you:
Live in or have recently traveled to the Arabian Peninsula (Saudi Arabia and its surrounding countries) or another area where MERS is spreading
Had close contact with someone with a confirmed MERS-CoV infection
You’ve taken care of someone with MERS
Have direct contact with camels or consume raw camel meat or milk
Complications of MERS
MERS is often severe, and complications are common. They include:
Kidney failure
Pneumonia
Respiratory failure
You’re more likely to develop severe illness if you have:
Advertisement
Cancer
Cardiovascular disease
Chronic
heart disease
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic lung disease
Conditions that
weaken your immune system
Diabetes
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose MERS
If you have respiratory symptoms and you live in or have traveled to an area where MERS spreads, a healthcare provider might test you for MERS. Tests could include:
Sputum test
Nasopharyngeal swab
Bronchoscopy
Blood tests
Not all labs do MERS-CoV testing. Your provider may send the samples to a specialized lab for diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
How is MERS treated?
There’s no treatment that gets rid of MERS. Your body has to fight it off on its own. If you’re severely ill and in the hospital, healthcare providers might give you:
IV (intravenous) fluids
Supplemental oxygen
Mechanical ventilation
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should call your provider if you have symptoms of MERS and:
You live in or have recently traveled to a place where it spreads, especially if you’re a healthcare worker or you’ve had contact with camels
You’ve been in close contact with someone with MERS or someone who’s recently traveled to an area where it spreads
Your provider can let you know which precautions to take and severe symptoms to look out for.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Middle East respiratory syndrome?
If you have MERS, you should stay away from other people to prevent it from spreading. It can get worse quickly. Go to the hospital if your symptoms are severe. You might need to stay in the hospital to fully recover.
What’s the mortality rate?
About
1 in 3 people
with MERS die from it. But experts aren’t sure if there are mild, undiagnosed cases. If so, that might lower the death rate.
Prevention
Can MERS be prevented?
You can reduce your risk of catching and spreading MERS by:
Washing your hands
frequently
Covering your nose and mouth when you cough or sneeze
Avoiding being around people when you’re sick
Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces frequently
Washing your hands after touching camels and avoiding contact with sick camels
Not drinking unpasteurized camel milk or eating raw camel meat
Avoiding contact with camels if you have a chronic health condition or compromised immune system
If you’re living with or caring for a person with MERS, health experts recommend additional precautions:
Wear a face mask, gown and gloves (
personal protective equipment
) if you have contact with the person’s body fluids or secretions.
Wear gloves when handling and washing dishes, towels, bedding and laundry. Wash your hands after removing your gloves.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
MERS is uncommon, but it still exists. And sometimes, outbreaks happen. That’s why it’s always important to talk to your healthcare provider and check public health recommendations before you travel. This can help you know how to avoid getting sick and what to do if you have symptoms.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment