Cardiac (Heart) Event Monitor
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diagnostics & Testing
/
Cardiac Event Monitor (Heart Monitor)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cardiac Event Monitor (Heart Monitor)
A heart monitor can provide valuable information ― just like an EKG ― to help your provider diagnose your heart issue. Wearing a monitor for a few weeks helps you record symptoms that don’t happen every day. Different kinds of heart monitors can track your heart’s rhythm (electrical activity). Any type you use has to be with you all the time.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Test Details
Results and Follow-Up
Additional Common Questions
Overview
A heart monitor records your heart rate and rhythm for up to a month so your provider can look for abnormal heart rhythms.
What is a heart monitor?
A heart monitor is a small device you wear or carry that records your
heart rate
and rhythm for your provider to review.
Heart
monitor devices can collect the same information as an
electrocardiogram
(EKG), but they’re smaller than a deck of playing cards. As you can have this battery-powered device with you for up to a month, it’s good for recording abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmias
) that don’t happen every day.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Types of heart monitors
Patch recorder:
This is good for two weeks of nonstop monitoring. It has everything contained in one unit (patch) that sticks to your chest.
Symptom event monitor:
You stick the sensors on your skin and turn the device on when you have symptoms.
Loop memory monitor:
You keep the sensors on and start the device when you have symptoms. It can record your EKG (your heart’s electrical activity) while symptoms are happening, but also a minute or two before and after they start.
Implanted loop recorders:
This multi-year option is the only type that goes under your skin.
When is a heart monitor used?
Your healthcare provider will ask you to use a cardiac event monitor if you’re having symptoms that don’t happen that often, like once a week or once a month. Think of it like this: When your car is making a sound that concerns you, it might not make that sound when you take it to the mechanic. In a similar way, your heart may not have an abnormal rhythm during your appointment with your provider.
A device that records your heart’s rhythm when you’re having symptoms is valuable. It allows your provider to review the recording and make a diagnosis.
Your provider can use the information from a heart monitor device when:
You
fainted
, had
chest pain
or got
dizzy
.
You had
palpitations
(a racing or pounding heartbeat).
You had a heart attack or
stroke
.
They want to know if enough oxygen is reaching your heart.
They want to see if the medicine you’re taking is helping.
They want to assess how often your heart stays in an abnormal rhythm.
They want to know if your pacemaker or
implantable cardioverter defibrillator
(ICD) is working right.
You’re at risk for an arrhythmia.
Advertisement
What will a heart monitor detect?
A cardiac event monitor can give your provider information that answers questions like:
Does your heart have a steady or an irregular rhythm?
How strong are your heart’s
electrical signals
?
Do your heart’s electrical signals have normal timing?
How fast is your heart beating?
Test Details
How does a heart monitor work?
Here’s how a heart monitor works:
Sensors on your chest will pick up your heart rhythms.
The sensors will send your heart rhythms through wires (or wirelessly) to your cardiac monitor device.
Your heart monitor will record your heart rhythms.
You’ll send (transmit) this information to your healthcare provider through a phone or computer.
Your provider will review your data and look for any abnormal heart rhythms.
If your provider sees an arrhythmia that’s a concern, they may call you and ask you what symptoms you’re having. They may also ask you to come in for a checkup so they can evaluate you.
What to expect before using a heart monitor
If you’re getting a heart monitor that sticks to your skin, your provider will:
Shave chest hair that’s in the way of where a sensor will go.
Clean and prepare your skin for the sensors. The plastic strips won’t stay on if your skin is oily or sweaty.
Attach several sensors to the skin on your chest with sticky strips of plastic. (Be sure to let your provider know if you’re
allergic
to the adhesive they’re using.)
Give you a supply of sensors so you can switch them out with new ones. Your provider will tell you how often to replace them and where they should go. They’ll also give you instructions on how to bathe with the device.
For some heart monitors, you don’t need to stick sensors on your chest. You just wear the monitor on one of your wrists or hold it up to your chest.
What to expect during a heart monitor test
You’ll need to wear or carry a device that receives information from the sensors attached to your body. Depending on the type of cardiac event recorder, you might carry it with you in your hand or pocket or wear it on one of your wrists.
For some heart monitor devices, you’ll need to push a button to record your heart rhythm when you’re having symptoms. Others will start recording on their own when an abnormal heart rhythm happens. It’s important to note that a monitor doesn’t offer safety or protection because it typically doesn’t have real-time monitoring. (You’ll get results weeks later.)
If you’re concerned about your symptoms, seek emergency care.
Follow your provider’s instructions. They may want you to exercise so they can see what your heart monitor records for that time frame. Otherwise, just do what you normally do. It’s helpful to keep track of what you’re doing and any symptoms you’re having when you’re active. You should also make note of when you took heart medications.
Things that may keep the sensors from communicating with your heart monitor
You may need to avoid or keep your monitor a safe distance from these:
Advertisement
Electric blankets, toothbrushes and razors.
Magnets.
Cell phones.
Portable music (MP3) players.
Microwave ovens.
Computer tablets.
Metal detectors.
Places with high voltage.
What to expect after a heart monitor test
After your healthcare provider has the information they need from your cardiac monitor, you’ll return it to them. If you have an implantable type of cardiac event recorder, your provider will take it out. In the case of a patch, you may need to mail it when you’re done with it.
What are the risks of a heart monitor?
The adhesive on the sensor patches may irritate your skin, but that often goes away when you take off the patches. For the implanted type of cardiac event recorder, you may have a small risk of pain or infection from the procedure to put the device under your skin.
Using a heart monitor is painless. You’ll just be aware of the sensors attached to your skin
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Results and Follow-Up
What type of results do you get and what do the results mean?
If your healthcare provider doesn’t see any major changes in your heart rhythms, your results are normal. If your cardiac event monitor results show abnormal heart rhythms, you may have an arrhythmia like:
Heart block
.
One of the various types of
tachycardia
(fast heart rate),
supraventricular
or
ventricular
.
Bradycardia
(slow heart rate).
Atrial fibrillation
.
Atrial flutter
.
When should I know the results of a heart monitor test?
Depending on the type of cardiac event recorder you have, it may take a few days up to a few weeks to get results. Ask your provider when you can expect to get results.
Advertisement
If the results are abnormal, what are the next steps?
If your cardiac monitor results are abnormal, your provider may want to do more testing or move forward with treatment.
When should I call my doctor?
Call your healthcare provider if you have questions about using your heart monitor or if any of the instructions they gave you aren’t clear.
Call 911 if you think you’re having a
heart attack
.
Additional Common Questions
Cardiac event monitor vs. Holter monitor
If you’re having frequent symptoms, your provider will ask you to use a
Holter monitor
, which is a heart monitor device that records your heart rhythm continuously for 24 to 48 hours. If your provider gets enough information from the Holter monitor to diagnose you, you won’t need to try a cardiac event monitor.
If you’ve tried the Holter monitor but it hasn’t given your provider enough information for a diagnosis, you may need to use a cardiac event monitor.
Who prescribes a heart monitor?
Your
cardiologist
, a healthcare provider who specializes in the heart, will ask you to use a cardiac event monitor. They’ll review the information it gathers and make a diagnosis from that.
Is it serious if you have to wear a heart monitor?
Yes, it can be. If a provider wants you to wear a heart monitor, they’re usually trying to find out what’s causing your fainting spells or other symptoms. Some abnormal heart rhythms are more dangerous than others. But a cardiologist (heart specialist) can’t confirm which kind you have until they see the results from your heart monitor.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
While it may seem inconvenient to wear a cardiac event monitor, it’s worth it to help find long-term relief from your symptoms. If you need motivation to keep wearing your heart monitor, remember that it will give your healthcare provider the information they need to make a diagnosis. After that, the next step is providing you with the treatment you need.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/08/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment