What Is an Ultrasound Technologist& Diagnostic Medical Sonographer?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Ultrasound Technologist/Diagnostic Medical Sonographer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ultrasound Technologist/Diagnostic Medical Sonographer
An ultrasound technologist, or a diagnostic medical sonographer, creates images called ultrasounds or sonograms. Sonography uses sound waves to produce images of the inside of your body. There are many different types of ultrasounds and many different types of ultrasound technologists.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Prenatal Testing
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is an ultrasound technologist?
An ultrasound technologist, or a diagnostic medical sonographer, is a healthcare provider that uses a special medical instrument to produce images of the inside of your body. Medical sonographers work closely with physicians and other healthcare providers who look at the images to assess and diagnose medical conditions.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What does an ultrasound technologist do?
Ultrasound technologists specialize in creating images called
ultrasounds
or sonograms. Sonography uses high-frequency sound waves to produce images of your body’s organs and tissues. A sonographer scans parts of your body with a medical instrument called a transducer. The transducer sends out pulses of sound that bounce back, which cause echoes. The echoes form an image of the inside of your body on the sonographer’s computer screen.
In addition to operating the transducer to get the images, ultrasound technologists have many other responsibilities, including:
Profiling you, by checking your prior exams.
Preparing the exam room and maintaining the imaging equipment.
Preparing you for the procedure by explaining what’s going to happen and answering any questions you may have.
Getting you set up in the proper position for imaging.
Reviewing the images to check for quality and coverage of the areas needed.
Analyzing the imaging results for abnormalities and providing a summary of their findings to your
radiologist
.
Recording their findings and keeping track of your medical records.
Types of diagnostic medical sonographers
Diagnostic medical sonographers may specialize in different parts of your body. The different types of medical sonographers include:
Advertisement
Abdominal sonographers
An
abdominal sonographer
specializes in taking images of your abdominal cavity and surrounding organs, including your liver, kidney, pancreas, gallbladder and spleen. Abdominal sonographers may also help during
biopsies
and other types of exams that need ultrasound guidance.
Breast sonographers
A
breast sonographer
specializes in taking images of your breast tissue. They look for and confirm the presence of tumors or cysts that you or your healthcare provider may have found during an exam,
mammogram
or
breast MRI
. Breast sonographers also help with procedures that track tumors. They can assist your provider by providing information that will help them in making decisions about your treatment options, too.
Neurosonographers
A neurosonographer specializes in taking images of your brain and nervous system. They examine the area using a different type of medical instrument called a
transcranial Doppler
, which uses special beam shapes and frequencies. Neurosonology and neuroimaging are other names for this type of sonography.
Cardiac sonographers (echocardiographers)
A cardiac sonographer, or an echocardiographer, specializes in taking images of your heart (
echocardiogram
). They look at your heart’s vessels, chambers and valves. Cardiac sonographers may also perform echocardiograms of fetal hearts, helping healthcare providers diagnose heart conditions during pregnancy.
Musculoskeletal sonographers
A musculoskeletal sonographer specializes in taking images of the
muscles
, joints,
tendons
and
ligaments
throughout your body. They may also help with ultrasound guidance during surgical treatments or for injections that deliver medication directly to affected tissues.
Pediatric sonographers
A
pediatric sonographer
specializes in taking images of babies and children. They frequently take images associated with premature births or birth defects. Pediatric sonographers may assist and work closely with
pediatricians
and other healthcare providers.
Obstetric and gynecologic sonographers
An
obstetric and gynecologic sonographer
specializes in taking images of the
female reproductive system
. They take many sonograms that evaluate your health while pregnant and track a fetus’s growth. This is the type of ultrasound many people think of when they hear the term “ultrasound” or “sonogram.”
Vascular technologists (vascular sonographers)
A
vascular technologist
, or vascular sonographer, specializes in taking images of your
blood vessels
, including your veins and arteries. They also collect data that help healthcare providers diagnose diseases that affect blood flow. Vascular technologists frequently study your blood flow and detect blood clots or blocked arteries.
How do you become an ultrasound technologist?
There are several ways to become a diagnostic medical sonographer. The most common way is through an accredited two-year ultrasound technologist program, where you’ll earn an Associate of Applied Science degree. Some people get a four-year Bachelor of Science degree focusing on sonography. There are also one-year certificate programs in sonography for people who have training in another healthcare field.
Advertisement
Two- and four-year ultrasound technologist programs include classes in:
Biology.
Chemistry.
Anatomy.
Physiology.
Physics.
Medical terminology.
You’ll also take classes related to your chosen sonography specialty.
After you earn your degree, you’ll take an exam to get certified through the American Registry for Diagnostic Medical Sonography (ARDMS). Certain sonography specialties require additional exams and certifications.
How long does it take to become an ultrasound technologist?
You can become an ultrasound technologist through a two-year associate ultrasound technologist program.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When you hear the word “ultrasound,” you may think of pregnancy and a healthcare provider looking at images on a computer monitor. While that’s one common type of ultrasound, there are many more. An ultrasound technologist, or diagnostic medical sonographer, can produce internal images of many different parts of your body. They work with doctors and other healthcare providers to help them assess and diagnose health conditions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Prenatal tests can give your providers information about your pregnancy and fetal development. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can guide you through prenatal testing.
Schedule Prenatal Testing
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/05/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointment Center
216.445.7050
Appointments & Locations