Natural Antidepressants: What They Are & Effectiveness
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Natural Antidepressants
Advertisement
Advertisement
Natural Antidepressants
Natural antidepressants can support your mental health by boosting mood and brain function. These include foods like omega-3s and leafy greens, supplements and lifestyle habits like exercise and mindfulness. Talk to your provider before starting anything new.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Depression Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Natural Antidepressants?
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
What Are Natural Antidepressants?
Natural antidepressants are non-medication treatment options that may relieve
depression
symptoms. These include different alternatives, like foods, supplements and activities that you can try.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Some natural antidepressants can replace
antidepressant therapy
when used correctly. Your healthcare provider can help you choose the right one.
Types of natural antidepressants
There are many different options, like:
Nutritional supplements
:
Omega-3 fatty acids
(fish oil), SAMe and probiotics
Herbs and plant extracts
: Saffron
Vitamins and minerals
: B-vitamins (thiamine, L-methylfolate, B12), magnesium, vitamin D
Foods
: Following the
Mediterranean diet
; avoiding processed foods, refined carbohydrates and sugars; eating plenty of omega-3 fatty acids or nutrient-dense foods (like seafood and leafy greens)
Physical activities
:
Aerobic exercises
(like walking or swimming), strength training, yoga, cycling, dance, etc.
Activity (or habit) changes
: Sunlight exposure, getting enough sleep,
meditation
, mindfulness techniques
Alternative therapies
:
Acupuncture
and massage therapy
Many people think of “natural” as anything not made by humans. However, some supplements are considered natural, which can blur that definition. It’s also important to know that most supplements aren’t approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. This means that they aren’t held to the same strict regulations as prescription medications.
Advertisement
Who are natural antidepressants effective for?
You may consider these options if you:
Have mild to moderate depression symptoms
Prefer non-medical treatments over others
Need extra support along with standard depression treatment
Your reasons for wanting to use natural antidepressants are your own. But remember, you should make the decision with guidance from your provider.
Treatment Details
How do natural antidepressants work?
Natural antidepressants may promote brain health by:
Encouraging brain cells to communicate better
Helping gut health, which can affect how you feel
Lowering
inflammation
, which may benefit your brain
Supporting chemicals that improve your mood, like
serotonin
and
dopamine
Not all options work the same way, and some still need more research to confirm how effective they are.
What are the potential benefits of natural antidepressants?
The benefits may include:
Better treatment support (when combined with other therapies)
Easier availability
Fewer side effects than medications
Improved mood
Stronger overall health and well-being
What are the most effective natural antidepressants?
There isn’t one natural remedy that works for everyone. But these are some of the most studied options you may want to try first:
Exercise
L-Methylfolate
Omega-3 (fish oil)
Probiotics
Saffron
SAM-e
Vitamin D
What is the safest natural antidepressant?
Physical activity is usually a safe choice. While you might feel sore or risk a small injury, exercises like walking, yoga or swimming can offer many mental health benefits.
What are the potential risks of natural antidepressants?
Even though these products are natural, they’re not completely safe for everyone. Possible risks include:
Dangerous interactions with other medications
Poor quality in some products
Side effects (like allergic reactions, toxicity, etc.)
Unknown long-term safety for many supplements
Lack of safety with certain health conditions
Do natural antidepressants interact with other medications?
Yes, many natural remedies can interact with your current medications or affect your body if you have certain health conditions. Always talk to your provider before starting anything new.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Depression Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
How long will it take for me to feel better?
Natural treatments take time. They don’t work right away. You may need to use them every day for a few weeks before you feel better. Exercise might boost your mood instantly, but you need to stay active to see lasting results. Eating nutrient-dense foods can also improve mood and energy, but this usually happens gradually.
Staying consistent is key. If you don’t feel better after a couple of months, talk to your healthcare provider about other options.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Always follow your provider’s instructions when taking these remedies. Let them know if you have any side effects. Don’t stop or start a new treatment without their guidance.
Call your healthcare provider right away if you have thoughts of suicide, self-harm or harming others. You can always reach out to the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline by calling or texting
988
(U.S.). Someone is available to talk to you 24/7.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When you’re not feeling quite like yourself, you might start thinking about new ways to feel better. There are many alternative treatment options available that may help you feel well again. But with so many choices, it can be hard to narrow down which one to pick first. This is where your healthcare provider can help.
Let them know you’re interested in natural antidepressants. They can work with you to figure out what best fits your lifestyle and make suggestions from there.
Just like building strength takes time, so does taking care of your mental health. Be patient with the process and kind to yourself along the way.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Depression can hamper every aspect of your life. Cleveland Clinic experts are here to help manage your mental health so you can do the things you want.
Depression Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment