Broken Leg: Symptoms & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Broken Leg
Advertisement
Advertisement
Broken Leg
A broken leg is a fracture in any of the three bones in your leg. Providers sometimes call it a fractured leg. Your leg bones are strong, so it usually takes severe trauma to break them. You may need surgery and will need to wear a cast while your leg heals. It usually takes at least a few months for broken legs to heal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Healthcare providers classify broken legs based on which bone is broken and the fracture’s shape or pattern.
What is a broken leg?
A broken leg is a
bone fracture
(broken bone) in your leg. Healthcare providers also call broken legs fractured legs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are three bones in your leg, including your:
Femur (thigh bone)
.
Tibia (shin bone)
.
Fibula (calf bone)
.
Severe traumas (like a car accident or falling off a roof) can break all three of your leg bones at the same time. It’s also common to break your tibia and fibula during the same injury.
You might need surgery to repair a fractured leg, especially if you break your femur. Some people can recover without surgery and only need a splint or cast. You’ll need physical therapy to regain your leg’s strength and ability to move.
Types of broken legs
In addition to saying which of your leg bones is broken, a healthcare provider will assign the fracture a type or classification.
Providers classify some fractures by the break’s shape or pattern:
Transverse fracture
.
Oblique fracture
.
Spiral fracture
.
Segmental fracture
.
Comminuted fracture
.
Buckle (impacted) fracture
.
Some types of fractures are classified by how they happen:
Stress fracture
.
Avulsion fracture
.
For example, you might have a transverse
femur fracture
or a segmental
tibia fracture
. All of the different names and types are ways for your provider to quickly and specifically say which bone is broken, and what the injury did to it.
How common are broken legs?
The femur is the biggest and strongest bone in your body, and usually, only severe traumas can break it. Experts estimate that fewer than 30 in every 1,000 people worldwide break a femur each year.
Advertisement
Tibia and fibula fractures are some of the most common long bones people break. It’s very rare for someone to break their fibula on its own. Fibula fractures almost always happen at the same time as tibia fractures.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs and symptoms of a broken leg?
Most broken legs will look visibly different than usual. You’ll probably notice swelling, discoloration or bruising near the fracture that spreads (radiates) to the area around it. There will probably also be a bump you can feel or see. You might also be able to see bone poking through your skin.
The most common symptoms of a fractured leg include:
Pain.
Swelling.
Tenderness.
Not being able to move or use your leg.
Bruising
or discoloration.
A bump (deformity) that’s not usually on your leg.
Go to the emergency room right away if you’ve experienced trauma or think you have a broken bone.
What causes broken legs?
Traumas almost always cause broken legs. The most common causes include:
Falls (especially falls from high up, like off a ladder or roof).
Car accidents.
Sports injuries
.
Risk factors
Anyone can break their leg, but some people are more likely to, including:
Athletes who play contact sports.
People older than 65 (especially people who have an increased fall risk).
People with health conditions that affect their bone density (
metabolic bone diseases
).
People with osteoporosis or
osteopenia
are much more likely to experience bone fractures, especially from falls.
Osteoporosis
weakens bones, making them more susceptible to sudden and unexpected fractures. Many people don’t know they have osteoporosis until after it causes them to break a bone. There usually aren’t obvious symptoms.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do providers diagnose broken legs?
A healthcare provider will diagnose a broken leg with a
physical exam
and some imaging tests. Providers in the emergency room might diagnose the fracture if you’re taken to the ER after a trauma like a car accident.
Which tests will I need?
You’ll need at least one of a few imaging tests to take pictures of the fracture:
X-ray
:
An X-ray will confirm any fractures and show how damaged your bones are.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
:
Your provider might use an MRI to get a complete picture of the damage to your bones and the area around them. An MRI will show tissue like
cartilage
and
ligaments
around your bones, too.
Computed tomography (CT) scan
:
A CT scan will give your provider or surgeon a more detailed picture of your bones and the surrounding tissue than an X-ray.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for a broken leg?
How your provider treats a broken leg depends on which bone is broken and if you have any other injuries.
Advertisement
Immobilization
If the fracture is mild and your bones didn’t move far out of place (a non-displaced fracture), you might only need a
cast
or
splint
. How long you’ll need to wear one depends on which type of fracture you have. Most people need a cast for several weeks. You’ll need follow-up X-rays to make sure your bones are healing correctly.
Surgery
Some fractured legs require surgery — broken femurs almost always do.
The most common surgery is an open reduction with internal fixation. Your surgeon will realign (set) your bone to its correct position and then secure it in place so it can heal and grow back together. They usually perform what’s called an internal fixation, which means your surgeon inserts metal plates, screws or pins into your bone to hold it in place while it heals.
You might live with these pieces inserted in your bone forever. Some people need follow-up surgery to remove them.
Broken leg surgery complications
Fracture surgery complications are rare, but can include:
Acute compartment syndrome
(ACS): A buildup of pressure in your
muscles
may stop blood from getting to tissue, which can cause permanent muscle and
nerve
damage.
Malunion
: This happens when parts of a broken bone don’t line up correctly while healing.
Nonunion
: Your bone may not grow back together fully or at all.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does it take a broken leg to heal?
How long it takes your leg to heal depends on a few factors:
Which bone was broken.
What caused the fracture.
Which treatments you need.
Any other injuries you experienced.
Most broken legs need at least a few months to heal. Talk to your provider or surgeon about a timeline that fits your specific situation.
Broken leg recovery time
Even after your bone is healed, it might take a while before you’re fully recovered and able to resume all your usual activities. How long it takes depends on which of your leg bones is broken.
Most people who break their legs need several months of physical therapy. A
physical therapist
will help you regain your strength and range of motion (how far you can move your leg). Your provider or surgeon will tell you what to expect.
It can take up to a year to recover from a broken femur. It usually takes less time to recover from a tibia and/or fibula fracture.
Ask your provider when you can resume physical activities. You’ll need to move your leg to prevent stiffness as you heal, but don’t start playing sports, working out or using your leg for intense physical activities before your provider says it’s safe.
Prevention
How can I prevent a broken leg?
You may not be able to prevent a broken leg, especially because traumas you can’t plan for cause them. You might be able to reduce your risk of injuries by following these general safety tips:
Advertisement
Always wear your seatbelt.
Wear the right protective equipment for all activities and sports.
Make sure your home and workspace are free of clutter that could trip you or others.
Always use the proper tools or equipment at home to reach things. Never stand on chairs, tables or countertops.
Follow a diet and exercise plan that’ll help you maintain
good bone health
.
Talk to your provider about a
bone density test
if you’re older than 65 or if members of your biological family have osteoporosis.
Use a
cane
or
walker
if you have difficulty walking or have an increased risk of falls.
Living With
When should I go to the emergency room?
Go to the emergency room right away if you think you have a fractured leg, including any of the following symptoms:
Intense pain.
You can’t move your leg.
Your leg is noticeably different-looking or out of its usual place.
You can see bone through your skin.
Swelling.
New bruising that appears at the same time as any of these other symptoms.
What questions should I ask my provider?
Questions you can ask your provider include:
Which of my leg bones are broken?
Will I need surgery?
How long will I need to wear a cast?
How long will I need physical therapy?
When can I resume physical activities?
Additional Common Questions
How serious is a broken leg?
Breaking a bone in your leg is a serious injury. Any trauma that’s severe enough to break bones in your leg can cause other, potentially life-threatening injuries.
It’s extremely important to go to the emergency room right away if you think you have a broken leg. The sooner your injury is diagnosed and treated, the more likely it is to heal properly. Talk to your provider or surgeon about what to expect.
Can you still walk with a broken leg?
You can’t stand, walk or put weight on your leg with a broken femur or tibia.
Some people with a broken fibula can still walk because it isn’t a weight-bearing bone (it doesn’t support your body weight when you stand and move). But because it’s rare to break your fibula on its own, you shouldn’t try to walk or use it.
Your provider or surgeon will show you how to safely stand, walk and move while you’re wearing a cast or after surgery.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Broken legs can be scary, intense injuries. You’ll probably need to adjust to standing and moving differently for at least a few months while you’re recovering. That time is worth it. Most leg fractures heal very well without long-term consequences.
Physical therapy is a long, hard process. Take time to celebrate your progress and be proud of each step on your recovery journey.
Ask your healthcare provider or surgeon how to take care of your cast if you need one. They’ll give you tips on doing everyday activities like bathing and getting dressed.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/23/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment