COPD Exercises Can Keep You Out of the Hospital
Search
Advertisement
Advertisement
December 20, 2023
/
Health Conditions
/
Lung
Have COPD? Exercise Can Help Keep You Out of the Hospital
Get improved quality of life and breathe better
In general, regular
exercise
offers many health benefits.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
For people living with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (
COPD
) — a family of chronic, progressive lung diseases that includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema — staying active is especially important.
A COPD flare-up can be very serious and even land you in the emergency room. But you can take steps — literally — to avoid that urgent care trip by adding regular exercise to your weekly routine.
Let’s take a closer at exercise and COPD with pulmonologist
Humberto Choi, MD
.
Why is exercise important if I live with COPD?
Whether your COPD is mild, moderate or severe, regular exercise can
ease your symptoms
. These include shortness of breath, chronic cough, fatigue, wheezing and chest tightness, says Dr. Choi.
Exercise, especially aerobic exercise, can also boost your quality of life while providing benefits like:
Improved circulation in your body.
Higher
energy levels
so you can do more activities without becoming tired or short of breath.
Strengthening your heart and cardiovascular system.
Increased endurance.
Lower
blood pressure
.
Improved muscle tone and strength, plus better balance and joint flexibility.
Strengthened bones.
Reduced body fat and a healthier weight.
Less
stress
, tension, anxiety and
depression
.
A boost in self-image and self-esteem as you become more fit and healthy.
Better sleep to leave you more rested.
Advertisement
Exercise benefits for mild COPD
For mild COPD, try a light cardio program, such as walking or swimming. Dr. Choi suggests working up to a routine with 30 minutes of activity five days a week. This benefits you in three ways:
Your lungs won’t have to work as hard.
Regular exercise can lower your
resting heart rate and blood pressure
, so your body can use oxygen more efficiently.
You’ll be less susceptible to flare-ups.
Participating in cardio and strength training will help strengthen your chest muscles and improve your breathing.
You may lose weight.
The less you weigh, the easier it is for your lungs to do their job.
Exercise benefits for moderate to severe COPD
If your COPD is moderate or severe, a
pulmonary rehabilitation program
can be a life-changer. “The hardest part of my job is convincing people to go to pulmonary rehabilitation,” shares Dr. Choi. “But I’ve never had anybody who went to rehab who didn’t love it.”
In pulmonary rehab, an expert team helps create an exercise program tailored to your needs. A respiratory therapist trained in exercise physiology first tests your exercise capacity, or what level of activity you’re up for doing. Then, the team determines a routine that fits your areas.
Most pulmonary rehabilitation programs focus on breathing exercises, cardio exercise and resistance training, as well as proper use of inhalers. Typically, you participate in three weekly sessions for eight to 10 weeks.
Once you complete the program, your exercise capacity is reassessed. The team then helps you develop a year-long exercise plan to sustain your progress. Dr. Choi says the success of the program convinces people to stick with it.
“It is important for people to continue to apply everything they learned during the rehab program ­— especially continuing to exercise ­— so the benefit is long-term,” he adds.
The benefits of completing a pulmonary rehabilitation program are many and lasting. They include:
Fewer flare-ups.
Fewer visits to the ER or urgent care.
A better quality of life.
Less anxiety.
Decreased shortness of breath.
“You’ll feel better at the end of the program and learn more about your lung condition,” reassures Dr. Choi. “People also tend to have fewer hospitalizations than people who don’t complete rehabilitation.”
If you’re not a candidate for pulmonary rehabilitation,
regular exercise
such as walking will still benefit you.
What type of exercise is best?
So, are you ready to get started? Here are a few types of exercise that often work wonders if you have COPD.
Stretching
Stretching your arms and legs before and after exercising helps prepare your muscles for activity and helps prevent injury and muscle strains. Regular stretching also increases your range of motion and flexibility.
Advertisement
Cardiovascular or low-impact aerobic
This type of exercise strengthens your heart and lungs while improving your body’s ability to use oxygen. Over time,
aerobic exercise
can help decrease your heart rate and blood pressure while improving your breathing (as your heart won’t have to work as hard during exercise).
Aerobic exercises include:
Walking.
Jogging.
Jumping rope.
Bicycling (stationary or outdoor).
Cross-country skiing.
Skating.
Rowing
.
Low-impact water aerobics.
Strengthening
These are repeated muscle contractions (tightening) until your muscle becomes tired. Strengthening exercises for the upper body are especially beneficial for people living with COPD, as they help increase the strength of your respiratory muscles.
How often should you exercise?
The frequency of an exercise program is how often you exercise. In general, to achieve maximum benefits, you should gradually work up to an exercise session lasting 20 to 30 minutes at least three to four times a week. Exercising every other day will help you keep a regular exercise schedule.
Breathing during exercise
Learn three common breathing exercises that can help ease symptoms of COPD.
Always breathe slowly to save your breath. Inhale through your nose, keeping your mouth closed. This warms and moisturizes the air you breathe and at the same, time filters it.
Know this, too:
Breathing out slowly and gently through pursed lips permits more complete lung action as the oxygen you inhale is exchanged for the carbon dioxide you exhale.
Aim to inhale for two seconds and exhale for four seconds. You might find slightly shorter or longer periods are more natural for you. If so, just try to breathe out twice as long as you breathe in.
Exercise won’t harm your lungs. When you experience shortness of breath during an activity, this is an indication that your body needs more oxygen. If you slow your rate of breathing and concentrate on exhaling through pursed lips, you’ll restore oxygen to your system more rapidly.
Advertisement
Talk to your healthcare provider first
If you’re interested in pulmonary rehabilitation, ask your doctor to refer you to a program that follows American Heart Association guidelines. Choose either a COPD-specific program or one that’s staffed by people experienced in COPD.
Exercise can seem daunting, but it can make living with COPD much easier. “You may think you’re not up for it — but you won’t regret it,” encourages Dr. Choi.
Advertisement
Learn more about our
editorial process
.
Health Library
COPD: Exercise & Activity Guidelines
Overview
Health Library
COPD: Exercise & Activity Guidelines
Overview
Advertisement
Related Articles
April 26, 2024
/
Lung
What To Eat When You Have COPD
A change in diet won’t cure COPD — but getting to or maintaining a healthy weight will help
January 10, 2024
/
Lung
Understanding the Difference Between Asthma and COPD
Both conditions have similar symptoms, but different causes and treatments
January 5, 2024
/
Lung
Preventing COPD Exacerbations and Flare-Ups
You can reduce your chances of a flare-up by quitting smoking, avoiding respiratory infections and following your doctor’s orders
September 25, 2023
/
Lung
Get the Facts About COPD and Living With the Disease
Quitting smoking helps immediately, but this disease doesn’t only affect people who smoke
October 13, 2025
/
Exercise & Fitness
Easy Does It: Why You Should Target Zone 2 Cardio Workouts
Lower-intensity workouts can deliver high-quality health and fitness results
October 7, 2025
/
Exercise & Fitness
Your Simple Guide to Progressive Overload Training
Incremental changes in your exercise routine can improve your strength and endurance over time
October 6, 2025
/
Exercise & Fitness
What To Know About Exercise and Heart Rate Zones
Understanding heart rate zones can help you tailor your workout to reach your goals
October 1, 2025
/
Allergies
Indoor Air Quality: Why It Matters and How To Improve It
Open the windows, keep a clean house and consider putting in preventive features like carbon monoxide detectors
Trending Topics
Sleep
Breathing Problems? Try These Sleep Positions
If you’re feeling short of breath, sleep can be tough — propping yourself up or sleeping on your side may help
Mental Health
What Is Anxious Attachment Style — and Do You Have It?
If you fear the unknown or find yourself needing reassurance often, you may identify with this attachment style
Nutrition
Are Prebiotic Sodas Good for You?
If you’re looking to boost your gut health, it’s better to get fiber from whole foods
Health Categories to Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Ad
Rendered:
Fri Oct 31 2025 11:28:38 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)