Vaginal Hematoma: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vaginal Hematoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vaginal Hematoma
A vaginal hematoma is a collection of blood under the skin of your vulva. Hematomas occur due to injury or damage to your genital area, usually during childbirth. Most hematomas heal on their own, but large or growing hematomas may require surgery to drain them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Vaginal Hematoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Is a Vaginal Hematoma?
A vaginal hematoma is when blood collects in the tissues of your
vagina
and
vulva
(outer part of your vagina). A hematoma is a collection of
blood
under your skin that results from a broken
blood vessel
. They typically happen due to injury.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hematomas are different from
bruises
. A hematoma is a more serious bruise because it typically involves damage to larger blood vessels. A hematoma is more likely to swell and turn a deeper shade of red, blue or purple. They’re typically more painful, too.
A vaginal hematoma isn’t usually a serious problem. It happens most often due to
childbirth
, but it can also happen any time an injury damages your vulva. Most hematomas are temporary and go away on their own. Still, let your healthcare provider know if you have a hematoma on your vaginal area. A hematoma that’s large or growing quickly may need medical attention.
Vaginal hematomas are rare. Between
1 in 300 to 1 in 1,000
of all deliveries result in a vaginal hematoma.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of a vaginal hematoma?
A hematoma can cause different symptoms depending on where it is and how big it is. Some of the symptoms of a hematoma are:
Swelling
. The affected tissue will swell up or become puffy.
Skin discoloration
. Depending on your skin color, the hematoma may appear shades of red, purple or blue. Over time, the discoloration will fade to yellow.
Pain
. The pressure from the pooled blood may give you pain that ranges from mild to severe. It usually depends on how large the blood vessel was or how bad the original injury is.
Advertisement
What causes a hematoma on your vagina?
All hematomas form due to an injured blood vessel. Injuries can occur to the blood vessels in your genital region just like they can occur in your legs or arms. The injury breaks down the walls of the blood vessel, causing blood to spill into the surrounding tissues.
Some of the most common causes of a vaginal hematoma are:
Vaginal childbirth
due to factors like pushing (especially a long second stage of labor), stretching the birth canal,
vaginal tears
or from use of medical tools like
forceps
Trauma from a fall or car accident
Sports like horseback riding, cycling, gymnastics or other activities that involve straddling an object
Intense sexual intercourse
What are the risk factors for vaginal hematomas?
Anyone with a vagina can get a vaginal hematoma. Risk factors for vaginal hematomas are any type of activity that could possibly injure or damage your vagina.
Childbirth is the biggest risk factor, especially if your baby has
macrosomia
or your
obstetrician
needs to use an instrument like forceps to deliver your baby. Having an
episiotomy
can also increase your risk.
Other risk factors unrelated to childbirth include vulvar surgery or
sexual assault
(intercourse without consent).
What are the complications of vaginal hematomas?
Most vaginal hematomas don’t cause long-term problems. But, depending on the size and location of the hematoma, there can be complications. Some of the possible complications are:
Pain
. Your pain can last several days or weeks, depending on how long it takes for the hematoma to heal. It could affect your ability to move or do things you enjoy.
Blood loss
. Large hematomas can lead to more blood loss, which could affect things like your
heart rate
and
blood pressure
.
Infection
. Sitting or pooling blood has the potential to become a bacterial infection.
Necrosis
. This is when the tissue in the affected area dies due to either not having blood supply or from damage/injury.
Urinary problems
. A hematoma that blocks or obstructs your
urethra
can make it hard to pee.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is a vaginal hematoma diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can usually diagnose a vaginal hematoma by looking at it. They may order an
ultrasound
,
CT scan
or
MRI
to see the size of the hematoma or if it’s getting larger. If you haven’t recently given birth, your provider may ask you about your health history or potential causes of the hematoma.
Management and Treatment
How is a vaginal hematoma treated?
Treatment usually depends on the location and size of the hematoma. A small hematoma will heal on its own with at-home treatment within one to three weeks. At-home treatment could include things like:
Applying a cold compress to the hematoma several times each day
Taking over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers like
ibuprofen
Resting or staying off your feet to let the area heal
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider may recommend surgery to drain a hematoma if it’s large, growing or causing intense pain. Surgery to drain a hematoma involves your provider:
Numbing the area with a
local anesthetic
Making a small cut (incision) into the hematoma to drain the blood through a tube
Closing the incision with stitches
Most people recover within a few days of surgery and can return to their typical activities. Complete healing of the hematoma, including skin discoloration, can take a few weeks.
Since everyone is different, ask your healthcare provider what you can expect from the treatment method they suggest.
When should you drain a vulvar hematoma?
Healthcare providers generally wait until a hematoma is larger than 10 centimeters in diameter before recommending surgery. This isn’t a hard and fast rule, but providers believe if the hematoma isn’t growing and isn’t causing uncomfortable symptoms, surgery may not be necessary. Only your healthcare provider can tell you what’s best for your situation.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a vaginal hematoma?
Most make a complete recovery from a vulvar hematoma. Complications and long-term problems from a hematoma on your vagina or vulva are rare.
Prevention
Can you prevent a vaginal hematoma?
Some causes of vaginal hematoma are hard to prevent. You can’t anticipate a fall or an accident. But there are some activities that increase your risk of injury to your vaginal area that you can anticipate. Avoiding those activities can lower your risk of a vaginal hematoma. Activities that involve repeat force to your vulva — like riding a horse, for example — can increase your risk of injury to your vagina.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you have an injury to your vagina and believe you developed a hematoma. They’ll want to examine you and make sure the injury isn’t serious and won’t result in blood loss or other complications.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Seeing a hematoma on your vagina can be alarming. But in most cases, it looks worse than it is. A hematoma is an injury to the blood vessels under your skin, most often from childbirth (but not always). Most vaginal hematomas heal on their own with cold compresses, rest and other at-home treatments. If your healthcare provider is worried about the size of the hematoma or if it’s causing you a great deal of pain, they may recommend surgery to drain it.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment