Giant Cell Arteritis (Temporal Arteritis): Signs & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Giant Cell Arteritis (Formerly Temporal Arteritis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Giant Cell Arteritis (Formerly Temporal Arteritis)
Giant cell arteritis is a kind of vasculitis, which is inflammation of your blood vessels. It’s also known as temporal arteritis. With this type of vasculitis, inflammation causes your large arteries to swell and narrow, which restricts blood flow. The most common symptom of giant cell arteritis is a throbbing headache. Glucocorticoids can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
Temporal arteritis causes inflammation in your temporal arteries (the blood vessels near your temples).
What is giant cell arteritis?
Giant cell arteritis (GCA), previously known as temporal arteritis, is a form of
vasculitis
(inflammation of your
blood vessels
). It affects the large blood vessels in your body, particularly the
arteries
in your head, neck and arms. These arteries become inflamed, swollen and constricted (narrowed).
Inflammation
and narrowing of these arteries can interrupt their blood flow, which can damage vital organs and tissues.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your temporal arteries, which run along your temples, supply blood to your scalp, jaw muscles and the
optic nerve
in your eye. When GCA involves these arteries, it can lead to various complications, including
blindness
. GCA can also involve the largest blood vessels in the body, like your
aorta
and its branches. Inflammation in your aorta (
aortitis
) can lead to serious health problems.
Giant cell arteritis commonly occurs together with another inflammatory condition called
polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR)
.
Is GCA a serious condition?
Yes. If not diagnosed and treated quickly, giant cell arteritis can cause:
Damage to your eyesight, including
sudden vision loss
or blindness in one or both eyes
Damage to your blood vessels, like an
aneurysm
(enlargement or widening of a blood vessel that puts it at risk of bursting)
Other disorders, including
stroke
or
transient ischemic attacks
(“mini-strokes”)
How common is GCA?
GCA is one of the most common forms of vasculitis, but it’s a relatively rare condition, affecting about 19-23 out of every 100,000 people in the United States.
Symptoms and Causes
What are giant cell (temporal) arteritis symptoms?
The most common symptom of giant cell arteritis is a throbbing, continuous
headache
on one or both sides of your forehead. Other symptoms may include:
Tenderness at your scalp or temples
Jaw pain
that becomes worse with chewing
Vision problems, like
double vision
,
blurry vision
or temporary vision loss
Fatigue
Fever
Loss of appetite
or weight loss
Muscle aches
in your upper arms and shoulders, hips, upper thighs, lower back and buttocks
Advertisement
GCA often occurs together with another condition called polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR). This is an inflammatory condition that causes significant stiffness and pain in your shoulders and hips. PMR can occur by itself (and is far more common on its own than GCA is). But up to 40-60% of people with GCA have PMR, and 10-20% of people with isolated PMR, can go on to develop GCA.
What causes giant cell arteritis?
Researchers don’t know the exact cause of giant cell arteritis, but many believe it’s an
autoimmune or autoinflammatory disease
. This means your body’s immune system attacks your healthy blood vessels. Because the condition mainly affects people as they age, some believe it could be linked to the aging process. They also believe genetics and environmental factors that stress your immune system may play a role.
Who does GCA affect?
Anyone can get GCA, but it’s most common in:
Older people
. GCA almost always affects people over the age of 50, and it seems to become more common as people age. It’s most common between the ages of 70 and 80.
Females
.
Females
experience the condition more often than males. However, males are more likely to experience blindness due to the condition.
White people
. GCA predominantly affects people of Northern European ancestry, more often than any other ethnic or racial group.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is giant cell arteritis diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will ask about your medical history and perform a
physical examination
. They’ll check to see if your pulses are weak in your arms and legs. They’ll also examine your head to look for scalp tenderness or swelling of your temporal arteries.
What tests will be done to diagnose GCA?
Your healthcare provider will first order
blood tests
, like
erythrocyte sedimentation rate
and
C-reactive protein
, to measure how much inflammation you have in your body. They may also test for
anemia
by measuring your
hemoglobin
levels (the part of your
red blood cells
that carries oxygen).
If they suspect giant cell (temporal) arteritis, your provider may order a temporal artery ultrasound or temporal artery
biopsy
. During a biopsy, a skilled healthcare provider removes a small piece of your artery. They send it to a
pathologist
to examine under a microscope and look for evidence of inflammation (vasculitis).
Other tests that are sometimes necessary include:
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
Ultrasound
s of the large arteries
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for giant cell (temporal) arteritis?
Giant cell arteritis treatment should begin immediately to prevent vision loss. The primary treatment is a
glucocorticoid
, usually
prednisone
. You’ll likely start taking it at a dose of 40 mg to 60 mg per day (by mouth), and your provider will gradually reduce your dosage. If you already have vision loss or other vision symptoms, your provider may treat you with a high dose of glucocorticoids through a catheter in your vein (IV).
Advertisement
Since glucocorticoids can cause serious side effects, your provider will monitor your response to these medications closely. Because glucocorticoids
suppress your immune system
, side effects can include more frequent and more severe
infections
. They can also
make your bones thinner
, which raises your risk of
fractures
.
Other side effects may include:
Cataracts
High blood pressure
High blood sugar
Insomnia
Mood swings
Muscle loss and weakness
, particularly in your legs
Swelling
, especially in your face and legs
Weight gain
Your provider may want to
test your bone density
while you’re on glucocorticoids to monitor you for bone thinning. They might recommend treatments to keep your bones strong, like exercises,
calcium and vitamin D supplements
and possibly
medications to prevent osteoporosis
.
In 2017, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a new
biologic medication
called tocilizumab (Actemra®) for the treatment of GCA. This medication is given as an injection (under your skin) or through an IV (in your vein). It can help decrease your need for glucocorticoids. Tocilizumab is associated with other side effects that your provider will discuss with you.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re experiencing symptoms of GCA or infection, or symptoms that are new for you, call your healthcare provider right away. Seeing your provider frequently and getting ongoing lab and imaging tests can help them detect a relapse early.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask your healthcare provider include:
What treatments do you recommend?
What side effects of the treatment should I watch out for?
What can I do to reduce side effects of my treatment?
What complications can this condition cause?
How will my condition be monitored?
What are the features of a relapse?
What symptoms should I contact you for?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy of someone with giant cell arteritis?
Having GCA hasn’t been found to reduce life expectancy, although many different factors can affect this. With early diagnosis and treatment, the outlook is good, and symptoms often start to improve within days.
Without early treatment, the GCA can lead to permanent vision loss, and life-threatening complications, such as aneurysms and stroke. It’s important to see your healthcare provider right away if you experience any of the symptoms associated with GCA.
Once you’ve started treatment, your primary risk is from the side effects of treatment. Also, even with effective treatment and initial improvement, GCA can sometimes return (relapse). Researchers don’t know why relapses occur.
How do I take care of myself while living with giant cell arteritis?
Living with GCA can be challenging. To manage your condition and the side effects that you may experience from glucocorticoids, make sure that you:
Eat healthy, nutritious foods, like lean meats, whole grains and fresh fruits and vegetables
Get enough vitamin D and calcium to protect your bones
Stay active with some sort of physical activity for at least 30 minutes a day
Get at least seven to eight hours of sleep every night
Take your prescribed medications as directed
Visit your healthcare provider regularly
Take steps to reduce your risk of infection
Advertisement
What should I avoid with GCA?
There are certain things you should avoid if you have GCA. These include:
Factors that increase your risk of getting sick
. The medications used to treat GCA weaken your immune system, putting you at greater risk of infection. To avoid getting sick, make sure to wash your hands, stay away from people who are sick and ask your healthcare provider about other measures that may decrease your risk of infection.
Smoking
. Smoking can increase your risk of developing GCA. Your blood vessel health will improve right away when you quit, and it’ll have lifelong benefits.
Drinking alcohol
. Alcohol can have a negative effect on your heart and blood vessel health. It can also speed up bone loss, and it may interact with medications you have to take for your condition.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Giant cell arteritis (formerly temporal cell arteritis) can be a challenging condition to live with, but people do better when it’s detected early and followed regularly by a skilled practitioner. Symptoms of the condition and side effects of the treatment can take a great toll on your sense of well-being. It can also affect your work and many other aspects of your life. But you don’t have to go through it alone. Ask your healthcare provider to help you find a support group. Sharing stories and tips with others experiencing GCA may help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment