Tourette Syndrome: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tourette Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tourette Syndrome
Tourette syndrome is a disorder that causes uncontrollable movements and vocal sounds called tics. It often shows up in early childhood and improves in adulthood. Tics can be mild or severe. Medication and therapy can help reduce tics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Movement Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Tourette Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Tourette Syndrome?
Tourette syndrome (TS) is a neurological disorder that affects your
brain
and
nerves
. It causes you to make sudden movements or sounds called
tics
. Tics are involuntary, so you can’t control or prevent them. Motor tics involve body movements, like eye blinking or shoulder shrugging. Vocal tics involve your voice, like sniffing or throat clearing. Motor tics tend to develop before vocal tics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Tourette syndrome, or Tourette’s, usually starts in early childhood. Most of the time, tics become milder and occur less frequently in late adolescence and adulthood. Tourette syndrome is the most severe type of tic disorder.
Tourette syndrome affects
1 out of every 160 children
, which means that approximately 300,000 children in the U.S. have the condition.
Symptoms and Causes
Tourette syndrome (TS) is a neurological disorder that affects your brain and nerves, and causes you to make sudden movements or sounds called tics.
Symptoms of Tourette syndrome
The most common Tourette syndrome symptoms are motor and/or vocal tics. Tics usually start between the ages of 5 and 7 and peak around age 12.
Tics are either simple or complex:
Simple tics
: Simple tics are quick, repeated movements that only involve a few muscle groups. Shoulder shrugging and throat clearing are simple vocal tics.
Complex tics
: Complex tics involve many movements and muscle groups. Jumping and repeating certain words or phrases are complex vocal tics.
Tourette syndrome causes
Researchers don’t know the exact cause of Tourette syndrome. But the condition tends to run in families, so they believe
genes
may play a role. Issues with how your brain breaks down (metabolizes) neurotransmitters may also contribute to Tourette syndrome. Neurotransmitters, like
dopamine
, are chemicals in your brain that regulate behavior and movement.
Risk factors
Risk factors for Tourette syndrome may include:
Advertisement
Sex
:
Males
are 3 to 4 times more likely to develop Tourette syndrome.
Biological family history
: Parents may pass down Tourette syndrome to children through genes (inherited).
Prenatal health
: Children born to people who
smoked
or had health complications during pregnancy may be at a higher risk for Tourette syndrome.
Low birth weight
may also increase the chances of Tourette syndrome.
Does Tourette’s occur with other health conditions?
Most people with Tourette’s have other health conditions. These are usually
mental
or behavioral health disorders, including:
Anxiety disorders
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
Depression
Learning disabilities
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Tourette syndrome
To diagnose Tourette syndrome, a provider checks when the tics started. They should begin before age 18. Your child must have both motor and vocal tics for over a year.
There isn’t a
blood test
or imaging exam that can detect Tourette syndrome. Instead, your child’s provider will carefully review their medical history and symptoms.
Their provider may also do tests to rule out other conditions that could be causing tics.
Management and Treatment
Tourette syndrome treatment
Mild tics that don’t affect your child’s everyday activities might not need treatment. But severe tics can make it hard to function at work, school or in social situations. Some tics can even lead to self-injury. In these cases, Tourette syndrome treatment, including medication or
behavioral therapy
, may help.
Tourette syndrome medication
For mild tics, your child’s healthcare provider may recommend medications that typically treat high blood pressure. These medications include
clonidine
and
guanfacine
.
For more severe tics, your child’s provider may recommend neuroleptics (
antipsychotic medication
). Neuroleptics are drugs that limit the activity of dopamine in your brain. Dopamine is a chemical that can increase tics.
Other medications can help manage conditions that occur with Tourette’s, like ADHD or OCD.
Tourette syndrome therapy
The tics associated with Tourette’s are involuntary, so they aren’t something you or your child can control. But new therapies help people manage tics and reduce their negative effects.
Comprehensive behavioral intervention for tics (CBIT) helps people:
Recognize tics
: Sometimes, people feel a sensation right before a tic occurs, called a premonitory urge. By recognizing this urge, they may be able to mask or suppress the tic.
Respond to tics
: Doing a new and different action when a tic occurs is a “competing response.” A voluntary action (shutting your eyes) limits the involuntary action (blinking).
Reduce tics
: Excitement or anxiety tends to make tics worse. Staying calm and avoiding stressful situations may reduce the frequency of tics.
Advertisement
When should I contact my healthcare provider about Tourette syndrome?
Contact a healthcare provider right away if someone with Tourette syndrome:
Becomes violent
Injures themselves
Talks about suicide
You can call or text the
Suicide and Crisis Lifeline
at 988.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Movement Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for someone living with Tourette syndrome?
There’s no cure for Tourette syndrome. The condition usually improves by early adulthood. Tics may still occur, but most adults don’t need to continue medication or therapy.
What is the life expectancy of someone with Tourette’s syndrome?
People with Tourette syndrome have a typical life expectancy. Tourette syndrome isn’t a progressive condition — it doesn’t get worse over time. In many cases, the condition is mild and the tics go away on their own.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Tics among children aren’t uncommon, and they’re usually harmless. But if you notice your child’s tics becoming more severe or frequent, it’s possible they may have Tourette syndrome (TS). If you can, take a video of your child performing their tic so you can show it to their healthcare provider. Your child’s provider can determine if Tourette’s is affecting your child and recommend appropriate treatment.
It’s important to remember that your child can’t control their tics. Their tics make them unique. Make your friends, loved ones and child’s teachers aware of your child’s tics so they understand the condition. And work with your child’s provider to get them the best possible treatment to manage their tics.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Parkinson’s disease, essential tremor and dystonia are common movement disorders. And Cleveland Clinic has the expert care and support you need to manage them.
Movement Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment