Superior Vena Cava Syndrome (SVCS)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Superior Vena Cava Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Superior Vena Cava Syndrome
Superior vena cava syndrome is when something presses on or blocks a big vein in your chest, disrupting blood flow. Lung cancer and certain implanted medical devices are the most common causes.  Early signs include swelling and bulging veins in your upper body. Providers treat this condition with procedures, medications and (rarely) surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Superior Vena Cava Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Superior Vena Cava Syndrome?
Superior vena cava syndrome — also known as SVC syndrome or SVCS — is a group of symptoms that occur when blood can’t flow normally through a large
vein
in your chest. This vein, called your superior
vena cava
, delivers blood from your upper body to your
heart
. But certain things — like
tumors
or
blood clots
— can press on or block this vein.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When this happens, blood backs up in your superior vena cava. Sometimes, blood can reroute through nearby veins — like cars that detour around a traffic jam. This detour allows some blood to reach your heart. But a sudden or severe blockage can greatly disrupt
blood flow
and cause life-threatening symptoms.
Types of SVC syndrome
There are two types of superior vena cava syndrome. The difference is what causes your symptoms:
Malignant SVC syndrome
. This means
cancer
is the cause. For example, a tumor might press on your vein, limiting blood flow. About 7 in 10 cases of SVC syndrome are malignant.
Benign SVC syndrome
. This means the cause is something other than cancer. About 3 in 10 cases are benign.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of superior vena cava syndrome
SVC syndrome signs and symptoms include:
Swelling
in your face, neck, upper chest and/or arms — this is often the earliest sign
Bulging veins
in your neck or chest — this is also an early sign
Blurred vision
Cough
Headache
Hoarse voice
Lightheadedness or
fainting
Shortness of breath
These symptoms might get worse when you lie flat on your back.
SVC syndrome causes
Cancer is a major cause of superior vena cava syndrome. Specific types of cancer that can cause it include:
Lung cancer
(most common)
Lymphoma
Breast cancer
that spreads to lymph nodes in your
mediastinum
Mesothelioma
Thymoma
Advertisement
Benign causes include:
Implanted medical devices (most common)
Complications of medical procedures
Goiter
Infection (
syphilis
or
tuberculosis
)
Noncancerous tumors
Sarcoidosis
Scar tissue from radiation therapy or unknown causes
Most benign cases of superior vena cava syndrome occur as complications from an implanted medical device. For example, wires or catheters can irritate your vein. This can lead to
inflammation
, scarring and blood clot formation. Devices that can cause SVCS include:
Central venous catheters
Defibrillators
Hemodialysis
catheters
Pacemakers
It’s important to know that most people with these devices never get SVC syndrome. But the risk can vary based on the device type and how long it’s in the vessel.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers diagnose SVC syndrome by doing a
physical exam
and running some tests. Imaging tests can show if blood is flowing normally through your superior vena cava or detouring around a blockage.
Tests you may need include:
Chest X-ray
CT scan
Vascular ultrasound
Venogram
Management and Treatment
How do you fix superior vena cava syndrome?
Treatment depends on the cause of SVCS and the severity of your symptoms. Possible treatments for SVC syndrome include:
A procedure to insert
stents
(tiny tubes) to prop open your vein (endovascular stenting)
A procedure to remove or replace a device that’s causing issues
Medicines
through an IV or by mouth to get rid of blood clots
Radiation therapy
or
chemotherapy
to get rid of cancerous tumors
Surgery to remove tumors
Surgery to reroute blood flow (rare)
These treatments can help improve blood flow to your heart. You may need more than one treatment. Your provider will explain which treatments are best for you and the benefits and risks.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call your provider if you have symptoms of SVC syndrome. They’ll make sure you get the care you need.
You’ll likely need follow-up appointments with your provider after treatment. Follow the schedule your provider gives you. These visits are important and allow your provider to check the health of your
blood vessels
.
When to seek emergency care
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have these symptoms of severe or possibly life-threatening superior vena cava syndrome:
Dizziness
or fainting
A
high-pitched sound
when you breathe in or out
Changes to your thinking
and awareness of your surroundings (like confusion or reduced alertness)
These symptoms can occur if there’s swelling of your
brain
or
airways
, or your major
organs
aren’t getting
enough blood
. You need immediate medical care.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Prognosis
(outlook) with superior vena cava syndrome varies widely, depending on its cause and severity. In some cases, treating the underlying problem can
cure
SVC syndrome. Rarely, SVC syndrome is fatal.
Your healthcare provider can give you the most accurate sense of what you can expect. The condition that caused your SVC syndrome may affect your
life expectancy
. People with benign SVC syndrome typically live longer than those with malignant forms.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Superior vena cava syndrome can cause a lot of stress. Maybe you’re already living with a cancer diagnosis, and these new symptoms are making you worry about your prognosis. Or maybe a medical device that’s giving you lifesaving treatment is suddenly causing these issues.
Whatever your situation, your healthcare provider is prepared to take care of you. They’ll explain what’s causing your symptoms and offer treatments that can help. Ask them any questions that come to mind. Make sure you understand what treatment will involve and when you should return for follow-up visits.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment