Shoulder Impingement Syndrome (Rotator Cuff Tendinitis)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Shoulder Impingement Syndrome (Rotator Cuff Tendinitis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Shoulder Impingement Syndrome (Rotator Cuff Tendinitis)
Shoulder impingement happens when bones in your shoulder rub against or pinch your rotator cuff. It happens when swelling in your shoulder makes your rotator cuff too big to fit comfortably between your bones. There are a few different types, including rotator cuff tendinitis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rotator Cuff Injuries Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Shoulder Impingement Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Shoulder Impingement Syndrome?
Shoulder impingement is painful pinching inside your shoulder, especially when you move it. It happens when the top outer edge of your shoulder blade squeezes your rotator cuff beneath it. Healthcare providers sometimes also call it impingement syndrome or shoulder impingement syndrome. Impingement is the medical term for pinching or rubbing together inside a joint.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
rotator cuff
is a group of four muscles that connects your shoulder blade to your upper arm bone. You use it to raise your arm overhead. And to rotate your arm toward or away from your body.
Experts estimate that shoulder impingement causes around half of all cases of shoulder pain. It’s especially common among athletes and people who do physically demanding work. Visit a healthcare provider if you’re experiencing shoulder pain or can’t move your shoulder comfortably.
Types of shoulder impingement
A healthcare provider might classify shoulder impingement as a more specific issue, including:
Rotator cuff tendinitis:
Tendinitis
is swelling or irritation of a tendon. Four tendons support your rotator cuff and help it move your shoulder joint. Anything that irritates or damages them can cause swelling and impingement.
Shoulder bursitis
:
Bursitis is inflammation of a bursa. These are fluid-filled sacs that line some of your joints. A bursa cushions the space between your rotator cuff tendons and shoulder blade. Swelling from bursitis can lead to impingement.
Acromion deformity:
The top of your shoulder blade is called the acromion. It’s usually flat. But it can rub or pinch your rotator cuff if it’s curved or hooked. Yours might have a naturally different shape from birth. You might also develop
bone spurs
on it as you age.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of shoulder impingement syndrome
Shoulder pain is the most common symptom. The pain usually feels like it comes from the front of your shoulder. It may also:
Make your shoulder feel tender
Spread from the front of your shoulder to the side of your arm
Get worse at night or affect your sleep
Pain may get worse during certain movements or positions, including when you:
Extend your arm up, above your head
Lift and lower your arm
Reach for something
Lay on the injured side of your body
Reach behind your back, like twisting to unzip a purse or backpack
Rotator cuff tendinitis symptoms
You might experience different symptoms depending on which type of shoulder impingement you have. For example, rotator cuff tendinitis symptoms can also include:
Stiffness
Swelling
Skin discoloration
Hearing or feeling a crack or pop when you move your shoulder
Shoulder impingement causes
Shoulder impingement is almost always an
overuse injury
. This means it happens over time when an activity or motion repeatedly puts too much stress on your shoulder.
Overhead rotation motions where you twist and turn your shoulders with your arms raised can cause impingement. Training for a sport or doing the same type of movement all day at work are the most common causes.
You might have shoulder impingement without an obvious cause. It’s also possible for trauma — like a fall, car accident or sports injury — to cause sudden impingement.
Shoulder impingement risk factors
Anyone can experience shoulder impingement. Athletes and people who do physical work are more likely to. It usually develops slowly over weeks or months.
Sports that can cause shoulder impingement include:
Swimming
Baseball
Volleyball
Tennis
Any physical job that puts pressure on your shoulders can lead to impingement, including:
Construction
Painting
Washing windows
Hanging wallpaper or drywall
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will diagnose shoulder impingement with a physical exam. They’ll examine your shoulder and check your range of motion. Tell your provider what you were doing when you first noticed symptoms. Tell them about your hobbies, work or sports if you use your shoulders a lot.
Your provider might use imaging tests, including:
X-rays
MRI
Ultrasound
These will help your provider see the bones and tissue in your shoulder. They’ll also help them rule out other causes of shoulder pain, including:
Rotator cuff tears
Biceps tendon injuries
Shoulder arthritis
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Your provider will suggest treatments that manage the symptoms while your shoulder heals. The most common shoulder impingement treatments include:
Rest:
You’ll need to take break from physical activity, especially the sport or activity that caused impingement.
Physical therapy:
A physical therapist will give you stretches and exercises to strengthen your shoulder and improve its range of motion. They’ll help you strengthen the muscles in your rotator cuff as your shoulder heals.
Icing:
Apply ice or a cold pack to your shoulder. Wrap ice packs in a thin towel to avoid putting them directly on your skin. Your provider will tell you how often you should ice your shoulder.
Pain relievers:
Over-the-counter
NSAIDs
can relieve pain and reduce swelling. Don’t take them for more than 10 days in a row without talking to your provider.
Corticosteroids
:
These are prescription anti-inflammatory medications. You may need
cortisone shots
in your shoulder joint.
Surgery:
Your provider might recommend surgery if other treatments don’t work. Your surgeon might remove part of your shoulder blade to create more space for your rotator cuff.
Advertisement
Rotator cuff tendinitis treatments usually include all the same treatments for other types of shoulder impingement. Your provider will suggest the best ways to help your rotator cuff tendons heal.
Does rotator cuff tendinitis ever go away?
Yes, rotator cuff tendinitis is very treatable. All types of shoulder impingement are. But don’t ignore pain or other symptoms. Impingement can get worse the longer it’s not treated. This can make a minor injury into a bigger problem that takes longer to heal.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rotator Cuff Injuries Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Recover times vary. It depends on what caused the impingement. And its severity.
People usually start feeling better a few weeks after starting treatment. But it can take a few months for your shoulder to heal completely. You may need treatment and rehab for up to a year.
Don’t resume physical activities before your healthcare provider says it’s safe. You’re more likely to reinjure your shoulder if you use it too soon. This can increase your risk of more severe injuries like a
torn rotator cuff
.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Shoulder impingement can be painful and annoying — especially if it makes you miss weeks of your favorite sport or activity. But don’t ignore symptoms like pain, tenderness or difficulty moving your shoulder. The sooner you get your shoulder examined by a healthcare provider, the sooner you can get back to doing what you love safely.
Advertisement
Whether you have rotator cuff tendinitis, bursitis or a structural issue with your shoulder bones, your provider will suggest a combination of treatments that relieves your symptoms and restores your normal range of motion.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a sore shoulder that won’t go away? Cleveland Clinic offers minimally invasive treatments for painful rotator cuff injuries.
Rotator Cuff Injuries Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/11/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment