Ureteral Stent: Purpose, Procedure, Results & Removal
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Ureteral Stents
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ureteral Stents
Ureteral stents hold your ureters open to allow pee to flow easily from your kidneys into your bladder. You may need a ureteral stent to treat an obstruction, narrowed ureter or tumor. Most ureteral stents are temporary. But some people with long-lasting problems might need it for months or years.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is a ureteral stent?
Ureteral stents are thin, flexible silicone or polyurethane (plastic) tubes that hold your ureters open. Ureters are part of your
urinary system
. They’re narrow tubes of muscle that carry urine (pee) from your
kidneys
to your
urinary bladder
. Most people have two ureters — one ureter connects to each kidney, and each one connects to one side of the bladder. Healthcare providers place ureteral stents to prevent or treat blockages (
ureteral obstructions
). They may put a stent into one or both ureters, depending on the reason for the stenting.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Ureteral stents are about 10 to 15 inches long and about a quarter inch in diameter. They line the entire length of your ureter to keep it open. The top part of a ureteral stent has a coil that sits inside your kidney. The bottom part has a loop that sits inside your bladder.
Other names for a ureteral stent include:
Urinary stent
Ureteric stent
Double-J stent
What is the reason for a ureteral stent?
Ureteral obstructions prevent pee from draining. A ureteral stent opens the ureter so pee can easily move from your kidney to your bladder.
Healthcare providers most commonly use ureteral stents to:
Allow pee to bypass a
kidney stone
(renal calculi) that slows or stops pee flow
Prevent a new blockage from developing after kidney stone treatment
Prevent a blockage from postoperative swelling after kidney stone removal
Providers also use ureteral stents to treat obstructions due to:
Blood clots
Inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD)
Scar tissue
buildup from endometriosis or other conditions
Tumors
Ureteral stones
Ureteral junction obstruction
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for ureteral stenting?
Before the procedure, a healthcare provider will explain how they’ll use a ureteral stent to treat your condition and ask for your
consent
. They’ll perform a
physical exam
to ensure you’re healthy enough for surgery and may ask you to:
Advertisement
Provide your health history
List all medications you’re taking, including vitamins and
herbal supplements
— some of these may increase your risk of bleeding
List all of your
allergies
Take
blood tests
(
estimated glomerular filtration rate
or eGFR) to check how well your kidneys work
Not eat or drink (fast) for at least eight hours before the procedure, but if you must take certain medications, take them with a small sip of water
Is a ureteral stent a major surgery?
Ureteral stenting is typically a
minimally invasive urological surgery
. In most cases, it’s an outpatient procedure. That means you’ll go home the same day you have the procedure. But you must have a family member or friend drive you home.
Who makes up my ureteral stenting care team?
In general, the following healthcare providers make up your ureteral stenting care team:
Urologist
Anesthesiologist
Nurses
What happens during ureteral stenting?
A urologist usually performs ureteral stenting in a hospital or surgical center while you’re under general
anesthesia
. General anesthesia makes you temporarily fall asleep so you won’t feel pain or be aware of anything else in the operating room during the procedure. You’ll lie on your back for the procedure.
Once you’re asleep, the urologist will:
Use an imaging test, such as
fluoroscopy
or a
kidney ultrasound
, to locate the obstruction and guide the procedure
Insert a long, thin medical tool with a camera at the end (
cystoscope
) through your
urethra
and into your bladder
Thread a thin, flexible wire (guidewire) through the cystoscope into the blocked ureter
Use the guidewire to place the ureteral stent
Gently remove the guidewire and cystoscope, leaving the stent in place
The coiled end of the stent sits in your kidney, while the looped part rests in your bladder. These parts hold the ureteral stent in place.
How long does ureteral stenting take?
In most cases, ureteral stenting takes less than 30 minutes to complete. But you may be in a hospital or surgical center for a few hours while healthcare providers prepare you for surgery and make sure you’re healthy before they discharge you. A provider will give you an idea of what to expect.
What happens after ureteral stenting?
After your urologist places the ureteral stent and removes the cystoscope, your anesthesiologist will stop giving you anesthesia. You’ll be conscious (awake) after a few minutes. But you’ll likely feel groggy. Providers will monitor your health and treat your pain once you fully wake up. They may recommend drinking lots of water over the next few days to help with your kidney and bladder function.
They’ll let you go home (discharge you) once they determine you no longer require monitoring. You must have someone drive you home.
You may notice some blood in your pee (
hematuria
) and have some general discomfort, especially when you pee. These symptoms are normal, and they should gradually improve within a few days. But you may still have traces of blood in your pee that come and go and have discomfort until your provider removes your ureteral stent. You may also pee more than you usually do (
frequent urination
) and feel discomfort or pain in your kidney when you pee. Call a healthcare provider if you have kidney pain.
Advertisement
How long does a ureteral stent stay in?
Most ureteral stents are temporary. Your urologist will remove the stent after your condition improves. Most people have the stent in for a few days or up to a few weeks.
Some people need ureteral stents for months or years. You may need a ureteral stent for an extended period if you have a tumor that presses on your ureters, or your ureters are narrow. Your urologist will replace the stent every three to six months. Replacing the stent reduces the likelihood of complications, such as
urinary tract infections
(UTIs).
How are ureteral stents removed?
Some short-term ureteral stents have strings that hang outside your urethra, where pee exits your body. A healthcare provider gently pulls the string to remove the ureteral stent.
If you need a ureteral stent for a few weeks or longer, it won’t have a string. Your urologist will remove it during a minor office procedure. They may also order imaging tests to ensure your condition has improved.
To remove the stent, your urologist will:
Use a
topical anesthetic
to numb the area
Insert a cystoscope through your urethra and into your bladder
Use tiny clamps that attach to the cystoscope to grab the stent
Gently remove the stent
How painful is removing a ureteral stent?
The area will be numb during ureteral stent removal, so you won’t feel much, if any, pain. But many people feel moderate discomfort or pain after the topical anesthetic wears off. It usually goes away after a few days.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of ureteral stenting?
It depends on why you need a ureteral stent. Some of the benefits include:
It allows pee to drain from your kidneys to your bladder
It allows you to pee comfortably
It helps drain infected pee
It allows your ureter to heal after surgery or from another condition
Without treatment, a ureteral obstruction may lead to life-threatening
kidney failure
or
sepsis
.
What are the disadvantages of a ureteral stent?
Up to 80% of people with ureteral stents have one or more of the following complications:
Bladder irritation
Bladder spasms
Peeing more than usual
Blocked, broken or dislodged stents
Blood in their pee
Pain or burning while peeing (
dysuria
)
UTIs
You may also be at a greater risk of developing a
sexually transmitted infection
(STI). Bacteria and viruses can more easily enter your body through a wound in your urinary system.
A healthcare provider will talk to you about your likelihood of risk. They’ll also tell you how to handle any worrying signs that may appear while the stent is in place.
Why is a ureteral stent so painful?
Your body is unique, and how it reacts to a ureteral stent may be different than others. Some people may experience only minor discomfort, while others feel more pain. In some cases, this occurs because, when you pee, your bladder shrinks. As it shrinks, the looped end of the ureteral stent rubs against your bladder wall.
Advertisement
Recovery and Outlook
How do I relieve ureteral stent pain?
Ureteral stents can be uncomfortable or painful. You may have
pelvic pain
or experience a pulling sensation when you pee. Over-the-counter
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) can help relieve pain. Not everyone can take NSAIDs, so make sure to check with a healthcare provider first.
A provider may prescribe
tamsulosin
(Flomax®) to help with stent pain. This drug is designed for people with prostate problems. But it can help anyone with stent-related pain.
What is the recovery time for a ureteroscopy with a stent?
Most people can return to their typical daily activities within a week after receiving a ureteral stent.
What should you avoid after a ureteral stent?
Avoid strenuous activity for at least a few days after receiving a ureteral stent. This includes lifting anything heavier than 10 pounds, which is about the same weight as a gallon of water.
It’s also a good idea to avoid having sexual intercourse for at least a week after stent placement. This reduces your risk of developing an STI. Sex may also be difficult or uncomfortable.
When can I go back to work/school?
Most people can return to school or work a day or two after ureteral stenting. But you may need to take more time off if your job requires a lot of physical activity or heavy lifting.
What is the prognosis for someone who has ureteral stents?
Ureteral stents are generally safe. They don’t typically cause any long-term problems.
You may experience some uncomfortable or annoying side effects. But ureteral stents are helpful. They work well to resolve ureteral obstructions and let kidney stones pass. What you can expect as time passes depends on the condition the stents are treating and your overall health.
When should I call a healthcare provider?
Call your healthcare provider if you experience:
Clots of tissue in your pee
Dark, cloudy or foul-smelling pee
Trouble peeing or severe pain or burning when you pee
Kidney pain
Nausea
and
vomiting
Signs of an
infection
, including a
fever
or
chills
Additional Common Questions
Is a kidney stent the same as a ureteral stent?
A kidney stent is similar to a ureteral stent, but they’re not the same. In rare cases, a urologist can’t place a ureteral stent because of scarring or other problems. In these instances, you may need a kidney stent (
nephrostomy
). A urologist or
radiologist
will place the stent directly in your kidney. The kidney stent drains pee from your kidney into a bag outside your body (urostomy pouch), bypassing your ureters and bladder.
A kidney stent is different than a
renal artery stent
. A renal artery stent opens your
renal artery
to get more blood from your
heart
to your kidneys.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Any procedure that requires general anesthesia can be scary, especially in such a sensitive area of your body. But ureteral stents are an effective treatment for conditions that affect your ureters. Most people only need a ureteral stent for a short time. But even if you need it for a long period, you can manage discomfort with over-the-counter pain medications. If you have any questions, don’t hesitate to talk to a healthcare provider. They’re available to answer your questions, and they can also suggest other ways to relieve pain or discomfort until it’s time to remove your ureteral stent.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your urinary system, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment