Epiglottitis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Epiglottitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Epiglottitis
Epiglottitis is inflammation and swelling of your epiglottis. The most common cause is bacterial infection. Epiglottitis symptoms include pain when swallowing, severe sore throat and difficulty breathing. Although most people recover fully after treatment, it’s a medical emergency that requires prompt medical care in the emergency room.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
An inflamed epiglottis can block your airway, making it harder to breathe. This is why epiglottitis requires emergency medical treatment.
What is epiglottitis?
Epiglottitis (pronounced “eh-pih-glah-
tai
-tis”) is inflammation and swelling of your
epiglottis
. Your epiglottis is a thin flap of cartilage near the base of your
tongue
. It keeps food and liquids from going down your windpipe (
trachea
) when you swallow.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You may also hear the term “acute epiglottitis.” This refers to the very sudden and intense onset of symptoms, including difficulty breathing and swallowing. Without prompt treatment, the swelling can block your airway and even be fatal.
It’s essential to get to the emergency room (ER) immediately if you or a loved one is experiencing symptoms of epiglottitis.
Epiglottitis is a medical emergency that you should never try to manage at home.
How common is this condition?
Epiglottitis is an uncommon condition that affects both children and adults.
Before the widespread use of
Haemophilus influenzae
(Hib) vaccinations in 1985, epiglottitis mainly affected children between the ages of 3 and 5. Thanks to the vaccine, cases of Hib infection —the primary cause in children — have fallen. Now, only
.
5 out of every 100,000 children
in the U.S. get epiglottitis.
But cases have been on the rise in adults. Most are related to infections other than Hib. Epiglottitis affects anywhere from
1 to 4 out of every 100,000 adults
in the U.S.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs and symptoms of epiglottitis?
Epiglottitis symptoms usually appear suddenly and get worse quickly. Sometimes, in older children and adults, it may take a few days for symptoms to develop fully. But in young children, who have smaller airways, a swollen epiglottis often causes severe symptoms that appear without warning.
Advertisement
The most common symptoms include:
Dysphagia
: Difficulty swallowing
Dysphonia
: Hoarseness or an abnormal voice
Drooling
: Saliva (spit) flowing out of your mouth involuntarily
Distress
: Difficulty breathing or lack of oxygen
Other epiglottitis symptoms include:
Severe
sore throat
Fever
of 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius) or higher
A
high-pitched whistling sound
when you breathe
An open mouth and leaning forward to breathe (a main symptom in young children)
Irritability and restlessness (a main symptom in young children)
Epiglottitis shares several common symptoms with other conditions, such as
croup
. But unlike epiglottitis, croup doesn’t always require emergency treatment. This is why proper diagnosis and treatment are key.
What causes epiglottitis?
Bacterial infections
are the most common cause of epiglottitis. In children,
Haemophilus influenzae
type b
(Hib) bacteria is the most common cause. In adults, bacterial infections usually come from non-Hib sources. These include
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
and
Staphylococcus
bacteria.
Other possible epiglottitis causes include:
Viral infections
.
Viruses like
varicella-zoster virus
and
herpes simplex virus
can make you vulnerable to bacterial infections that may lead to epiglottitis.
Fungal infections
.
Candida
infections, particularly in people with a weak
immune system
, have been linked to epiglottitis.
Injury to your
throat
. The injury may involve things like a physical blow, swallowing a foreign object or drinking a very hot liquid.
Smoking
. This includes
vaping
or smoking substances like crack cocaine.
Chemical burns
. Epiglottitis can develop from ingesting a harmful chemical. This is called corrosive epiglottitis.
Is epiglottitis contagious?
Getting an infection that can cause epiglottitis — like Hib — doesn’t mean you’ll develop epiglottitis, too. But you may if the germ spreads to your epiglottis and causes inflammation. The offending
germs
can spread from person to person through droplets of saliva or mucus when they cough or sneeze.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is epiglottitis diagnosed?
Since epiglottitis is a life-threatening medical emergency, healthcare providers usually work through the steps of making a diagnosis only after they’ve stabilized your breathing.
Once you’re stable (and only if it’s perfectly safe), they may run the following tests to diagnose epiglottitis:
Culture tests
. A provider swabs your throat and sends the sample to a
pathology lab
to test for bacteria or viruses.
Blood tests
. Your provider may perform a variety of blood tests to count your
white blood cells
(your body’s infection-fighters) or see if there are any bacteria or viruses in your blood.
Laryngoscopy
. A provider uses a small camera at the end of a flexible tube to examine your throat.
Imaging tests
. An
X-ray
can help determine the level of swelling. Epiglottic swelling on an X-ray sometimes resembles an adult thumb. Providers sometimes call this the “thumbprint sign.”
Management and Treatment
How is epiglottitis treated?
You’ll receive treatment for epiglottitis immediately. In the hospital, your care team will:
Advertisement
Restore your airways to full capacity
. Your healthcare provider will place an oxygen mask over your mouth and nose so your
lungs
can get more air. If your air passages are blocked, they may place a
breathing tube
through your mouth and into your windpipe. (If your provider can’t insert a breathing tube through your mouth, they may need to insert a breathing tube through your neck. This is called a
tracheostomy
. But it’s rare that people with epiglottitis need this.)
Administer fluids
. Your medical team will give you plenty of fluids through an intravenous (IV) drip (a needle inserted into a vein).
Administer antibiotics
. If you have a bacterial infection, your provider will give you a broad-spectrum
antibiotic
through an IV. This medicine kills most strains of bacteria that may be causing the infection. Once your provider gets the results of your culture tests, they may give you a different antibiotic that targets the specific bacteria causing your infection.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have epiglottitis?
For most people, it takes about one week to fully recover from epiglottitis. You’ll probably spend between three to five days in the hospital. But you may start to feel better within the first few days. Even if you get a breathing tube, it usually only takes a few days before you’re able to breathe on your own.
Advertisement
If an infection causes your condition, it’s important to take the full course of antibiotics to kill the bacteria (usually about seven days).
When addressed quickly, treatment can heal epiglottitis. Still, it’s important to remember that an inflamed epiglottis is a medical emergency. If you or someone you know exhibits epiglottitis symptoms, call 911 (or your local emergency services number) or head to your nearest emergency room.
Prevention
How can I prevent epiglottitis?
You can’t prevent an inflamed epiglottis altogether, but there are things you can do to reduce the risk:
Get your child vaccinated
. In children, the best prevention is to ensure all their
childhood immunizations
are up to date. Children are especially vulnerable to Hib infections because their immune systems haven’t fully developed yet.
Practice good hygiene
. Wash your hands frequently, and avoid placing fingers in your
eyes
,
nose
and
mouth
.
Protect yourself from infection
. Take precautions around people who are coughing and sneezing, like avoiding close contact or masking up.
Avoid injury to your throat
. Steer clear of activities that can damage your throat, like drinking hot liquids or smoking.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Epiglottitis can be life-threatening if swelling closes off your airway. If you think you or someone you know might have a swollen epiglottis, seek emergency care immediately.
Advertisement
Never put anyone with epiglottitis on their back or allow them to have anything in their mouth.
This can make it even harder for someone with the condition to breathe. Also, try to remain calm, as stress can worsen the tightening of someone’s throat.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask before leaving the hospital include:
What caused my epiglottitis?
How long will I need to continue taking antibiotics?
How can I care for my throat during recovery?
How long should I avoid lying down (on my back)?
Will I need follow-up visits?
How can I reduce my risk of epiglottitis in the future?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Don’t delay getting emergency care if you or a loved one is experiencing symptoms of epiglottitis. If you’re unsure if it’s epiglottitis or another condition, remember that it’s always a good idea to seek emergency care if someone’s having trouble breathing or swallowing. With prompt care, most people recover completely from epiglottitis, but acting fast is essential.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment