Types of Hearing Aids: Styles & How They Work
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Types of Hearing Aids
Advertisement
Advertisement
Types of Hearing Aids
There are many types of hearing aids, such as behind-the-ear (BTE), in-the-ear (ITE) and in-the-canal (ITC). Selecting a type that’s right for you depends on a number of factors, including the severity of hearing loss, size and shape of your ear, personal preferences, ease of handling and new hearing aid technologies.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hearing Loss Treatment
Pediatric Hearing Loss Treatment
Request a Hearing Assessment in Ohio
Request an Appointment in Florida
What type of hearing aid should I get?
There are many different types of
hearing aids
. Each type has its own advantages and limitations. Selecting a hearing aid that’s right for you depends on a number of factors, including:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The severity of your
hearing loss
(mild, moderate, severe or profound).
The size and shape of your
ear
.
How well you can use your fingers and hands (manual dexterity).
The availability of new hearing aid technologies.
Your personal preferences.
Many of the latest hearing aids are rechargeable. You can even connect them to smartphones and other devices using Bluetooth® technology.
How many types of hearing aids are there?
Healthcare providers categorize hearing aids into five types: behind-the-ear (BTE), in-the-ear (ITE), receiver-in-the-ear (RITE), in-the-canal (ITC) and CROS/BiCROS.
Behind-the-ear (BTE)
Behind-the-ear (BTE) devices are appropriate for people with a wide range of hearing loss, from mild to profound. This device fits neatly behind your ear. The body of the hearing aid attaches to a custom ear mold or thin tubing. Because this device has several parts, manual dexterity is necessary to ensure proper insertion and placement.
In-the-ear (ITE)
In-the-ear (ITE) devices fill either your entire ear (known as full-shell) or a portion of the bowl (known as half-shell) of your ear. These are best for people who may have dexterity issues or difficulty handling small items. Providers often recommend ITE devices for people with moderate to severe hearing loss.
Advertisement
Receiver-in-the-ear (RITE)
Receiver-in-the-ear (RITE) hearing aids are similar to BTE devices. The body of a RITE hearing aid sits behind your ear. A thin receiver wire extends from the body of the hearing aid over your outer ear and into your ear canal. A soft tip sits just inside of your ear canal without sealing it. For many people, this offers a more natural sound. RITE devices require manual dexterity. They’re appropriate for mild to severe hearing loss.
In-the-canal (ITC)
In-the-canal (ITC) hearing aids fit more deeply into your ear canal than ITE hearing aids, so they’re typically less visible. Because of their smaller size, they use smaller batteries and may be more difficult to handle. Depending on your situation, you may even qualify for completely-in-the-canal (CIC) hearing aids. These devices fit deeper into the ear canal so they’re even less visible.
CROS/BiCROS
Your healthcare provider may recommend a CROS/BiCROS hearing aid if you have normal hearing or minimal
hearing loss in one ear
, and very little or no usable hearing in the other ear. You wear the hearing aid on the better hearing side, and you wear an additional microphone on the poorer hearing side. This allows you to hear from the poorer side — even though it delivers all sounds to your better ear. These devices are especially beneficial when someone is talking on the side of the poorer ear. CROS stands for “Contralateral Routing of Signals.” BiCROS stands for “Bilateral Contralateral Routing of Signals.”
Can I purchase hearing aids over the counter?
On August 16, 2022, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) ruled to improve access to hearing aids by making a new category for over-the-counter devices. As a result of this historic ruling, people will be able to purchase hearing aids over the counter as soon as fall of 2022.
Over-the-counter hearing aids will be appropriate for many people with mild to moderate hearing loss. But if you have severe to profound hearing loss or complex hearing conditions, you’ll need to see a healthcare provider for appropriate testing, diagnosis and treatment.
Which type of hearing aid battery should I choose?
Hearing aid batteries come in disposable and rechargeable. Disposable batteries — which look like little buttons — aren’t that common anymore.
Most new hearing aids run on rechargeable batteries. Similar to smartphones and other Bluetooth devices, you simply place hearing aids with rechargeable batteries on a charger when you’re not using them. Some even come with a convenient docking station.
What’s the best type of hearing aid for my condition?
There are so many types of hearing aids on the market, selecting the one that’s right for you can feel overwhelming. The good news is that your healthcare provider can help you choose a device based on your specific health condition and situation, including the best type of hearing aid for:
Advertisement
Tinnitus
(ringing in your ears).
Meniere’s disease
(a condition in which swelling and pressure in your inner ear cause balance or hearing issues).
High-frequency hearing loss.
Low-frequency hearing loss.
Sensorineural hearing loss (caused by damage to your
inner ear
).
Mild to moderate hearing loss.
Severe hearing loss.
Profound hearing loss.
People with limited manual dexterity.
What if hearing aids don’t work for me?
For some people, hearing aids aren’t sufficient. If you have severe or profound hearing loss, you may have better success with
cochlear implants
or
bone-anchored auditory implants
. Ask your healthcare provider about treatment options.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have hearing loss that’s interfering with your quality of life, schedule an appointment with your healthcare provider. They can establish the extent of your hearing loss and determine whether hearing aids could help.
If you already have hearing aids, be sure to get them checked by an audiologist at least twice a year. An
audiologist
is a healthcare provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating hearing loss, balance disorders and more. You should also have your hearing
tested
whenever you notice new symptoms or a change in hearing.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you’re considering hearing aids, here are some questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
Advertisement
Will a hearing aid really help improve my hearing loss?
What type of hearing aid(s) do you recommend?
What happens if I don’t do anything?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’re considering hearing aids, there are several types to choose from. Ask your healthcare provider or audiologist about your options. They can help you find a hearing aid that’s tailored to your specific needs so you can live a fuller life.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hearing is an important part of your everyday life. Hearing loss can impact your life in so many ways. Cleveland Clinic experts can help you hear clearly again.
Hearing Loss Treatment
Pediatric Hearing Loss Treatment
Request a Hearing Assessment in Ohio
Request an Appointment in Florida
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/12/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment