St. Louis Encephalitis Virus (SLEV): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
St. Louis Encephalitis Virus
Advertisement
Advertisement
St. Louis Encephalitis Virus
St. Louis encephalitis is a virus that spreads through infected mosquito bites. Symptoms are usually mild — you may not even have any. But it’s possible to develop severe symptoms, including serious brain inflammation. There’s no cure for the virus. But medications can help ease your mild symptoms. Severe symptoms may require hospitalization.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is St. Louis Encephalitis Virus?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is St. Louis Encephalitis Virus?
St. Louis encephalitis virus (seynt loo-es en-suf-uh-LI-tis VAHR-ruhs) is a
virus
that spreads through
mosquito bites
— specifically the
Culex
species of mosquitoes. It can cause
inflammation
in your brain (
encephalitis
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most people get St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV) from an infected mosquito bite. The virus doesn’t spread from person to person through bodily contact (hugging, shaking hands, sharing drinking glasses, kissing and so on). But it’s possible for it to spread through
blood transfusion
.
SLEV isn’t common. Most cases occur in the U.S., particularly in the Eastern, Central and Southwest states. But the following areas also have reported cases:
Argentina
Canada
The Caribbean
Mexico
According to the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), there were a little over 300 reported cases of SLEV between 2003 and 2024. In the U.S., cases usually occur during warmer months — June through October — but they may occur throughout the year in warmer climates.
SLEV symptoms vary. In mild cases, you may not have any symptoms, or you may have
flu
-like symptoms.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of SLEV?
St. Louis encephalitis virus symptoms are usually mild, if you even have any symptoms at all. Mild symptoms include:
Feeling very tired (
fatigue
)
Fever
Headache
Muscle
weakness
Nausea
Severe SLEV causes brain inflammation. Symptoms of brain inflammation include:
Confusion
, disorientation or other
changes to your mental function
Stiff neck
Uncontrollable movements (
tremors
)
Advertisement
If you have any confusion or mental function changes, get to an emergency room as soon as possible.
Severe SLEV can also cause
coma
and
death
.
How long does it take St. Louis encephalitis virus symptoms to develop?
St. Louis encephalitis virus symptoms usually develop between four and 14 days after a bite from an infected mosquito (
incubation period
).
What is St. Louis encephalitis caused by?
Mosquitoes get SLEV when they feed on infected birds. Infected mosquitoes then transfer SLEV when they bite your
skin
. Humans are a “dead-end host” of the virus. That means you can’t transfer the infection to another person because the virus doesn’t exist in high enough levels in your bloodstream. If someone has SLEV, they don’t have to self-isolate at home, wear a mask or clean and disinfect surfaces.
In rare cases, the infection may spread through blood transfusion.
Risk factors
St. Louis encephalitis virus is rare. But you may be more at risk of an SLEV infection if you:
Live or work in areas where there’s an SLEV outbreak, particularly in areas where mosquitos live and breed, like bodies of water or wooded areas
Spend a lot of time outside in areas where there’s an outbreak, especially between dawn and dusk when mosquitoes are more active
You have a greater chance of developing severe SLEV symptoms if you:
Are 50 or older
Have a weakened
immune system
Have
diabetes
Complications of St. Louis encephalitis virus
Even with successful treatment, SLEV may cause long-term complications, including:
Changes in your behavior, including
anxiety
,
depression
, and irritability
Difficulty walking
Problems remembering things (
memory loss
)
SLEV may also cause an
intellectual disability
in children.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose St. Louis encephalitis virus
Healthcare providers will first review your medical history and symptoms and conduct a
physical exam
. They may ask questions such as:
Have you traveled recently?
Have you had any recent mosquito bites?
When did the bites happen?
When did you first notice symptoms?
If a provider suspects you have SLEV, they’ll recommend a
serological test
. A serological test is a type of
blood test
that looks for
antibodies
, specifically immunoglobulin M (IgM). Your immune system makes antibodies to help protect you from infections, including SLEV. Providers may also recommend a spinal tap (
lumbar puncture
) to test your cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for IgM.
Management and Treatment
How is SLEV treated?
There isn’t a cure for St. Louis encephalitis virus. But healthcare providers may recommend the following to treat mild symptoms:
Acetaminophen
(Tylenol
®
),
aspirin
(Bayer
®
, Bufferin
®
),
ibuprofen
(Advil®, Motrin IB
®
) or
naproxen sodium
(Aleve
®
) to treat headaches
Drinking fluids, especially water, to help prevent
dehydration
Medications to treat nausea and vomiting, like
bismuth subsalicylate
(Pepto-Bismol
®
) and
phosphorated carbohydrate solution
(Emetrol
®
)
Advertisement
If you have severe symptoms, you need to stay at a hospital for monitoring. If SLEV causes a dangerous amount of inflammation in your
brain
, a surgeon may need to remove part of your skull (
craniotomy
) to relieve pressure.
Can antivirals treat St. Louis encephalitis virus?
No,
antiviral medications
can’t treat SLEV. Over-the-counter medications can treat mild symptoms.
Is there a vaccine for SLEV?
No, there aren’t any
vaccines
to help protect you from SLEV.
Recovery time
Your recovery depends on the severity of the infection. In mild cases, your symptoms may go away within a few weeks. But some symptoms may take a few months to go away completely.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Reach out to a healthcare provider if you develop symptoms of St. Louis encephalitis virus, especially if you have recent mosquito bites. A provider can evaluate your symptoms, order tests and recommend treatment.
You may wish to ask a provider the following questions:
Are my symptoms serious?
Will I require hospitalization?
When should I start to feel better?
How do I manage my symptoms at home?
Should I be aware of any serious symptoms?
Should I schedule a follow-up appointment?
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Many people who get St. Louis encephalitis virus don’t have any symptoms or their symptoms are mild. You’ll likely recover before the virus causes inflammation in your brain. But it can be life-threatening, especially if you’re over 50 or have diabetes or a compromised immune system. If you have symptoms, schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider. They can tell you what to expect.
Advertisement
What is the mortality rate for St. Louis encephalitis?
The mortality (
death
) rate for people who have SLEV is between 5 and 20 out of every 100 people. The rate is higher if you’re 50 or older or if you have
high blood pressure
(hypertension).
Prevention
Can St. Louis encephalitis virus be prevented?
There isn’t a vaccine to prevent St. Louis encephalitis virus. The best way to prevent SLEV is to protect yourself from mosquito bites. You can avoid mosquito bites by:
Avoiding areas in which there’s an SLEV outbreak
Avoiding standing water, such as ponds and swamps, and emptying standing water in birdbaths, buckets, watering cans, trash cans and so on
Making sure your windows and doors have tight-fitting screens
Using insect repellant when you go outside
Wearing thick, long-sleeved shirts, pants and socks when you spend time outside
Additional Common Questions
Why is it called St. Louis encephalitis?
St. Louis encephalitis got its name because the virus was first identified in St. Louis, Missouri, U.S.A., in 1933. Healthcare professionals reported over 1,000 cases during the outbreak.
Can I donate blood if I have a St. Louis encephalitis virus infection?
No, you can’t
donate blood
if you have an active SLEV infection. But you should be able to donate blood about four months after the infection goes away. Be sure to let a healthcare provider know if you’ve recently had an SLEV infection before donating blood.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Most of the time, mosquitoes are just pests. But sometimes, they carry diseases that they transfer to you when they feed on your blood. St. Louis encephalitis virus is one of those diseases. For most people, your risk of getting very sick is low. But it’s still possible to have severe or even dangerous symptoms. The best way to protect yourself is to avoid mosquito bites, especially in areas where SLEV outbreaks are more likely to occur. Reach out to a healthcare provider if you have bites and develop symptoms of SLEV. They can help treat the symptoms and, if necessary, monitor you to make sure they don’t get worse.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment