Cervical Disk Replacement (CDR): Purpose, Procedure & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Cervical Artificial Disk Replacement
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cervical Artificial Disk Replacement
Cervical disk replacement (CDR) surgery may be an option for you if you have degenerative disk disease in your neck. It involves replacing the damaged disk with an artificial one. CDR surgery can help maintain the range of motion in your neck and relieve nerve pain. As with all surgeries, it comes with possible risks and complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cervical Neck Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Cervical disk replacement is a procedure to replace a damaged spinal disk in your neck with a prosthetic disk.
What is cervical disk replacement (CDR) surgery?
Cervical disk replacement (CDR) surgery involves replacing a damaged
spinal disk
in your neck (
cervical spine
) with an artificial (
prosthetic
) disk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Spinal disks are rubbery cushions between your vertebrae (
bones
in your spinal column). They act as shock absorbers and help you move, bend and twist comfortably. The goal of CDR surgery is to restore the height of a worn down (degenerated), collapsed disk space. This maintains the range of motion in your neck and may decompress
nerve
roots, which may help relieve pain.
There are several types of artificial cervical disks. The three main material types for them are cobalt, titanium and stainless steel.
You may have a lot of questions and concerns about needing neck surgery. While CDR is a newer type of surgery compared to other cervical spine procedures, several studies have shown that it’s effective and safe. Your surgeon will walk you through the process of CDR surgery and what you can expect.
Why might I need cervical disk replacement surgery?
Cervical disk replacement surgery is mainly for people who have cervical
degenerative disk disease
with pinched nerves (
radiculopathy
) or
myelopathy
. Your provider may recommend CDR surgery if conservative (nonsurgical) treatment hasn’t worked to manage your symptoms for at least six weeks.
Certain factors may disqualify you from being a good candidate for this surgery, like having:
An active infection.
Certain metal allergies (hypersensitivities).
Osteoporosis
.
An unstable cervical spine.
Severe facet arthropathy (
arthritis
that affects the facet joints in your spine).
Severe
neuromuscular conditions
.
Advertisement
Together, you and your healthcare provider will decide if cervical disk replacement surgery is right for you. Providers most often compare CDR surgery to
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF)
because they can treat many of the same issues. Your provider may compare and contrast CDR and ACDF when discussing your options.
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for cervical disk replacement surgery?
You'll meet with your surgeon (either an
orthopaedic surgeon
or
neurosurgeon
) before your cervical disk replacement surgery. You can expect your surgeon to:
Do a
physical exam
.
Ask about your medical history and symptoms.
Request imaging tests of your neck, like an
X-ray
,
myelogram
or
MRI
.
Ask about the medications or supplements you take.
Make changes to your medications, like removing or adding certain medications. Don’t stop taking medications unless your surgeon tells you to.
Let your healthcare provider know if you use tobacco products.
Nicotine
in tobacco products can interfere with your healing. Your provider may ask you to quit using these products at least four weeks before your surgery.
Your surgeon will also explain any risks or side effects and give you information about how you can prepare. If you have any questions or concerns, make sure to ask your surgeon before the date of your surgery.
What happens during cervical disk replacement surgery?
Your surgeon will go over the steps of CDR before the surgery. In general, the steps include:
An
anesthesiologist
will give you
general anesthesia
to put you completely to sleep so you won’t feel any pain.
Once you’re asleep, your surgeon will make an incision (cut) in the front of your neck. The exact location and length of your incision will vary based on your unique circumstances. They’ll move your
trachea
and
esophagus
to the side to access your spine.
Your surgeon will use imaging guidance called
fluoroscopy
throughout the surgery to see your neck vertebrae better.
Your surgeon will remove the damaged disk and replace it with an artificial disk.
Your surgeon will close up the incision site after moving everything back into place.
What happens after cervical disk replacement surgery?
After CDR surgery, your care team will move you to a recovery room where they’ll monitor your
vital signs
as you wake up from anesthesia. You may need to stay overnight in the hospital. Your healthcare provider will let you know when it’s safe for you to go home. You’ll need someone else to drive you home after surgery.
Your surgeon will give you instructions to help your body heal. This may include:
Taking medications to alleviate pain.
Resting and limiting physical activity (like avoiding
aerobic exercises
and lifting heavy objects).
Caring for your incision site
.
Participating in
physical therapy
.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cervical Neck Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of cervical disk replacement surgery?
Several studies show that cervical disk replacement surgery provides significant short-term and long-term pain relief for many people. It can also help maintain the range of motion in your neck.
How successful is cervical disk replacement?
The majority of people who have cervical disk replacement surgery get symptomatic relief and can resume full activity after six months. But as with any treatment, it’s not guaranteed to relieve your symptoms.
What are the risks or complications of cervical disk replacement?
Short-term complications of cervical disk replacement surgery are rare but can include:
Wound infection.
Difficulty swallowing (
dysphagia
).
Voice hoarseness
.
Sore throat
that comes and goes.
Possible long-term complications of CDR include:
Adjacent segment degeneration (ASD). This is degeneration that happens in the spinal segments next to (adjacent to) the replaced disk.
Artificial disk-related failures.
Heterotopic ossification (HO)
. This happens when bone grows in tissues where it typically wouldn’t.
Possibly needing another, future surgery.
Your healthcare provider will go over all the possible risks and complications of CDR before your surgery.
Recovery and Outlook
How long does it take to recover from cervical disk replacement surgery?
It may take up to six months to fully recover from CDR surgery. Your surgeon will give you a timeline of certain activities you can build up to over time after surgery. In general, most people can:
Advertisement
Return to activities of daily living (like grooming and preparing meals) by the second day after surgery.
Return to regular, light activities between two to three weeks after surgery.
Return to full activities (excluding contact sports) by four to six weeks after surgery.
Be sure to ask your surgeon for a complete list of activity restrictions.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you experience the following after cervical disk replacement surgery:
Continuous bleeding from the incision site.
Yellow or green
(purulent) drainage
from the incision.
Severe pain.
Fever
.
Worsening or persistent difficulty swallowing or eating.
New weakness or
numbness
.
You’ll need to have follow-up appointments with your provider after surgery to make sure you’re healing well and that the artificial disk is functioning as it should. Your provider will let you know how many appointments this will be and when to schedule them.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having surgery can be scary, especially a major surgery like cervical disk replacement (CDR). But know that this surgery is often effective and safe. Talk to your care team if you have any questions about the surgery or your recovery. Following your provider’s instructions can help you get back to the activities you enjoy without pain or complications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Everyday things like turning your head shouldn’t be a pain in the neck. Cleveland Clinic medical spine experts can find ways to ease your cervical neck pain.
Cervical Neck Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/19/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment