Aromatase Inhibitors for Breast Cancer
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Aromatase Inhibitors
Advertisement
Advertisement
Aromatase Inhibitors
An aromatase inhibitor (AI) is a type of hormone therapy for cancer. Healthcare providers use aromatase inhibitors to treat ER-positive breast cancer. This therapy reduces the risk that breast cancer will come back after surgery. If you’re at an increased risk of this form of breast cancer, taking an aromatase inhibitor may reduce that risk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is an aromatase inhibitor?
An aromatase inhibitor (AI) is a common type of
hormone therapy
for
cancer
. Healthcare providers use aromatase inhibitors to treat
estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer
. ER-positive breast cancer often affects females ages 50 and older who’ve gone through
menopause
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Aromatase inhibitors work by reducing the amount of estrogen in your body. They block the enzyme aromatase, which turns other hormones into estrogen.
Estrogen
is an essential
hormone
that supports your sexual and reproductive health. It also regulates other important processes that affect your body. But high estrogen levels may increase your risk of developing ER-positive breast cancer.
Providers use aromatase inhibitor therapy as an initial treatment for ER-positive breast cancer. They may prescribe aromatase inhibitor therapy if:
You’ve had
surgery
for ER-positive breast cancer (to reduce the risk that the cancer will
come back
)
You have ER-positive breast cancer that’s spread to nearby
lymph nodes
You have
metastatic
ER-positive breast cancer that’s spread to your organs (breast cancer may spread to your
lungs
,
bones
,
brain
or
liver
)
You develop ER-positive breast cancer before you’ve gone through menopause (in that case, your ovaries still make estrogen, but you may have additional treatment to block these estrogens)
You’re at increased risk of developing ER-positive breast cancer — studies show certain aromatase inhibitors reduce breast cancer risk (the U.S. Food and Drug Administration hasn’t approved this use)
You’re a male with ER-positive breast cancer
Advertisement
While estrogen is considered a
female
hormone, males have estrogen, just at lower levels than in females. In this case, your provider may combine aromatase inhibitor therapy with estrogen-blocking therapy.
What are common aromatase drugs?
The three most common drugs are:
Letrozole
Anastrozole
Exemestane
Treatment Details
How do you take an aromatase inhibitor?
Aromatase inhibitors are pills you take every day. You may start treatment with an aromatase inhibitor. In some cases, you might take
tamoxifen
for a few years and then start aromatase inhibitor therapy.
After treatment, you may be considered in
remission
if five years have passed, you don’t have cancer symptoms and tests don’t find signs of cancer.
How long will I need this treatment?
Most people take aromatase inhibitors for five years, stopping treatment if they don’t have signs of recurring or new breast cancer.
That said, studies show breast cancer can come back as long as 20 years after treatment. This is late recurrence breast cancer. If you’re receiving treatment for ER-positive breast cancer, ask your healthcare provider to explain your risk.
What are the potential benefits and risks of this treatment?
The most significant benefit is being free of ER-positive breast cancer. Studies show 95% of people who receive aromatase inhibitor therapy after breast cancer surgery don’t have breast cancer signs five years after completing treatment.
But estrogen helps keep your bones and heart healthy. If you take aromatase inhibitors, you may have the following side effects:
Increased risk of
osteoporosis
and
bone fractures
Muscle pain
(myalgia)
Joint pain
Hot flashes
Vaginal dryness
Cardiovascular disease
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What can I do to help recover from aromatase inhibitor therapy?
Aromatase inhibitors can cause severe joint pain. If you have this side effect, ask your healthcare provider for help. They may recommend:
Anti-inflammatory medications, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (
NSAIDs
) like ibuprofen
Switching your medication to another aromatase inhibitor
Substituting tamoxifen
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your healthcare provider if:
Your side effects become more severe than you expected
Your side effects don’t improve with the medication your provider recommended
You notice changes in your body that may be symptoms of
recurrent breast cancer
(ask your provider about watching for specific changes)
Additional Common Questions
What is the survival rate without aromatase inhibitors?
Aromatase inhibitors help lower the chance of hormone-positive breast cancer coming back. Studies show that people who take an aromatase inhibitor after surgery have a much lower risk of dying from breast cancer —
about 40% lower after 10 years
— compared to those who don’t take hormone-blocking medicine at all.
Aromatase inhibitor therapy significantly reduces the risk that ER-positive breast cancer will come back. One early study compared outcomes of people who took the aromatase inhibitor letrozole after tamoxifen to those of people who didn’t. The study showed that taking letrozole reduced the risk of dying from breast cancer by 24% to 35%.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Aromatase inhibitor therapy is one of the most effective ways to treat ER-positive breast cancer in women who’ve gone through menopause. Studies show that most women who take aromatase inhibitors after breast cancer surgery remain free of breast cancer for five or more years after treatment.
Still, aromatase inhibitor therapy has side effects that may affect your quality of life. If you’re taking an aromatase inhibitor, ask your healthcare provider about ways to reduce side effects so you can continue treatment that helps you live free of breast cancer.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment