Androgens: Function, Levels & Related Disorders
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Androgens
Advertisement
Advertisement
Androgens
Androgens are a group of hormones that mainly trigger the development of male physical characteristics. Androgens have other important roles, too, like keeping your bones strong and helping red blood cell production. Everyone has androgens, but males naturally have more.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
What are androgens?
Androgens are a group of sex
hormones
. They help start
puberty
and play a role in reproductive health and body development.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Everyone has androgens. But
males
naturally make more of them.
Testosterone
is the most common androgen.
The
testicles
in the
male reproductive system
and the
ovaries
in the
female reproductive system
make androgens. Your
adrenal glands
that sit on top of each
kidney
also produce these hormones.
Androgens are busy working behind the scenes to keep your body on track with sexual development and overall health. Their levels can change throughout the day. Different life stages, like puberty or menopause, affect hormone levels, as well.
Types of androgens
Testosterone is the main androgen in all people. The majority of other androgens play roles in making other hormones. For example, the following androgens help make testosterone and estrogen:
Androstenedione
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
DHEA sulfate (DHEAS)
Another androgen is
dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
. As an adult, your body converts about 10% of your testosterone into DHT each day.
There are several other forms of androgens and androgen-related chemicals. The way your body uses these hormones is very complex.
What is the role of androgens?
In all people, androgens help with:
Bone density
Muscle
development
Puberty
Red blood cell
production (
erythropoiesis
)
Sexual desire and function
Advertisement
What is the role of androgens in men?
In males, androgens contribute to:
Deep voice (
vocal cord
lengthening)
Getting taller
Hair growth on your face, scalp, chest, underarms and genitals
Sperm
development
These body characteristics mainly begin in puberty. But testosterone has different roles in different life stages. Once you’re an adult, your testosterone levels naturally decline as you age.
What is the role of androgens in women?
In females, other body chemicals convert testosterone into estradiol, a form of
estrogen
. Estradiol:
Triggers the secondary sexual characteristics in puberty, like
breast
development and wider hips
Regulates
menstruation
Aids
conception
and
pregnancy
Minimizes bone loss (
osteoporosis
)
The levels of estradiol you have vary in different life stages. In
postmenopause
, your body doesn’t make much estradiol.
What androgen conditions affect men?
Males mainly have issues with low androgen or
low testosterone (male hypogonadism)
. It can cause symptoms like
low sex drive
and
erectile dysfunction
.
For some people, androgens can fuel the growth of
prostate cancer
. You may take medications to lower your body’s natural production of androgens. Healthcare providers call this treatment for prostate cancer androgen deprivation therapy (ADT).
Androgens — mainly DHT — also play a role in
male-pattern baldness (androgenic alopecia)
.
What androgen conditions affect women?
Females mainly have issues with high levels of androgens (
hyperandrogenism
). The most common cause of hyperandrogenism is
polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS). Rarely,
adrenal
or ovarian tumors cause hyperandrogenism.
People with PCOS or high androgen levels may have:
Acne
Amenorrhea
(missed periods) or
abnormal menstruation
Excessive hair growth (
hirsutism
) in certain parts of your body
High blood pressure
and
high cholesterol
Infertility
Obesity
Androgens — specifically DHT — can also play a role in
female pattern baldness
.
What androgen conditions affect children?
Issues with androgen levels can lead to delayed or
early (precocious) puberty
in children. These each have several possible causes.
Androgen levels also play a role in
disorders of sexual development
. This is a group of nearly 60 different conditions in which a person has features of both sexes.
How do healthcare providers measure androgen levels?
In females, healthcare providers typically use the free androgen index (FAI) to check for high androgen levels. FAI starts with a blood test to measure:
Total testosterone
Free testosterone
Sex-hormone-binding globulin (SHBG)
SHBG is a protein that carries androgens (testosterone and DHT) and estrogen in your blood. Your provider compares total testosterone to SHBG to find the amount of androgen in your blood.
Advertisement
For males, providers typically order
testosterone blood tests
to check for low testosterone levels.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Androgens are an essential part of reproductive health and overall health for all people. But they require a careful balance to do so. If you have symptoms of low or high androgen levels, reach out to your healthcare provider for help. They can recommend some tests to get to the bottom of your symptoms.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hormonal conditions can be tricky to find and complicated to treat. The experts in endocrinology at Cleveland Clinic are here to provide the best care.
Endocrinology Care
Endocrinology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/12/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes