Hypermetabolism: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hypermetabolism
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hypermetabolism
Hypermetabolism is when your metabolism is extremely fast. This means you burn calories (or energy) at a high rate. It can cause weight loss, fatigue, anemia and other symptoms. It typically occurs when your body is trying to repair or heal itself. Eating disorder recovery, burns and sepsis are common causes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is hypermetabolism?
Hypermetabolism is when you have a very fast
metabolism
. Your metabolism is how your body converts food to energy so you can use that energy for important bodily functions. Hypermetabolism is when your metabolism is extremely active, which means your body burns more calories than it should. It can lead to symptoms like weight loss and tiredness.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This typically happens when your body needs extra energy to heal or repair itself. Healthcare providers can treat it with methods like medication and nutritional guidance.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hypermetabolism?
The most common symptoms are:
Unexplained
weight loss
.
Increased appetite.
Sweating excessively
.
Fatigue
.
Quick and/or
irregular heart rate
.
Anemia
.
What causes hypermetabolism?
Hypermetabolism is complex. It can start suddenly all at once or years after you develop a condition that can cause it. It can be temporary or something you have to manage for a long time (chronic hypermetabolism). Some possible causes of hypermetabolism are:
Burns
or other traumas
: Your body reacts to burns or
breaking multiple bones
by needing and using more energy to try to heal itself.
Sepsis
: Sepsis is a complication of infections. It can cause hypermetabolism because your body uses extra energy to repair your organs and tissues.
Eating disorders
: During recovery from
anorexia nervosa
or
bulimia nervosa
, your metabolism may go into overdrive because it’s gotten used to fewer calories. Hypermetabolism is common in recovery from eating disorders.
Hyperthyroidism
: An overactive thyroid can make your metabolism extra fast.
Cancer
: Certain cancers like
lung
and
pancreatic
cancer can cause hypermetabolism.
Surgery
: Your body can develop an increased metabolism when it’s repairing itself after surgical procedures.
Genetic conditions
:
Inborn errors of metabolism (IEM)
are a group of conditions you’re born with that can affect how your metabolism works.
Advertisement
What are the complications of this condition?
Hypermetabolism in short bursts may be OK, especially when it’s helping your body heal. But having a fast metabolism long-term can have serious complications, including:
Muscle weakness or
muscle atrophy
.
Bone density loss
.
Heart problems due to prolonged heart rate changes.
Kidney
damage.
Weakened
immune system
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is it diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose hypermetabolism by talking to you about your health and daily routine. They’ll ask about any symptoms you’re experiencing and when you first noticed them. Tell your provider about any conditions or injuries you’ve had recently, and how you’re treating or managing them.
Your provider may order the following tests:
Blood tests
: A blood test can show
inflammation
, nutrient deficiencies and
thyroid dysfunction
. Your provider may order a
basic metabolic panel
, a
comprehensive metabolic panel
or other specific tests.
Metabolic test
: This test measures the oxygen you breathe in and the carbon dioxide you breathe out to determine how quickly you burn calories. It involves you breathing in and out of a machine while you exercise.
Imaging tests
: Your provider may order a
CT scan
or
MRI
to look for
tumors
or signs of other conditions.
Management and Treatment
How is hypermetabolism treated?
Your healthcare provider may suggest some or all of the following treatments:
Custom meal plan
: Your provider will increase how many calories you eat and suggest
meals and snacks
that will help you gain weight. You might need high-calorie foods to gain weight.
Medication
: Your provider may prescribe medication to treat a condition that’s causing the hypermetabolism. For example, you may need
antibiotics
for a
bacterial infection
or
beta-blockers
for a rapid heart rate.
Fluids
:
IV fluids
can help with dehydration and replenish lost energy. If you develop the condition due to burns or injuries, getting fluid or
parenteral nutrition
(food through an IV) can help with healing.
Cancer treatment
: If a cancer is causing hypermetabolism, getting
radiation therapy
or
chemotherapy
can help treat it.
Limited physical activity
: Movement and physical activity require energy. Limiting how much activity you get can prevent your body from using energy.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of hypermetabolism, like:
Losing weight, even when you eat more often.
Fatigue.
Sweating.
Irregular or
fast heart rate
.
Prevention
Can I prevent hypermetabolism?
You can’t necessarily prevent hypermetabolism because you can’t always control or prevent the conditions or injuries that cause it. For conditions you can control, the following tips may reduce your risk:
Advertisement
Maintain a weight that’s healthy for you
: Having underweight or
overweight
can impact your health. Ask your provider what a healthy weight range is for you if you’re unsure.
Eat healthy, well-balanced meals
: Your provider will help you determine an eating plan.
Attend check-ups
: Seeing a healthcare provider each year can help you stay healthy and identify any conditions that can cause hypermetabolism as soon as possible.
Get regular exercise
: Exercising for 20 to 30 minutes each day is good for your health. Ask your provider for tips to find the right routine or program.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hypermetabolism causes your metabolism to be significantly higher than usual. It can be risky for your health because your metabolism controls critical bodily functions. When it works too hard and too fast, it can put a strain on your organs, muscles and bones. Talk to a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of hypermetabolism. They can determine what’s causing it and what treatment will be best for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/16/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes