Arthrocentesis (Joint Aspiration): What It Is & Procedure
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Arthrocentesis (Joint Aspiration)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Arthrocentesis (Joint Aspiration)
You might have arthrocentesis if you have painful swelling in one of your joints, like your knee, hip or ankle. It’s a simple procedure to draw fluid from your joint with a hollow needle and a syringe. Drawing the fluid relieves pressure, and it may also help diagnose your condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
Overview
During arthrocentesis, a healthcare provider draws excess fluid from your joint through a hollow needle.
What is arthrocentesis?
Arthrocentesis, also called joint aspiration, is a simple procedure to draw fluid from your
joint
through a hollow needle. If your joint is inflamed and swollen, it will have extra fluid in it. Drawing the fluid out relieves some of the
swelling
and
pain
. It can also help your provider learn more about what’s causing it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Arthro-
means joint, and
-centesis
means to puncture with a needle (to draw fluid). A joint is any place in your body where two bones meet, like your
knee
, your
hip
, your
elbow
or your knuckle. “Aspiration” is just another term for a medical procedure to withdraw fluid (or sometimes gas) from your body.
Treatment Details
What happens during the arthrocentesis procedure?
You can have arthrocentesis in your healthcare provider’s office, or as an outpatient procedure at the hospital. You don’t need to prepare ahead of time. When you arrive, your healthcare provider will:
Sterilize your skin where the needle will go in
Apply topical anesthesia to your skin
Locate the joint capsule to aspirate, using imaging technology if necessary (they might have an
ultrasound
or
fluoroscopy
machine in the room, and sometimes, they’ll use it to guide the needle)
If needed, inject local
anesthesia
into the site
Attach a different needle to a syringe and insert it into the joint through the same pathway
Withdraw as much fluid as possible, changing the syringe as needed
If desired, use the same needle and pathway to inject medication into the joint
If needed, send the drawn joint fluid to a pathology lab for a
pathologist
to analyze
How long does arthrocentesis take?
The whole procedure takes about 10 minutes. It might take a few more if your provider uses imaging, if you need to wait for anesthesia to work or if you’re having a joint injection with your joint aspiration.
Advertisement
What are the complications or problems that can develop after joint aspiration?
Complications of arthrocentesis are rare. They include:
Infection
introduced through the procedure
Injury to a
blood vessel
, causing bleeding
Allergic
reactions to the anesthesia
What are the benefits of arthrocentesis?
Arthrocentesis has several purposes, and it often serves more than one at a time. It’s both therapeutic and diagnostic. It can help relieve your symptoms and set the stage for further treatment. It can also help your healthcare provider learn more about your condition when they send the sample to a lab for analysis.
Benefits include:
Pain relief.
Inflammation in your joint can cause it to swell with excess fluid. This can be a major source of your joint pain. Drawing some of the fluid out reduces the swelling to relieve some of the pain.
Preparation.
Arthrocentesis (joint aspiration) can also help prepare your joint for a
therapeutic injection
. Drawing excess fluid out makes room for injected medications that treat
arthritis
, like:
Cortisone shots (steroid injections)
Platelet-rich plasma injections
Bone marrow aspirate concentrate (BMAC) injections
Viscosupplementation (gel injections)
Diagnosis.
Once your healthcare provider has drawn a sample of your joint fluid (synovial fluid), the sample might prove useful. They can send it to a lab to analyze (synovial fluid analysis) and check for:
Signs of infection, like
bacteria
or a
high white blood cell count
Signs of injury, like
joint bleeding
Crystal deposits related to
gout
or
pseudogout
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are potential risks or complications of arthrocentesis (joint aspiration) and joint injections?
Joint aspirations and injections are relatively safe. Rarely, these complications develop:
Allergic reaction
. Some people are allergic to the anesthetic or the injectable medication. In very rare instances, this can cause
anaphylaxis
, a life-threatening response.
Infection
. Rarely, people develop infections after getting steroid injections.
Post-injection flare
. An estimated 1 in 50 people develop post-injection flare several hours after getting an injection. It causes joint swelling and pain that subsides in a few days.
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after joint aspiration?
Your provider will bandage your joint and may advise you to rest it for a while. How long depends on your individual condition. If they sent your sample to a lab, they’ll let you know when they have the results.
When will I feel better, and for how long?
If you had joint aspiration to relieve pain and swelling, you should begin to feel relief over the next day or so. Depending on what caused the swelling and how severe it was, the relief might be temporary. Sometimes, swelling returns a few days later, and you may need another aspiration to relieve it.
If you have a chronic condition, like arthritis, your symptoms might return more gradually. Your healthcare provider can advise you on when you can have another joint aspiration and/or injection. Different types of joint injections have different rules about how often you should have them.
Advertisement
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider if you experience any unusual symptoms after your procedure, like:
Worsening pain that doesn’t improve with pain relievers
Redness, heat or a rash at the injection site
Bleeding or discharge from the injection site
Fever or chills
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Arthrocentesis is a simple procedure with many benefits. It can treat joint swelling and pain and sometimes help your provider diagnose the cause. The experience is similar to having your blood drawn. You’ll have to endure a needle prick or two. But the relief you’ll gain from it will last much longer.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/22/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment