Achalasia (Cardiospasm): Symptoms, Causes, Types, Treatments
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Achalasia (Cardiospasm)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Achalasia (Cardiospasm)
Achalasia (cardiospasm) is a rare condition that happens when food and liquid doesn’t move through your esophagus to your stomach. Achalasia symptoms include trouble swallowing, heartburn and chest pain. It may cause complications like aspiration pneumonia. Treatment includes surgery and non-surgical options like medication and Botox injections.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Swallowing Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
Achalasia is a rare condition that affects your esophagus so food can’t move through your esophagus to your stomach
What is achalasia?
Achalasia (ay·kuh·
lay
·zhuh) or cardiospasm is a rare
esophageal disorder
that develops when your esophagus doesn’t move food and liquid to your
stomach
like it should.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
esophagus
is a muscular tube that runs from your mouth to your stomach. Normally, muscular contractions (
peristalsis
) in your esophagus push food and liquid down to your lower esophageal sphincter (LES). Your LES is a ring-shaped muscle that relaxes (opens) to let food move into your stomach and tightens (contracts) to keep contents in your stomach from backing up into your esophagus.
In achalasia, peristalsis doesn’t take place or doesn’t work as well as it should. And when it does, your LES doesn’t relax, so what you eat and drink stays in your esophagus instead of moving into your stomach. You have trouble swallowing your food or have other symptoms. You may lose a lot of weight and may develop malnutrition.
Cardiospasm affects 1 in 100,000 people in the U.S. It typically affects adults ages 25 to 60, but kids may develop it. Treatment includes surgery and medication, but achalasia symptoms often come back.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of cardiospasm?
Cardiospasm symptoms develop slowly. You can have this disorder for months or years before noticing changes in your body. Symptoms include:
Difficulty swallowing
Bringing swallowed food back into your mouth
Chest pain
that comes and goes and may be severe
Difficulty belching
Heartburn
Hiccups
Unexplained weight loss
Advertisement
What causes achalasia?
Experts don’t know the exact reason why your esophagus doesn’t work like it should. One theory is that achalasia is an
autoimmune disease
(your body attacks itself) that a virus triggers. In this theory:
Your immune system attacks
nerve cells
in your esophagus that control muscle function.
Under attack, these cells slowly deteriorate.
They stop driving the process that moves food and liquid through your esophagus to your stomach.
What are the complications of achalasia?
If you have achalasia, food may back up into your esophagus and into your
windpipe
, so you inhale food into your lungs. If that happens, you may develop complications like:
Aspiration pneumonia
Bronchiectasis
Lung
infections
Increased risk of
esophageal cancer
Malnutrition
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose cardiospasm?
A healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
. They’ll ask you to describe your symptoms and how long you’ve had them. Providers commonly use these three tests to diagnose cardiospasm:
Esophagram test (barium swallow)
Esophageal manometry test
Upper endoscopy
Management and Treatment
How is achalasia treated?
Treatment focuses on relaxing your LES, the ring of muscle at the base of your esophagus. Treatment can’t
cure
achalasia, but nonsurgical and surgical options can help ease symptoms. Your healthcare provider will plan treatment depending on factors like your symptoms and your personal preferences. They’ll discuss these options with you so you both can decide what treatment makes sense for you.
Nonsurgical treatment for achalasia
Nonsurgical treatments for achalasia include balloon dilation and medication. Here’s more information:
Balloon dilation
. This procedure involves inserting a specifically designed balloon through your LES. You’ll be under light sedation during the procedure. Your provider inflates the balloon, which helps the muscle relax so food can move to your stomach. You may need several treatments to relieve your symptoms.
Medication
. This is another way to loosen your LES. Your provider may recommend injecting
Botox
®
(botulinum toxin) into your LES.
Other options include
nifedipine
(Procardia
XL®
, Adalat CC
®
) or
isosorbide
(Imdur
®
, Monoket
®
). These are pills that you’d take as prescribed.
Surgical treatment for achalasia
Your provider may recommend one of two noninvasive surgeries to loosen your lower esophageal sphincter (LES). Those surgeries are:
Laparoscopic
Heller myotomy
. In this surgery, your provider inserts an endoscope into your esophagus. The endoscope has tiny tools that your provider uses to cut the muscle fibers.
Peroral endoscopic myotomy (
POEM
)
. This procedure involves cutting the muscles on the side of your esophagus, the muscular ring and in the upper part of your stomach.
Very rarely, your symptoms may be so severe that your provider will recommend an
esophagectomy
to remove your esophagus.
Advertisement
Treatment complications
Research shows laparoscopic Heller myotomy and POEM surgery are effective, but may cause the following complications:
Achalasia symptoms that come back
GERD
Very rarely, surgery may
rupture your esophagus
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Swallowing Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have achalasia?
Achalasia symptoms often come back after treatment. You’ll need long-term follow-up so your healthcare provider can:
Do tests to confirm that your esophagus lets enough food and fluid into your stomach
Check for signs of GERD
Check for signs of esophageal cancer
Can achalasia affect my life expectancy?
Without treatment, achalasia may lead to malnutrition, which can be life-threatening and affect your life expectancy. With treatment, you may expect to live as long as other people who don’t have the disorder.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Achalasia may come back after treatment. The disorder’s symptoms develop over time. Here are some suggestions for ways to keep food moving and limit the impact the disorder can have on your life:
Cut your food
into small, bite-size pieces and chew it thoroughly.
Drink lots of water
while you eat to moisten your food.
Sit up
when you eat so gravity can help food move down through your esophagus.
Don’t eat
solid food for three to four hours before you go to bed. That way, what you eat has time to get to your stomach before you lie down. (Gravity helps here, too.)
Tuck an extra pillow
under your head. Propping your head reduces the chance that food in your esophagus will get into your windpipe and then your lungs.
Advertisement
What food should I avoid if I have cardiospasm?
Cardiospasm makes it hard for food to move through your esophagus, particularly food that may:
Block your esophagus
: Examples are unpeeled apples and grapes, raw vegetables and stringy or dry meat
Congeal or turn into a solid mass in your esophagus
: Examples are white bread and white rice, potatoes, chips and pasta
Irritate your esophagus
: Examples are spicy foods, carbonated drinks or beverages containing alcohol
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider as soon as you notice changes in your body, like new difficulty swallowing, which may be new achalasia symptoms.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Achalasia is a rare disorder that causes a wide range of symptoms that develop over time. It may cause everything from heartburn to hiccups to having a hard time swallowing your food. It’s understandable if you don’t make the connection between your various symptoms, much less the connection between your symptoms and something going on in your esophagus.
But even seemingly unrelated symptoms that don’t go away are a reason to talk to a healthcare provider. There are several ways to treat achalasia, and your provider will explain each treatment and recommend the one that’s right for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Swallowing disorders (dysphagia) can affect how you eat and drink. Cleveland Clinic is here to help you manage your dysphagia and feel better.
Swallowing Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us