Lewy Body Dementia (LBD): What It Is, Symptoms & Stages
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Lewy Body Dementia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Lewy Body Dementia
Lewy body dementia (LBD) is a decline in mental functioning that happens when clumps of proteins called Lewy bodies build up in your brain cells. They damage parts of your brain that affect thinking, behavior, movement and sleep. LBD gets worse over time. There’s no cure, but medications and therapies may help manage symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lewy Body Dementia Treatment
Doctors and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Lewy Body Dementia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Lewy Body Dementia?
Lewy body dementia (LBD) is a progressive brain disorder that happens when certain proteins called Lewy bodies build up in your brain cells. This makes it harder to think clearly and do everyday activities.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
With this type of
dementia
, symptoms start slowly and get worse over time. There’s no cure, but your healthcare provider can help you manage symptoms with medications and therapies.
According to the
U.S. National Institute on Aging
, Lewy body dementia affects more than 1 million people in the United States. In adults after age 65, LBD is the second most common form of dementia after Alzheimer’s.
Types of Lewy body dementia
There are two types of LBD. They have similar symptoms. The difference is when the cognitive and movement problems begin:
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
: Cognitive and memory problems come first, like in
Alzheimer’s disease
. Movement issues usually happen later or can occur at the same time as cognitive changes.
Parkinson
’
s disease dementia
: Movement problems start first, like in
Parkinson’s disease
. Cognitive and memory issues develop later.
Symptoms and Causes
Lewy body dementia symptoms can affect many different parts of your body.
Symptoms of Lewy body dementia
LBD causes a mix of symptoms. They can be different for each person:
Thinking (cognitive)
: You might have trouble focusing, have memory loss, feel
confused
, have disorganized thoughts, see things that aren’t there (
hallucinations
) and have trouble understanding or using words.
Mood and behavior
: You may have changes in your mood or personality, like
depression
,
anxiety
or
apathy
. You could feel
paranoid
, believe in things that aren’t true (
delusions
) or feel angry or restless.
Movement
: You may have
stiff muscles
, shaking (
tremors
), slow or shuffling steps, trouble with balance, speech or swallowing, and a lack of facial expression.
Nervous system issues
: You might notice problems with your body’s automatic functions, like blood pressure, digestion, temperature control or bladder and bowel control. You may feel dizzy, faint or have trouble going to the bathroom. You may lose your sense of smell, which may be an early indicator of the disease.
Sleep
: You may have trouble falling or staying asleep. You could act out dreams (REM sleep behavior disorder), feel very sleepy during the day or have restless legs at night. Poor sleep can make other symptoms worse.
Advertisement
Symptoms may come and go. Some start early (acting out dreams or loss of smell) or show up later. They’ll slowly get worse over time.
Your provider may describe LBD in stages. These stages show how thinking and movement abilities change over time.
Lewy body dementia causes
LBD happens when proteins called Lewy bodies (alpha-synuclein) build up in brain cells. These proteins damage parts of your brain that control thinking and memory.
Doctors and researchers don’t know why some people get LBD and others don’t.
Risk factors of Lewy body dementia
LBD usually affects people after age 50. Having a biological family history of LBD or Parkinson’s disease can raise your risk.
Certain genes, like
APOE
and
GBA
, may also increase your chances. But having these genes doesn’t mean you’ll definitely get LBD.
Researchers are still studying other factors that may raise the risk of developing this condition.
Complications
LBD can lead to serious health problems, and some may be life-threatening:
Depression, which can increase the risk of suicide
Trouble eating, speaking or
swallowing
Heart problems
Falls that can cause injury
Pneumonia
Needing help walking or moving
Dementia can impact your mental health. If you’re feeling overwhelmed, are thinking about suicide or self-harm, call or text
988
in the U.S. This is the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline. Someone is there to talk to you 24/7.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Lewy body dementia
To make a diagnosis, your provider may use the following steps:
Ask about your medical history and do a
physical exam
Do a
neurological exam
to check your thinking and memory and evaluate abnormal movement problems
Order
blood tests
, cerebrospinal fluid test, a skin biopsy and brain scans (like a
CT
,
MRI
,
SPECT
or
PET
scan)
Consider a neuropsychological assessment to clarify your cognitive profile
Recommend a
sleep study
A team of specialists may work together to make a diagnosis. This team might include:
Neurologists
Psychiatrists
Neuropsychologists
Geriatricians
They combine your test results and symptoms to determine if you have “probable LBD.” This means you most likely have the condition based on the information they have, even though there isn’t a single test that can say for sure.
Management and Treatment
How is Lewy body dementia treated?
There’s no cure for Lewy body dementia and no way to prevent it. But medications and therapies can help manage symptoms for a while.
Your doctors will look at how LBD is affecting you and what stage you’re in. Then, they’ll create a treatment plan that best fits your needs.
In later stages, your care team may focus more on
palliative care
. This means providing comfort, support and relief from symptoms instead of intense treatments or hospital stays.
Advertisement
Medications for Lewy body dementia
Your provider may offer different medications. These can include:
Cholinesterase inhibitors (like
rivastigmine
,
galantamine
and
donepezil
) to improve thinking and memory
Antipsychotics
(like
pimavanserin
,
clozapine
,
quetiapine
and
aripiprazole
) for hallucinations that don’t get better with cholinesterase inhibitors
Carbidopa-levodopa
to help with movement problems
Antidepressants
(like SSRIs) to treat depression
Clonazepam
and
melatonin
to improve sleep
Memantine
for early symptom relief
Your provider may also recommend medications for nervous system symptoms, like dizziness or
blood pressure changes when standing.
These are usually prescribed if other steps, like raising your legs, eating foods with more salt or drinking more fluids, don’t help.
Therapies for Lewy body dementia
Different types of therapy may help, including:
Occupational therapy
: Helps you stay independent by teaching ways to manage daily tasks
Physical therapy
: Improves your strength, balance and ability to move
Speech therapy
: Helps with speaking, understanding language and swallowing
LBD can also impact your mental health.
Talking to a mental health professional
, either one-on-one or in a group, can help you and your family cope. Support groups are also available to connect you with others going through similar experiences.
Advertisement
A calm and steady routine can be a benefit as well. This can prevent symptoms like confusion, agitation and stress.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Hallucinations are often one of the first signs of Lewy body dementia. If you or a loved one starts seeing things that aren’t there, especially with changes in movement, mood, behavior or thinking, talk to a healthcare provider.
If you’ve already been diagnosed with LBD, you’ll need regular check-ups. Your care team will track your symptoms, adjust treatments as needed and watch for any side effects. Be sure to tell them if anything changes or if new symptoms appear.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lewy Body Dementia Treatment
Doctors and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Lewy body dementia life expectancy
On average, people live
five to eight years
after being diagnosed with Lewy body dementia. However, this number can vary. Some people live much longer, sometimes even decades.
Your provider can help you understand what to expect. Everyone’s experience is different.
What’s the prognosis for Lewy body dementia?
As this is a progressive disease, that means it gets worse over time. Some people decline slowly, while others may notice faster changes. Your general health and other medical conditions can affect how the disease progresses.
If you have LBD, your provider will suggest treatments to manage symptoms that improve your comfort and safety.
As the disease progresses, you may lose the ability to make decisions or handle daily responsibilities. That’s why it’s important to talk early about care planning. An
advance directive
is a smart step. It’s a legal form that tells others what care you want if you can’t speak for yourself.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Learning that you have Lewy body dementia (LBD) isn’t easy. You and your loved ones may worry about what’s ahead. But no one can predict exactly how the disease will progress. The best approach is to take things one day at a time.
While the symptoms can be unpredictable, there are ways to manage them. Treatments, therapies and support systems can help you stay independent and keep up with daily life for as long as possible.
It also helps to build a care team you trust, keep a calm daily routine and talk about future plans while you’re still able to make decisions. These steps might seem big, but they’re really about making things a little easier for you and the people who care about you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Learning you could have Lewy body dementia can change your world. But Cleveland Clinic is here to help you and your family manage this brain disorder.
Lewy Body Dementia Treatment
Doctors and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment