Hematoma Definition, Types & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hematoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hematoma
A hematoma happens when you have blood pooling someplace inside your body. Most hematomas aren’t serious, and you can commonly see them in the form of surface bruises. But when hematomas are deeper or bigger, they can become serious. And knowing when they need care can make a lifesaving difference.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Hematomas are areas of pooled blood inside your body. Bruises are an example of collected blood visible through your skin.
What is a hematoma?
A hematoma is a closed wound where blood collects and fills a space inside your body because it can’t flow or drain out. And if blood fills a space, it can start pushing surrounding tissues outward. Minor hematomas are common, and you can have them almost anywhere in your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hematomas are a concern when they’re larger, press on surrounding tissues or happen because of dangerous conditions. But smaller ones in noncritical places usually go away and aren’t a cause for worry.
Types of hematomas
There are several specific types of hematomas, mostly organized by where they happen. They include, but aren’t limited to, the following:
Breast hematomas
Cephalohematomas
in newborns
Hematomas inside your skull, like
subdural hematomas
and
epidural hematomas
Internal bleeding like
hemoperitoneum
Rectus sheath hematomas
near your abdominal muscles or other muscle hematomas
Subchorionic hematomas
during
pregnancy
Subungual (under the nail) hematomas of your fingernails or toenails
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of hematoma?
The bigger a hematoma is, the more likely it is to cause symptoms. They’re also likely to cause symptoms when they fill small spaces or are next to critical tissues. Some common symptoms of a hematoma include:
Pain
. Hematomas usually happen with injuries, so pain is one of the key symptoms.
Bruising
. Shallower hematomas commonly cause visible color changes. They can be tiny (like
petechiae
), slightly larger (like
purpura
) or very large (like
bruises
).
Swelling
. Hematomas can cause
swelling (edema)
as the pooled blood pushes surrounding tissues like muscles or skin outward.
Nerve symptoms
. Hematomas can press on
nerves
, causing a pins-and-needles (
paresthesia
) feeling, as well as
numbness
or
nerve pain
.
Advertisement
Dangerous symptoms
Hematomas inside your head are dangerous because there’s limited space for blood to fill. Blood filling that space will start pressing on your brain, eventually damaging it.
Warning symptoms from hematomas in your head include:
A sudden, severe
headache
Weakness or
paralysis
, especially
on one side
of your body or face
Nausea
and
vomiting
Trouble
speaking
(aphasia) or
swallowing
(dysphagia)
Loss of balance or trouble coordinating muscle movements (ataxia)
Seizures
Losing consciousness and
coma
Internal bleeding inside your chest or abdomen that causes a large hematoma can also cause warning symptoms. They include:
Trouble breathing or breathing changes, like breathing fast (
tachypnea
) or slow (
bradypnea
)
Chest
or
abdominal pain
Your skin noticeably turning pale (
pallor
), cold or clammy
Severe pain, especially when it happens for an unknown reason or it seems much worse than you’d expect from the likely cause
What causes hematomas?
Traumatic injuries
are a key cause of hematomas. Blunt force trauma can easily cause them because bleeding inside your body doesn’t have anywhere to go.
But penetrating injuries can also cause hematomas. When you have some kind of penetrating injury, your body plugs the opening as soon as possible through a process called
hemostasis
. But if bleeding continues inside your body after the opening seals, hematomas can develop.
Some specific, injury-related conditions that can cause hematomas include:
Bone fractures
, especially complete ones (where the break goes all the way through the bone)
Broken nose
, facial
fractures
or
cauliflower ear
Head injuries
and
traumatic brain injuries
, especially ones that cause
intracranial bleeds
Internal organ injuries, especially ones that involve significant bleeding
Medical procedures that cause issues like a
blown vein
from an intravenous (IV) line or internal bleeding after surgery
Muscle contusions
Ruptures and tears of various tissues inside your body
Strain-related injuries like
sprained
joints
You can also develop hematomas from internal bleeding with conditions that don’t involve an injury or external cause. Conditions that can do that include:
Blood vessel tearing like
aortic dissections
Clotting disorders like
hemophilia
Blood cancers
like
leukemia
or
lymphoma
Damage from internal growths like tumors (including
benign
and
malignant
growths)
Hemorrhagic strokes
Internal organ damage from conditions like
kidney stones
Conditions that can cause digestive tract
ulcers
Nontraumatic
brain bleeds
from conditions like
high blood pressure (hypertension)
Ruptured
aneurysms
Infectious diseases that can cause internal bleeding, like
viral hemorrhagic fevers
Advertisement
Complications
Hematomas usually don’t cause complications unless they involve a lot of bleeding. Complications that they can cause include:
Hypovolemic shock
Ischemia
from lack of blood when hematomas press on blood vessels, stopping blood from flowing through
Nerve compression
symptoms
Other complications may be possible, depending on your health history and other factors. Your healthcare provider is the best person to tell you more about your specific complication risks.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is it diagnosed?
A healthcare provider can diagnose a hematoma using a physical exam and imaging tests. A physical exam is especially useful if there’s been an injury. During these exams, your provider will look for visible skin changes, listen with a
stethoscope
and feel (palpate) with their hands. Palpating is especially useful because hematomas feel different from normal, healthy tissues. Your provider may also ask questions about your symptoms, how and when they started, etc.
Imaging scans are helpful for finding hematomas because they let healthcare providers see inside your body.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
is the best at showing hematomas, especially deeper ones. But MRIs take a lot longer than other scans, so providers may use the following:
Advertisement
Computed tomography (CT) scans
. These can show if hematomas in your skull are pushing on your brain tissue.
Angiography
. This test can help find internal bleeding and related hematomas.
Ultrasound
. This test can help providers see hematomas that are shallower or in specific places, like around your uterus.
Depending on factors like your symptoms and health history, your provider may recommend other tests. They can tell you more about how these tests can help.
Management and Treatment
How are hematomas treated?
Smaller hematomas usually don’t need treatment or are treatable with simple home remedies. For simple surface bruising or a sprained or twisted joint, use the
RICE method
:
Rest
, so the injury can start healing.
Ice
, and be sure to wrap ice packs in towels so you don’t get frostbite.
Compression
, like wrapping the injured part with an elastic bandage.
Elevate
, so the affected part is higher than your heart.
When hematomas are more serious, treatment starts with managing dangerous effects or complications. Examples include
transfusing blood
to make up for severe blood loss, or doing
CPR
to keep blood circulating if your heart stops.
When you’re not in imminent danger, treatment focuses on addressing whatever caused the hematoma. Examples include:
Advertisement
Surgery to repair damaged blood vessels and tissues
Procedures to drain hematomas like centesis (using a needle to pull pooled blood out of your body)
Setting and immobilizing broken bones
Removing pooled blood so it doesn’t press on surrounding areas and it’s easier for your body to heal
Medications to help with blood pressure, clotting issues and any other related concerns
Your provider may recommend other treatments, depending on the details of your situation. They can explain the various options in detail and tell you about any possible complications or side effects.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a hematoma?
What you can expect from a hematoma can vary depending on several factors. Its size and cause, your health history and many other factors can affect what you experience. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about what you can and should expect for your specific case. They can also tell you about the outlook for your condition and what you can do to improve it.
Prevention
Are hematomas preventable?
Most hematomas aren’t preventable because they happen unpredictably. But there are a few things you can do to reduce the odds of having them.
Prevent injuries or limit their severity
. You can do this by using safety gear like helmets and protective padding and wearing your seat belt in moving vehicles.
Manage chronic conditions
. This may help you delay or even prevent dangerous conditions like strokes and brain bleeds. It can also help avoid hematomas from bleeding/clotting disorders.
Train and exercise cautiously
. You can get hematomas from muscle and soft tissue damage, so preventing that damage lowers your odds of developing hematomas.
Hematomas can also happen from other chronic conditions. Talk to your healthcare provider about ways to prevent hematomas if you have a chronic condition that might cause them.
Living With
How do I take care of myself if I have a hematoma?
Taking care not to aggravate or worsen an injury that caused a hematoma is a key part of taking care of yourself. If you give it time to heal, that’s usually all you’ll need. If you have questions or concerns about how to help a hematoma heal, you should talk to a healthcare provider. They can tailor the information they provide so it’s accurate and helpful for your situation.
When should I call or make an appointment with my healthcare provider?
You should talk to or see a healthcare provider about hematomas if you have:
Bruising that doesn’t heal within two weeks
Frequent or recurrent bruising that you can’t explain
Bruising along with other symptoms that could indicate a deeper issue (examples include muscle weakness, tingling or numbness, or color changes from lack of blood circulation)
When should I go to the hospital or emergency room?
You should get emergency medical care if you have any symptoms of dangerous conditions that involve hematomas. These symptoms include, but aren’t limited to, the following:
Trouble breathing
Losing consciousness
Chest pain
A sudden, extremely painful headache
One-sided weakness or paralysis
Trouble keeping your balance
Vision changes
Trouble speaking clearly
Unexplained nausea and vomiting
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Some questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider include:
What caused my hematoma?
How severe is it?
Can I self-treat it or do anything to care for it?
Does it need professional treatment, and what are my treatment options?
How long will my hematoma take to heal?
Additional Common Questions
How serious is a hematoma?
Hematomas can range from minor to serious. The main things that determine how serious a hematoma is include:
What’s causing it
How big it is
Where it is
If it could damage or is damaging something around it
If something about your current or past health could influence it and make it more serious
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A hematoma can be a bruise from bonking your shin on a piece of furniture or a dark purple spot underneath the nail of a toe that just got stepped on. But when hematomas are bigger, deeper or happen with certain symptoms, you shouldn’t ignore them.
If you have questions or concerns, talk to your healthcare provider. Timely diagnosis and care can make a lifesaving difference for severe hematomas. And the right response to self-treat and recover can help minor bumps and bruises fade away as your body heals.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/14/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider