Emergency Medical Technician (EMT)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Emergency Medical Technician (EMT)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Emergency Medical Technician (EMT)
An emergency medical technician (EMT) provides basic medical care for people in emergency situations outside of a hospital. They work alongside paramedics in ambulances and transport sick or injured people to a hospital for further care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Specialties
Overview
What is an emergency medical technician (EMT)?
An emergency medical technician (EMT) provides out-of-hospital emergency medical care. They also provide transportation if you need the emergency medical services (EMS) system in the United States — usually with an ambulance.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
EMTs have the basic medical knowledge and skills to safely get you to the hospital.
What does an emergency medical technician (EMT) do?
EMTs respond to calls for medical assistance outside of hospitals. Roles of an EMT include:
Quickly assessing a person’s condition and determining what treatment they may need
Providing basic medical care and
first aid
Preparing sick or injured people for transport to a hospital, like lifting them onto a stretcher
Safely transporting people to a hospital — either driving the ambulance or providing care on the way
Documenting any treatment they provide and sharing information with healthcare providers at the hospital
Specific medical interventions an EMT can perform include:
Maintaining a person’s airway, breathing and circulation with
CPR
and
defibrillation
Controlling any external bleeding with bandages and tourniquets
Preventing
shock
Preventing further injury by immobilizing potential
spinal fractures
or other
bone fractures
Providing oral (by mouth) medications, like
activated charcoal
,
NSAIDs
,
nitroglycerin
and
oral glucose gel
Providing
supplemental oxygen
with a nasal cannula
Assisting a
paramedic
with other treatments
EMTs can’t give treatments that break your skin, except
epinephrine injections
(EpiPen®) to treat
severe allergic reactions
. They can also give some nasal spray medications, like
naloxone
(Narcan®) for
substance overdoses
.
Advertisement
When would I receive care from an EMT?
You may get help from an EMT for medical situations outside of hospitals, like:
Medical emergencies (like a
stroke
, substance overdose and severe allergic reaction, for example)
Vehicle accidents
Severe injuries and traumas (like those from a shooting, stabbing or severe fall)
Emergency childbirth outside of a hospital
Fires
Near-drownings
Rescues
Mental health crises
Specialties
Who do EMTs work with?
EMTs work closely with other professionals who are part of the comprehensive EMS response system, including:
Paramedics
: These professionals do more extensive pre-hospital care than EMTs. They can give a wider range of medications and do advanced airflow management. Paramedics can use all types of medical equipment in an ambulance.
Advanced emergency medical technicians (AEMTs)
: The roles of AEMTs overlap with those of EMTs. But AEMTs can also start IV lines and give certain medications. They can use basic and some advanced medical equipment in an ambulance.
Emergency medical responders (EMRs)
: EMRs arrive at the scene of emergencies and can do CPR. They only need first responder certification for this. Firefighters and police officers typically have EMR certification.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Emergency medical technicians are crucial to emergency medical services across the United States. Know that if you need emergency medical help, an EMT and other professionals will be by your side to provide the best care and safely get you to a hospital.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider