Asthma: Types, Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Asthma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Asthma
Asthma is a condition that causes your airways to swell, narrow and fill with mucus. This can make it hard to breathe or cause other symptoms, like chest tightness, cough and wheezing. Common asthma triggers include allergies (like pets or pollen), smoke, cold weather, exercise, strong smells and stress. Asthma attacks can be fatal if not treated.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Asthma Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Asthma Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Asthma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Asthma?
Asthma triggers like allergies, cold, stress, smells or exercise cause your airways to tighten, swell and fill with mucus.
Asthma is a condition that causes long-term (chronic)
inflammation
in your
airways
. The inflammation makes them react to certain triggers, like pollen, exercise or cold air. During these
attacks
, your airways narrow (
bronchospasm
), swell up and fill with
mucus
. This makes it hard to breathe or causes you to cough or wheeze. Without treatment, these flare-ups can be fatal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Millions of people in the U.S. and around the world have asthma. It can
start in childhood
or develop when you’re an adult. It’s sometimes called bronchial asthma.
Types of asthma
Types of asthma include:
Allergic asthma
: when allergies trigger asthma symptoms
Cough-variant asthma
: when your only asthma symptom is a cough
Exercise-induced asthma
: when exercise triggers asthma symptoms
Occupational asthma
: when substances you breathe in at work cause you to develop asthma or trigger asthma attacks
Asthma-COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS)
: when you have both asthma and
COPD
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
Symptoms and Causes
Neha Solanki, MD, shares what causes asthma and if patients can outgrow it.
Symptoms of asthma
Symptoms of asthma include:
Shortness of breath
Wheezing
Chest tightness, pain or pressure
Cough
You might have asthma most of the time (persistent asthma). Or you might feel fine in between asthma attacks (intermittent asthma).
Asthma causes
Experts aren’t sure what causes asthma. But you might be at a higher risk if you:
Live with
allergies
or
eczema
(atopy)
Were exposed to toxins, fumes or
secondhand
or thirdhand smoke (residue left behind after smoking), especially early in life
Have a biological parent with allergies or asthma
Experienced repeated respiratory infections (like
RSV
) as a child
Asthma triggers
Asthma triggers are anything that causes asthma symptoms or makes them worse. You might have one specific trigger or many. Common triggers include:
Advertisement
Allergies
:
pollen
,
dust mites
,
pet dander
, other airborne allergens
Cold air
: especially in winter
Exercise
: especially intense physical activity and cold-weather sports
Mold
: even if you’re not
allergic
Occupational exposures
: sawdust, flour, glues, latex, building materials
Respiratory infections
:
colds
,
flu
and other respiratory illnesses
Smoke
:
smoking
, secondhand smoke, thirdhand smoke
Stress
: physical or emotional
Strong chemicals or smells
: perfumes, nail polish, household cleaners, air fresheners
Toxins in the air
: factory emissions, car exhaust, wildfire smoke
Asthma triggers can bring on an attack right away. Or it might take hours or days for an attack to start after you’re exposure to a trigger.
Complications of asthma
Asthma can cause severe flare-ups that don’t get better with treatment (
status asthmaticus
). This can be fatal if you can’t get enough oxygen to your organs and tissues.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose asthma
An
allergist
or
pulmonologist
diagnoses asthma by asking about your symptoms and performing
lung function tests
. They’ll ask about your personal and family medical history. It can be helpful to let them know what makes asthma symptoms worse and if anything helps you feel better.
Tests
Your provider might determine how well your lungs are working and rule out other conditions with:
Allergy blood tests
or
skin tests
: These can determine if an allergy is triggering your asthma symptoms.
Blood count
: Providers can look at
eosinophil
and
immunoglobulin E
(IgE) levels and target them for treatment if they’re elevated. Eosinophils and IgE can be elevated in certain types of asthma.
Spirometry
: This is a common lung function test that measures how well air flows through your lungs.
Chest X-rays
or
CT scans
: These can help your provider look for causes of your symptoms.
A peak flow meter
: This can measure how much your airways are restricted during certain activities.
Management and Treatment
What is the best way to manage asthma?
The best way to manage asthma is to avoid any known triggers and use medications to keep your airways open. Your provider might prescribe:
Maintenance
inhalers
: These usually contain inhaled
steroids
that reduce inflammation. Sometimes, they’re combined with different types of
bronchodilators
(medicines that open your airways).
A rescue inhaler
: Fast-acting “rescue” inhalers can help during an asthma attack. They contain a bronchodilator that quickly opens your airways, like
albuterol
.
A nebulizer
: Nebulizers spray a fine mist of medication through a mask on your face. You might use a nebulizer instead of an inhaler for some medications.
Leukotriene modifiers
: Your provider might prescribe a daily pill to help reduce asthma symptoms and your risk of an asthma attack.
Oral steroids
: Your provider might prescribe a short course of oral steroids for a flare-up.
Antihistamines
: Your provider might recommend
cetirizine
(Zyrtec
®
),
loratadine
(Claritin
®
),
fexofenadine
(Allegra
®
) or other allergy medications if you have allergic asthma.
Biologic therapy
: Treatments like
monoclonal antibodies
might help severe asthma.
Bronchial thermoplasty
: If other treatments don’t work, your provider may suggest bronchial thermoplasty. In this procedure, a pulmonologist uses heat to thin the muscles around your airways.
Advertisement
Asthma action plan
Your healthcare provider will work with you to develop an
asthma action plan
. This plan tells you how and when to use your medicines. It also tells you what to do when you have certain symptoms and when to seek emergency care. Ask your healthcare provider to walk you through it.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re having frequent asthma attacks or feel like your symptoms aren’t manageable. Make sure you understand your asthma action plan and when to go to the emergency room.
Use your rescue inhaler, then call 911 (or your local emergency number) if you’re having a severe asthma attack or are experiencing these symptoms:
Anxiety
or
panic
Bluish, whitish or grayish fingernails, lips or gums
Chest pain
or pressure
Coughing that won’t stop
Severe wheezing when you breathe
Difficulty talking or swallowing
Pale
, sweaty face
Rapid breathing
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Asthma Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Asthma Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have asthma?
Most people with asthma can manage their symptoms. Asthma management means you:
Can do the things you want to do at work and home
Have no (or minimal) asthma symptoms
Rarely need to use your rescue inhaler
Can sleep without asthma symptoms waking you up
Don’t need oral steroids for flare-ups more than twice a year
Some people are able to avoid triggers and have no symptoms most of the time. Others need to use a maintenance inhaler or other medications in addition to avoiding triggers. Kids may have fewer or no symptoms as they get older and their airways get bigger.
Advertisement
What can I do to feel better?
You might be able to reduce or avoid asthma symptoms with a few everyday habits. These include:
Avoid triggers whenever possible. It might be helpful to keep a symptoms journal to figure out what makes your symptoms worse.
Be physically active to a level that’s right for you. Ask your provider what they recommend. A
pulmonary rehabilitation
program might help.
Don’t smoke or
vape
.
Let your provider know if you’re unable to use inhalers or take medication as prescribed.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Some people have lived with asthma their whole lives. Others are taken by surprise by a diagnosis as an adult. It can take time to figure out your triggers and find ways to manage your breathing that work for you. Working closely with your healthcare team can help. It might be reassuring to know that most people are able to manage their asthma symptoms and continue doing the things they love.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
You might feel anxious when your child gasps and wheezes. Cleveland Clinic Children’s asthma experts are here to help them (and you) breathe easier.
Asthma Treatment for Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Asthma Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment