Endotracheal Intubation: Procedure, Risks & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Intubation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Intubation
Intubation can help save your life when you can’t breathe. A healthcare provider uses a laryngoscope to guide an endotracheal tube into your mouth or nose, voice box and then trachea. The tube keeps your airway open so you can get air into your lungs. Providers usually perform intubation in a hospital during an emergency or before surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
During intubation, healthcare providers insert an endotracheal tube into your airway so you can breathe.
What is intubation?
Intubation (in-too-BEY-shuhn) is a process in which a healthcare provider inserts a breathing tube through your
mouth
or
nose
, then down into your windpipe (
trachea
). The tube keeps your trachea open so air can get through. The tube can connect to a machine that delivers air or oxygen with pressure (
mechanical ventilation
).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Other names for intubation include:
Airway intubation
Endotracheal intubation (ETT)
Tracheal intubation
Why would you intubate a patient?
A healthcare provider may need to intubate you when a blockage or damage to your
airways
keeps you from breathing. Some conditions that can lead to intubation include:
Injury or trauma to your abdomen, chest or neck that affects your airways
Loss of consciousness (
fainting
) or a low level of consciousness, which can make you lose control of your airway
Need for surgery that will make you unable to breathe on your own
Respiratory failure
Risk for breathing in an object or substances, like food,
vomit
or blood (aspiration)
Something is caught in your airway and blocking the flow of air (airway obstruction)
Sudden loss of
heart
function (
cardiac arrest
)
A temporary stop in breathing (apnea)
How common is it?
Intubation is a very common lifesaving procedure. Each year in the U.S., healthcare providers perform intubation approximately:
15 million times in operating room (OR) situations
650,000 times outside of the OR, including 346,000 times in the emergency department
Procedure Details
What happens during endotracheal intubation?
Most intubation procedures happen in the hospital. Sometimes, emergency medical services (EMS) personnel intubate people outside of a hospital setting.
Advertisement
During endotracheal intubation, healthcare providers will:
Insert an intravenous (IV) needle into your arm
Deliver medications through the IV so you fall asleep and don’t feel pain during the procedure (
anesthesia
)
Place an oxygen mask over your nose and mouth to give your body extra oxygen
Tilt your head back and insert a laryngoscope in your mouth (or your nose when necessary); a laryngoscope has a handle, lights and a dull blade, which help providers guide the tracheal tube
Move the laryngoscope toward the back of your mouth, avoiding your
teeth
Raise the flap of tissue that hangs in the back of your mouth (
epiglottis
) to protect your voice box (
larynx
)
Advance the tip of the laryngoscope into your larynx and then into your trachea
Inflate a small balloon around the endotracheal tube to make sure it stays in place in your trachea and that all air from the tube reaches your
lungs
Remove the laryngoscope
Place tape on the sides of your mouth or a strap around your head to keep the tracheal tube in place
Ensure that the tube is in the right place by taking an
X-ray
or squeezing air through a bag into the tube and listening for breath sounds
How long does intubation take?
In an emergency, a healthcare provider can complete intubation in less than a minute.
Can a person talk or eat while intubated?
No. The endotracheal tube passes through your
vocal cords
, so you won’t be able to speak.
You also can’t swallow while intubated, so you can’t eat or drink. Depending on how long you’ll need intubation, healthcare providers may give you a
peripheral IV
to provide liquid nutrition (
enteral nutrition
) or
IV fluids
. They may also deliver them through a separate slim tube that they insert in your mouth or nose, which ends in your
stomach
or
small intestine
(small bowel).
How is the tracheal tube removed during extubation?
When healthcare providers decide it’s safe, they’ll remove the tube (
extubation
). They’ll:
Remove the tape or strap holding the tube in place
Use a suction device to remove any debris from your airway
Deflate the balloon inside your trachea
Tell you to take a deep breath and then cough or exhale while they pull out the tube
Your throat (
pharynx
) may be sore for a few days after extubation. You also may have trouble speaking.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of intubation?
Intubation is a common and generally safe procedure that can help save your life. The benefits of intubation far outweigh any possible risks.
What is the survival rate of being intubated?
The intubation survival rate varies according to many factors, including the reason for intubation, your age and your overall health. But according to
one study
, a little less than 7 out of every 10 people survive intubation in an emergency department setting.
Advertisement
What are the risks of intubation?
Though intubation is generally safe, risks may include:
Aspiration
: During intubation, you may inhale vomit, blood or other fluids into your lungs.
Endobronchial intubation
: The tracheal tube may go down one of the two tubes that connect your trachea to your lungs (
bronchi
). Another name for endobronchial intubation is mainstem intubation.
Esophageal intubation
: If the tracheal tube enters your food tube (
esophagus
) instead of your trachea, it can cause
brain
damage or
death
if a provider doesn’t recognize it quickly.
Failure to secure the airway
: When intubation doesn’t work, providers may not be able to treat you.
Infections
: You may develop a
bacterial infection
after intubation, like a
sinus infection
.
Injury
: Intubation can potentially injure your mouth, teeth,
tongue
, vocal cords or airway. An injury may lead to bleeding or swelling.
Problems coming out of anesthesia
: Most people recover from anesthesia well. But some have trouble waking up or other problems, like
fever
and
muscle cramps
(
malignant hyperthermia
) or temporary or permanent
nerve
damage.
Tension
pneumothorax
(collapsed lung)
: Trapped air in your chest cavity can cause your lungs to collapse.
Advertisement
Who should not be intubated?
In some cases, healthcare providers may decide that it’s not safe to intubate. This may happen if there’s severe trauma to the airway or an obstruction prevents providers from safely placing the tube.
In these cases, providers may decide to surgically open your airway through your throat at the bottom of your neck (
tracheostomy
). A tracheostomy is often necessary when you have an endotracheal tube in place for more than a few days or when you’re expected to have it for weeks.
Recovery and Outlook
How long does it take to recover?
Most people recover from intubation in a few hours or days. Reach out to a healthcare provider if you still have problems with coughing,
swallowing
or talking a few weeks after intubation. They may refer you to a head and neck specialist (
otolaryngologist
).
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Immediately contact a healthcare provider if you experience any of the following symptoms after intubation:
Chest pain
Difficulty breathing, including
shortness of breath
Difficulty or inability to speak or swallow
Severe sore throat
Swelling in your face
Additional Common Questions
How serious is it to be intubated?
It depends on why you need intubation. Healthcare providers sometimes use intubation during scheduled surgeries. But in emergency situations, intubation acts as a form of
life support
when you can’t breathe on your own.
Advertisement
What is the difference between being intubated and being on a ventilator?
Intubation and mechanical ventilation relate to each other. But they’re not exactly the same.
Intubation is the process of inserting an endotracheal tube into the airway. A healthcare provider then hooks the tube up to a device that delivers air. The device can be a bag that the provider squeezes to push air into your body, or it can be a ventilator. A ventilator is a machine that blows oxygen into your airway and lungs. Sometimes, a ventilator delivers air through a mask, not a tube.
What is nasotracheal intubation?
Nasotracheal intubation is when healthcare providers insert a tube through your nose. Providers commonly use it if you need surgery in your head, mouth or neck. You may also need nasotracheal intubation to help prevent additional trauma to your neck or windpipe.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The thought of a healthcare provider inserting a tube down your throat can be frightening. But intubation is a common medical procedure in operating rooms and emergency departments that can help save your life if you can’t breathe. Most people have a sore throat or difficulty talking after the procedure. But these side effects typically go away within a week.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sometimes you have surgery planned. Other times, it’s an emergency. No matter how you end up in the OR, Cleveland Clinic’s general surgery team is here for you.
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment