Diphtheria: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Diphtheria
Advertisement
Advertisement
Diphtheria
Diphtheria is a serious infectious disease that often causes breathing and swallowing problems. It can cause sores on your skin, as well. Due to widespread vaccine use and improved living conditions, diphtheria is very rare in the United States. But diphtheria outbreaks exist in other parts of the world.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Diphtheria?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Diphtheria?
Diphtheria is a contagious
bacterial infection
that typically affects your throat and nose. The bacterium releases a toxin that causes a buildup of grey tissue in your throat. This leads to problems with swallowing and breathing. It can affect other parts of your body, as well.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Diphtheria is treatable, but it can be life-threatening.
Diphtheria is very rare in the U.S. because of widespread use of the
diphtheria (Tdap) vaccine
and cleaner living conditions. The diphtheria epidemic peaked in 1921 in the U.S. with 206,000 cases.
In other countries with limited or no vaccines, the disease still exists. Diphtheria is endemic (an outbreak that’s limited to a certain region) in Southeast Asia, India and other parts of the world.
Types
There are two main types of diphtheria:
Classical respiratory diphtheria
:
It may affect your nose, throat, tonsils or
larynx
(voice box). It’s the most common type.
Skin (cutaneous) diphtheria
:
It causes a skin rash, sores or
blisters
. They can appear anywhere on your body. Cutaneous diphtheria is more common in tropical climates. Overall, it’s rare.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of diphtheria
Common diphtheria symptoms include:
Throat pain
Weakness or fatigue
Mild fever
Swollen lymph nodes in your neck
A thick, greyish coating on the back of your throat
Problems breathing and/or swallowing
Symptoms of skin diphtheria can include:
Painful open sore or ulcer
Rash with scales or peeling skin
Swelling and discoloration near the sore or rash
Signs of diphtheria usually show up around two to five days after exposure. But this can range from one to 10 days. Some people don’t have symptoms or have mild symptoms. But they can still spread the bacteria.
Advertisement
See a healthcare provider immediately if you have these symptoms or have been near someone with diphtheria.
Diphtheria causes
A bacterium called
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
causes diphtheria. The bacteria stick to the lining of your
airways.
They then make a toxin that damages your respiratory tissue cells.
Within a few days, a bulky, grey coating forms. It can cover tissues in your voice box, throat, nose and tonsils. Breathing and swallowing may become difficult. The toxins can damage other parts of your body, too.
If you don’t have the diphtheria vaccine and come in close contact with an infected person, you can develop the infection. You can get it through:
Droplets in the air that contain bacteria (spread by sneezing, coughing and spitting)
By touching something that has bacteria on it
By touching an open sore on an infected person
Without vaccination, you can get diphtheria more than once.
Risk factors
A lack of the diphtheria vaccine and/or not having a
booster shot
are the main risk factors for having severe diphtheria symptoms. Other risk factors for severe disease include:
Having a
weakened immune system
Being under age 5 or over 40
Risk factors for exposure include:
Low
herd immunity
Traveling to endemic areas or those with outbreaks
Living or working in overcrowded places
Complications of this condition
Diphtheria can lead to complications, like:
Airway blockage, which can cause suffocation
Heart muscle damage
and heart failure
Nerve damage
Kidney failure
These complications can result in death.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers diagnose diphtheria based on your symptoms and the results of a lab test. They’ll use a swab to take a sample from the back of your throat (or a sore). A lab then tests the sample for the bacterium that causes diphtheria.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Diphtheria treatment begins immediately — sometimes even before the lab test results come back. You may get diphtheria antitoxin to stop damage to your organs. You’ll also need
antibiotics
to fight the infection.
During treatment, you’ll stay in a hospital room by yourself (in isolation) to prevent others from getting sick. In most cases, you’re no longer contagious about 48 hours after starting antibiotics. But it takes about two to three weeks for treatment to be effective. Skin ulcers can take months to heal.
When treatment ends, your provider will run more tests to make sure the bacteria are gone.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your healthcare provider if you:
Have questions about vaccination
Were exposed to diphtheria
Have symptoms of the infection
Develop new or unexplained symptoms
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for someone with diphtheria?
Treatment for diphtheria can be effective. But, even with treatment, it can still cause death.
One study
estimates that the fatality rate of diphtheria is around 30% for people without vaccination and treatment. Children under 5 years old are at a higher risk of dying without vaccination and treatment.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
Yes. Vaccination is highly effective at preventing symptomatic diphtheria. The prevention rate is
over 87%
with three doses of the vaccine.
The U.S. uses three types of combination vaccines that include protection against diphtheria. They include DTaP, Tdap and Td. They protect you against multiple infections at once, like
pertussis (whooping cough)
and
tetanus
, too.
Talk to your healthcare provider about diphtheria immunization schedules. They can vary based on your age. Immunity can wear off over time, so you’ll need a booster about every 10 years if you’re an adult.
Many people have questions about vaccines. Healthcare providers welcome those conversations. They want you to feel confident in the decision you make.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Diphtheria is a risk you can avoid with the right medical care. Talk to your healthcare provider about vaccines, especially if you’re traveling to an area where diphtheria is more common. If you have any symptoms of diphtheria or possible exposure, go to the nearest emergency room. Diphtheria can be dangerous without quick treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment