Common Fall Injury Causes, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Falling Accidents and Injuries
Advertisement
Advertisement
Falling Accidents and Injuries
Falls can happen to anyone. But some people are more likely to fall and have fall-related injuries. That’s why fall prevention is so important. And understanding how falls happen and how to prevent them can help you, no matter your age or situation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
How Serious Are Fall Accidents and Injuries?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
How Serious Are Fall Accidents and Injuries?
Falling accidents and injuries are some of the most common reasons for people to seek medical attention. Falls can be no big deal if you don’t get any injuries — except for maybe your pride. But they can also result in dangerous or life-changing injuries.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Unintentional falls are a leading cause of injuries for almost all age groups in the United States. And falls are a bigger concern for people in two age groups: children around ages 1 to 2 and adults over 65.
Symptoms and Causes
Signs and symptoms of common injuries from falls
No harm
: This is when you fall, but aren’t hurt. You don’t need any kind of treatment.
Minor harm
: This includes smaller, superficial injuries like bruises, cuts (
lacerations
) or low-grade sprains. You can generally self-treat these issues at home.
Moderate harm
: This isn’t an emergency, but you still need professional care (like at an urgent care). It includes wrist and ankle
sprains
that limit your use of that limb, larger cuts (especially on your arms, legs or head), broken
ribs
or
spine
, or minor
concussions
.
Major harm
: Injuries of this severity are medical emergencies. They include
broken bones
in your
hip
,
pelvis
, arms, legs or hands.
Traumatic brain injuries
and
brain bleeds
also belong in this category.
Fall causes
Fall-related injuries can happen for many reasons. Some common examples include:
Sports- and leisure-related falls
Falls at work
Surfaces you didn’t know were slippery, like a floor that you couldn’t see was wet
Unstable or uneven surfaces, like cracked or loose sections of pavement
Simple human error, like tripping on something you didn’t see
Advertisement
But for some groups, falls are more likely to happen in specific ways.
Fall causes in children
As toddlers learn to walk, they have a very high fall risk. Children also may not have the experience to avoid falls in certain places. Examples include:
Stairs
Open windows
Furniture
Beds, especially for infants and toddlers, and bunk beds in general
Using playground equipment
Playing in or around treehouses
Causes of falls in older adults
In older adults, it’s common for falls to happen because multiple factors add up. As they do, your risk of a fall becomes more and more likely. Experts organize the factors into the following categories:
Medical conditions
Medications
Sensory, motor and balance issues
Environmental
Psychological, social and demographic
Medical conditions
It’s common for people to fall because of changes or long-term effects of medical conditions. Examples include:
Strokes
Movement disorders
like
Parkinson’s disease
Dementia
Vision loss
Muscle weakness (asthenia) or loss of muscle mass (
sarcopenia
)
Frailty
Medications
Many of the most common medications cause side effects that increase your risk of falls. Examples include:
Blood pressure medications
Anxiety medications
with
sedative
effects
Opioids
Your risk of a fall also goes up if you take five or more different medications daily. That’s because medications often intensify the others’ side effects.
Sensory, motor and balance issues
When your senses aren’t working properly, a fall becomes more likely. Multiple senses — especially vision, touch and balance — are important for getting around.
One example of a sensory issue that can lead to falls is vision loss. Another is
diabetes-related neuropathy
. Over time,
Type 2 diabetes
can damage
nerves
in your legs and feet. If you can’t feel your legs or feet, it can keep you from feeling uneven surfaces underfoot or stopping yourself from tripping. And if you can’t see where you’re going or obstacles in your path, you’re more likely to fall.
Environmental factors
These are factors from outside your body that can contribute to a fall. Examples include:
Home furnishings
: Rugs or other furnishings can pose a tripping hazard. Slippery surfaces, especially in bathrooms, can also cause falls.
Lack of grab bars and railings
: Falls are more likely when there’s nothing to grab for support, especially in bathrooms, on stairs and in other areas.
Footwear
: What you put on your feet can make falls more or less likely.
Weather and climate
: Snow or ice on walkways around your house can make falls more likely.
Psychological, social and demographic factors
Some factors about yourself or your background can contribute to a risk of falling. Examples include:
Advertisement
Previous falls
: If you fall once, you’re more likely to fall again in the future.
Age
: About 1 in 4 adults over age 65 fall at least once a year. For those 85 and older, it’s about 1 in 3.
Living situation
: People who live alone are more likely to fall. This can be because they try to do things on their own that require help.
Needing help with
activities of daily living (ADLs)
: People who need help with ADLs — like bathing, dressing or feeding themselves — are more likely to fall.
Fear of falling
: People who fear falling are much more likely to do so.
Fall complications
There are many potential complications of fall-related injuries. In general, the complications depend on what kind of injuries you had from the fall, the care you received and your health history.
If you’re over 65, fall-related complications are more likely to cause life-changing complications. These can include:
Extended hospitalization
: You may need to stay in the hospital longer because of fall-related injuries.
Long-term or permanent disability
: That includes permanent disabilities and/or needing to use mobility aids like a cane, walker or wheelchair.
Loss of independence
: This can include needing to live with family, in assisted living or in a long-term care facility.
Death
: A
2023 analysis
found that over 85% of fall-related deaths in the U.S. happen in adults over 65. And a
2016 study
found that about 15% of older adults who fall die within a year. Those statistics are part of why taking steps to prevent falls is so important.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose fall-related injuries
Healthcare providers can diagnose fall-related injuries using a variety of methods. They’ll start with physical and neurological exams. They’ll also likely use imaging scans to look for broken bones and/or internal injuries. The most likely imaging scans include:
X-rays
Computed tomography (CT) scans
and
CT angiograms
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Ultrasound
Lab and diagnostic tests are also possible. Experts often use them to look for underlying conditions or factors that could have contributed to the fall. Because there are many possible tests, your healthcare provider is the best source of information for your specific case.
Management and Treatment
How are fall-related injuries treated?
The treatments for fall-related injuries depend on multiple factors. The factors include the specific injuries and their severity, your health history and many other factors. Your healthcare provider is the best person to tell you about treatment options.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Prevention
Are falls preventable?
While falls can happen for reasons outside your control, it’s very possible to prevent most falls from happening. Falls are most likely to happen at home. Because of that, many of the best ways to prevent falls are ones you can put to work around your home.
Preventing falls for older adults
Some key ways to prevent falls for older adults include:
Advertisement
Stay active
: Physical activity or programs like
physical therapy
may help improve your strength and balance.
See your healthcare provider regularly
: Regular checkups let your provider check for medical conditions and review your medications to manage your fall risk.
Focus on your feet
: Take care of your feet, especially if you have chronic conditions like diabetes. Make sure you wear shoes that fit properly and replace them as needed.
Take care of your eyes
: Make sure your eyeglasses prescription is up to date by seeing your
eye care specialist
at least every one to two years (or more frequently if needed).
Ask about home safety assessments
: Occupational therapists and other experts may be able to do these assessments to identify potential hazards in your home.
Use nightlights around your home
: They can help you avoid falls due to unseen obstacles.
Preventing falls for children
The following may help prevent children from falling or protect them from serious injuries:
Restrict access
: Use gates, doors, locks and other means of childproofing to keep toddlers away from places they might fall, like stairs.
Prevent climbing
: Move climbable furniture away from windows or other places that children might fall from.
Supervise
: Keep an eye on your children in situations where they might climb or fall.
Teach
: Start teaching your children early on not to climb or go places where they might fall.
Additional Common Questions
When should I see my healthcare provider about falls?
In addition to regular checkups, you should see your provider if you repeatedly start to fall but catch yourself. These near misses can be an early sign of issues that could lead to a later fall.
It’s also a good idea to talk to your provider if you’re experiencing medication side effects that could contribute to falls. Some examples include dizziness, drowsiness or coordination issues.
When should I go to the hospital?
You should always go to the hospital after a fall if any of the following apply:
You take blood thinners (
anticoagulants
)
: These drugs make it harder for your blood to clot, which can lead to dangerous internal bleeding (even if you don’t have a visible injury). This is especially important if you hit your head, chest, back or abdomen.
You think you have a serious injury like a broken bone
: If you can’t use a limb like usual, you should get professional medical care.
You might have a head injury
: This includes hitting your head hard enough to black out or “see stars.” That also goes for delayed symptoms like confusion, drowsiness or behavior changes.
You should also get medical care immediately if you fell because of symptoms of a stroke, heart attack or other medical emergency.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Some questions that you may want to ask your healthcare provider include:
What can I do to reduce my risk of a fall?
What programs or organizations in my area might be able to help me reduce my risk of falls at home?
Are there activities that might help me prevent a fall?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Falling accidents and injuries can happen at any time in your life. But falls later in life can have drastically different effects than ones in your younger years. You can prevent falls, especially if you take precautions. You might benefit from support like a home visit from an occupational therapist or group physical activities.
If you have questions about what might help and how to access that support, talk to your healthcare provider. They can help you take care of yourself so that you can keep your life — and yourself — as steady as possible.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider