Neuroimmunology: What It Is & Disorders
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Neuroimmunology
Advertisement
Advertisement
Neuroimmunology
Neuroimmunology is the study of how your immune system and nervous system interact. There are several neurological conditions that happen as a result of your immune system attacking healthy parts of your nervous system like multiple sclerosis. These are neuroimmune diseases.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Multiple Sclerosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What Is Neuroimmunology?
Neuroimmunology is a combination of neuroscience (the study of the
nervous system
) and immunology (the study of the
immune system
). It focuses on how your nervous system and immune system work together during development and self-regulation (homeostasis) and how they respond to injuries and infections.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Before the discovery of neuroimmunology, studies theorized that your immune system and nervous system were independent and separated. Today, research disproves early theories and shows that these highly complex systems work closely together.
For example, your nervous system communicates regularly with your immune cells. To do this, your
brain
sends signals to tell your immune cells to cause inflammation.
Inflammation
is your immune system activating (turning on) to protect your body from harmful pathogens (like
germs
). Without this neuroimmunological process, your body wouldn’t be able to protect itself from harm.
What are neuroimmune diseases (neuroimmunological disorders)?
Neuroimmune diseases are conditions that affect your brain,
spinal cord
and
nerves
(neurological conditions) and happen after your immune system mistakenly attacks part of your nervous system.
Your immune system protects your body from anything that can harm it, like viruses,
bacteria
and other germs. Sometimes, your immune system gets incorrect instructions on how to do its job. For example, your immune system might activate when it shouldn’t or it might mistake parts of your nervous system for something harmful. As a result, your immune system attacks a healthy part of your nervous system.
Advertisement
This immune system attack on a healthy part of your body creates symptoms that affect how your nervous system functions.
Types of neuroimmune diseases
There are several neuroimmune diseases. Some common conditions include:
Acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis (
ADEM
).
CIDP
(chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy).
AIDP (acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy).
Autoimmune/paraneoplastic
encephalitis
.
MOGAD
(myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease).
Multiple sclerosis
(MS).
Neurosarcoidosis
and other
CNS
-mediated
autoimmune disorders
.
NMOSD (neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder).
Optic neuritis
.
Transverse myelitis
.
What are the symptoms of neuroimmune diseases?
Common neuroimmune symptoms include but aren’t limited to the following:
Bladder and bowel dysfunction.
Cognitive impairment (difficulty thinking and processing information, memory impairment).
Fatigue
.
Mood changes
.
Muscle weakness.
Sensory changes (
numbness
and tingling).
Speech difficulty.
Trouble with balance and walking.
Vision changes.
Each type of neuroimmune condition has different symptoms depending on what part of your nervous system your immune system targets during inflammation.
How rare are neuroimmunological conditions?
Neuroimmunological conditions are relatively common. Since there are a variety of conditions, the rate of occurrence varies for each type. Some are rare and some are common.
What does a neuroimmunologist treat?
Neuroimmunologists are healthcare providers who have specialized training in the field of neuroimmunology.
A neuroimmunologist works to diagnose, manage and treat all types of
neurological disorders
. They may work closely with your current care team to find treatment options for complex neuroimmune diseases that affect how your nervous system functions. They also research and test (with clinical trials) new treatment options and prevention methods for these conditions.
What are the treatment options for neuroimmune diseases?
Neuroimmune disease treatment options vary based on the type of neuroimmune disease you have and what symptoms affect you. Treatment options could include:
Taking medications.
Participating in
speech therapy
,
physical therapy
or
occupational therapy
.
Using assistive devices (like a wheelchair or walker, for example).
Making lifestyle changes (adding physical activity, eating nutritious foods, getting good sleep and/or managing
stress
).
Following up with your family care provider to monitor for or treat other conditions (e.g., high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes) that may worsen the neuroimmune disease.
Your healthcare provider will discuss all possible treatment options and their recommendations to help you feel better. They’ll also let you know if there are any side effects of the treatment to look out for.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Your nervous system and immune system seem like two different machines working to keep your body running. But these intricate systems rely on each other to do their jobs. Neuroimmunologists study neuroimmunology, or the link between your nervous and immune systems. Research is ongoing to learn more about this connection and how providers can better treat and prevent neuroimmune conditions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Living with multiple sclerosis is different for everyone. Cleveland Clinic MS specialists are experts at diagnosing and treating this condition.
Multiple Sclerosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/08/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment