Fallopian Tube Cancer: Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Fallopian Tube Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Fallopian Tube Cancer
Fallopian tube cancer affects the duct (tube) that carries eggs from your ovaries to your uterus. This rare gynecological cancer may lead to ovarian cancer. You’re more at risk if you have a BRCA gene mutation. Treatment involves surgically removing your uterus (hysterectomy), your fallopian tubes (salpingectomy) and ovaries (oophorectomy).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Fallopian Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is fallopian tube cancer?
Fallopian tube cancer forms in your
fallopian tubes
, the ducts that carry eggs from the
ovaries
to the
uterus
. Most fallopian tube cancer starts in the same tissue (epithelial tissue) and acts like
ovarian cancer
and
primary peritoneal cancer
. Healthcare providers diagnose, treat and manage these cancers similarly.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Fallopian tube cancer is
curable
if it’s treated early, when surgery removes all of the cancer cells. The challenge of this cancer is that it doesn’t often cause symptoms in the early stages, and it spreads fast. Most people aren’t diagnosed until fallopian tube cancer has spread and is harder to treat.
How common is the condition?
For years, medical experts thought of fallopian tube cancer as the rarest cancer that affects the
female reproductive system
(gynecological cancers). As few as 1% of gynecological cancers start in the cells lining your fallopian tubes.
But new research shows that the most common type of ovarian cancer —
epithelial ovarian cancer
— likely starts in the fallopian tube. It forms at the end of the tubes where eggs enter from your ovaries (
fimbriae
). It then spreads to the surface of your ovary and the rest of your pelvis and abdomen.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of fallopian tube cancer?
Symptoms of fallopian tube cancer can be hard to notice and easy to ignore, especially in the early stages. You may not notice symptoms until the cancer has spread throughout your abdomen.
Signs and symptoms of fallopian tube cancer include:
Pelvic pain
or mass.
Abdominal pain
, swelling or bloating.
Loss of appetite
, feeling full quickly or
nausea
.
Changes in your pooping habits, like
constipation
or
diarrhea
.
Peeing more often (
frequent urination
).
Abnormal periods
or bleeding after menopause.
Watery or bloody
vaginal discharge
.
Advertisement
You should see your healthcare provider anytime you notice a change in your health, especially if you have a family history of
cancer
or other risk factors.
What causes fallopian tube cancer?
Researchers aren’t sure what causes fallopian tube cancer. They do know that 90% of the time, it develops in glands that line your organs, including epithelial cells. These are the same type of cells where most ovarian cancers start. Most fallopian tube and ovarian tumors are high-grade serous tumors. This means they spread fast.
The remaining fallopian tube cancers start in connective tissue (
sarcomas
).
Risk factors
Factors that increase your chances of developing fallopian tube cancer include:
Age
: More than half of people with fallopian tube cancer or ovarian cancer are over 63.
Ethnicity
: People living in North America or those of Northern European or Ashkenazi Jewish descent are more likely to get fallopian tube cancer.
Family history
: Your risk is greater if you have a first-degree biological relative (mother, sister, daughter) who’s had
breast cancer
, ovarian cancer or fallopian tube cancer.
Genetic mutations
: Changes (
mutations
) to the breast cancer (
BRCA
) gene increase your risk.
Health conditions
: Inherited conditions such as
Lynch syndrome
and
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
increase fallopian cancer risk.
Endometriosis
is also a risk factor.
Pregnancy and childbirth history
: You’re more likely to develop fallopian tube cancer if you’ve never been pregnant or if you had your first full-term
pregnancy
past age 35.
Menstrual cycle history
: Getting your
first period
before age 12 and going through
menopause
after age 51 are both risk factors.
Obesity
: Having a
body mass index (BMI)
above 30 (
obesity
) can increase your risk, especially if you had obesity during early adulthood.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is fallopian tube cancer diagnosed?
Fallopian tube cancer doesn’t usually cause symptoms in the early stages, which means it often spreads before diagnosis. You may not know there’s an issue until a healthcare provider notices a lump or mass during a routine
pelvic exam
.
Your provider may order one or more of these tests to learn more about your condition:
Blood tests
: A
CA-125 blood test
measures the amount of cancer antigen 125 (CA-125). You may have higher levels of CA-125 if you have fallopian tube cancer. But you may have high levels for reasons unrelated to a fallopian tube cancer diagnosis, especially if you’re
perimenopausal
.
Imaging tests
: You may get a
transvaginal ultrasound
,
computed tomography (CT) scan
,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
or
positron emission tomography (PET) scan
. These scans produce images of your fallopian tubes and ovaries and can show cysts and tumors.
To make a diagnosis, your provider will need to remove fluid or tissue so a
pathologist
can test for cancer cells in a lab. Procedures include:
Exploratory surgery
: Surgery allows your provider direct access to your organs, so they can check for suspicious-looking tissue. They may remove all or part of your fallopian tubes, ovaries and nearby
lymph nodes
for testing. Procedures include
laparotomy
(open surgery),
laparoscopy
(minimally invasive surgery) or
robotic surgery
.
Paracentesis
: Your provider uses a needle to collect a sample of fluid that’s built up in your abdomen (
ascites
) for testing.
Biopsy
: A biopsy removes a tissue sample from a tumor for testing. This procedure can be performed under
ultrasound
or
computed tomography (CT) scan
guidance.
Advertisement
How is fallopian tube cancer staged?
Imaging scans and procedures that remove and test tissue allow providers to stage fallopian tube cancer.
Cancer staging
describes where fallopian tube cancer is located and how much it’s spread (
metastasized
). Staging helps your provider plan treatments and determine your prognosis.
Stages of fallopian tube cancer include:
Stage 1
: Cancer affects one fallopian tube or both.
Stage 2
: Cancer affects one fallopian tube or both and nearby tissues in your pelvis.
Stage 3
: Cancer has spread outside your pelvis to lymph nodes or nearby organs.
Stage 4
: Cancer has spread to your liver or distant organs like your
lungs
or
brain
.
You may also hear your provider describe your cancer as:
Local
: Hasn’t spread beyond your fallopian tubes.
Regional
: Has spread to nearby abdominal organs or lymph nodes.
Distant
: Has spread to distant organs.
Your provider can help you understand these classifications and how they affect your health outlook.
Management and Treatment
How is fallopian tube cancer treated?
Your treatment will depend on the cancer stage. Treatments include:
Surgery
: Exploratory surgery to diagnose fallopian tube cancer is often also the first stage of treatment. Most people have surgery to remove their uterus (
hysterectomy
), both fallopian tubes (
salpingectomy
) and ovaries (
oophorectomy
). You may need to have other organs removed, too, to increase your chances of survival and improve your quality of life. Depending on your age and diagnosis, your provider may be able to remove only the tumor. That way, you still may be able to have children.
Chemotherapy
: You may need chemotherapy to shrink the tumor before surgery or destroy lingering cancer cells after surgery. Sometimes, providers give chemotherapy treatment during surgery to allow more concentrated
chemotherapy drugs
in your abdomen. This is called heated (hyperthermic) intraoperative peritoneal chemotherapy.
Targeted therapy
: Targeted therapy stops the growth of certain cancer cells with minimal damage to healthy cells. Your provider may recommend targeted therapy drugs if you have a
BRCA
genetic mutation.
Immunotherapy
: If you have cancer cells with a specific genetic mutation (such as
Lynch syndrome
), your provider may consider
immunotherapy drugs
.
Clinical trials
: Your provider may recommend you take part in a study to try promising new
cancer treatments
.
Palliative care
: Palliative care can help you manage cancer symptoms and treatment
side effects
.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Fallopian Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have fallopian tube cancer?
About 80% of people experience
remission
(no signs or symptoms of fallopian tube cancer) after treatment. Early-stage cancers return (
recur
) 25% of the time. Advanced-stage cancers return up to 80% of the time.
You’ll need to see your healthcare provider regularly, especially within the first five years, to check for recurrent cancer. You’ll likely need lifelong checkups if you were treated for advanced cancer.
Talk to your provider about any new symptoms you’re experiencing during these visits. In addition to striving to keep you cancer-free, your healthcare provider can offer resources and advice to help you manage lasting side effects or locate support groups for people living with a cancer diagnosis.
What’s the prognosis for someone with fallopian tube cancer?
Survival rates depend on the cancer stage and other factors, like a person’s age. The prognosis is best when providers catch the cancer before it spreads.
The five-year survival rates (odds of being alive five years after the initial diagnosis) are:
Local: 94%.
Regional: 53%.
Distant: 44%.
Prevention
How can I prevent fallopian tube cancer?
If you have a family history of breast, ovarian or fallopian tube cancer, your healthcare provider may recommend a
BRCA
test
. The test can show if you have a
BRCA
mutation or a syndrome that increases your risk of gynecological cancers.
Advertisement
If you have the mutation, removing your ovaries and fallopian tubes (a salpingo-oophorectomy) can lower cancer risk by as much as 96%. This is a prophylactic (preventive) procedure.
To reduce your risk of fallopian tube cancer, you can also:
Choose hormonal
birth control options
, such as
the pill
or an
implant
. (But if you have a
BRCA
gene mutation, talk with your provider about what’s right for you. These options may increase breast cancer risk in some people.)
Have a
tubal ligation
or removal of your fallopian tubes.
Use non-hormonal treatments to manage menopause symptoms.
Cut back on how much alcohol you consume and
quit smoking
if you do.
Eat a healthy diet and stay physically active.
Strive to reach a healthy weight for you.
Breastfeed
, if possible.
Living With
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if you have:
A lump or mass in your pelvic area.
Severe abdominal, pelvic or back pain that interferes with sleep or daily activities.
Unexplained weight loss
.
Unusual vaginal discharge.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What’s the cancer stage?
What’s the best treatment for me?
What are the treatment risks and side effects?
Should I (or my family members) get tested for
BRCA
gene mutations?
What changes can I make to protect my health?
Should I look out for signs of complications?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Fallopian tube cancer has different outcomes depending on how early your healthcare provider catches it. If you receive this diagnosis, talk to your provider about how the cancer stage will affect your treatment options. Ask them to explain what you should expect during treatment and afterward — including side effects, but also improvements in your quality of life.
No two cancer diagnoses are the same. Your provider is your best resource for explaining what a fallopian tube cancer diagnosis means for your health and everyday life now and in the future.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic experts know what it takes to diagnose fallopian tube cancer. We’ll design personalized treatment using advanced surgery and therapies.
Fallopian Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/10/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment