Ichthyosis Vulgaris: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ichthyosis Vulgaris
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ichthyosis Vulgaris
Ichthyosis vulgaris is a common condition that causes dry, scaly skin. It’s usually caused by a genetic mutation (change), but can also be associated with medical conditions or medications. Mild cases may be confused with dry skin. There isn’t a cure, but you can minimize symptoms and prevent infections by soaking, exfoliating and moisturizing your skin frequently.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is ichthyosis vulgaris?
Ichthyosis vulgaris is a
skin
condition that causes excessively dry, thick, scaly skin. “Ichthyosis” (pronounced “ik-thee-o-sis”) comes from the word for “fish scales,” and “vulgaris” means “common.”
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Who might get ichthyosis vulgaris?
Anyone can get ichthyosis vulgaris. It often begins in infancy or childhood, between 2 months and 5 years old, or during your teenage years. But it can also start in adulthood.
How common is ichthyosis vulgaris?
There are more than 20 kinds of ichthyosis, and ichthyosis vulgaris is the most common by far. It affects about 1 of every 250 people.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of ichthyosis vulgaris?
Ichthyosis vulgaris symptoms can be mild to very bothersome.
Your skin can look or feel:
Bumpy (
keratosis pilaris
)
Chapped
Cracked or split
Dry
Itchy
Rough
Thick
Scaly
It’s common to have white, gray or brown scales on the front of your legs, back of your arms, scalp, back or stomach. If scales appear on your face, it’s mostly on your forehead and cheeks. Sometimes, the edges of the scales curl, making your skin feel rough. You may also have a lot of deep lines on the palms of your hands and soles of your feet.
The symptoms of ichthyosis vulgaris often flare up in the winter and improve in the summer.
What is the cause of ichthyosis vulgaris?
Ichthyosis vulgaris is usually caused by a genetic variation, which can be inherited or happen spontaneously during
fetal development
.
The gene variation causes the defective production of filaggrin. Filaggrin is a protein that helps bind cells together to form the skin barrier. As a result, skin cells don’t separate at the surface of your skin. And dead skin cells don’t shed well, causing scales.
Advertisement
But ichthyosis vulgaris can also occur with medical illnesses, like:
Cancer
Kidney failure
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Lupus
Sarcoidosis
Rarely, it can result from the use of certain medications, like:
Cimetidine
Clofazimine
Nicotinic acid (a B vitamin)
Is ichthyosis vulgaris contagious?
Ichthyosis vulgaris isn’t contagious. You can’t give it to another person by skin-to-skin contact.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is ichthyosis vulgaris diagnosed?
Ichthyosis vulgaris can be difficult to diagnose. Many people with mild cases often assume they just have dry skin. If moisturizers don’t help, you may have ichthyosis vulgaris.
A healthcare provider like a
dermatologist
can diagnose the condition by discussing your symptoms. They’ll examine your skin and ask what makes the symptoms better or worse. They’ll also ask about your family’s history of skin conditions and any medications you’re taking.
Ichthyosis vulgaris is usually a clinical diagnosis that doesn’t require testing. But a healthcare provider may order a
skin biopsy
to look at a skin sample under a microscope. Or they may order a blood test or saliva test to look for a filaggrin mutation.
Management and Treatment
Can you get rid of ichthyosis vulgaris?
There’s no cure for ichthyosis vulgaris. Treatment usually involves skin care at home to minimize symptoms and prevent infections. Your healthcare provider will instruct you to soak, exfoliate and moisturize your skin frequently.
If another medical condition is causing ichthyosis vulgaris, your healthcare provider will treat that condition. If a medication is causing the skin issue, you may consider stopping the medicine or taking an alternative.
For severe cases that don’t improve with skin care strategies, your healthcare provider may prescribe oral retinoids such as
acitretin
or
isotretinoin
.
If skin cracks cause infections, your healthcare provider may prescribe
antibiotics
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect with ichthyosis vulgaris?
Ichthyosis vulgaris can be annoying, but it rarely affects overall health and doesn’t shorten your lifespan.
The prognosis is usually excellent, particularly with genetic forms. Inherited ichthyosis vulgaris often improves or disappears over time. The outlook for acquired forms of the condition depends on the underlying disease.
Prevention
How can I prevent ichthyosis vulgaris?
There’s no way to prevent most cases of ichthyosis vulgaris. But you can help manage flare-ups by frequently soaking, exfoliating and moisturizing.
Are there other conditions that put me at higher risk for ichthyosis vulgaris?
Many people with ichthyosis vulgaris also have:
Allergic rhinitis (hay fever)
Asthma
Eczema
Food allergies
Scientists are still working to understand the links between these conditions.
Living With
What are some home remedies for ichthyosis vulgaris?
The following skin care strategies can help you manage ichthyosis vulgaris:
Soak:
Take a bath at least once a day, using mild cleansers. Consider soaking in salt water, which will help loosen scales. Pat your skin dry after bathing. Your healthcare provider may suggest adding a tiny amount of bleach to the water to prevent skin infections.
Exfoliate:
Gently exfoliate your skin to loosen and remove scales and rough patches. Exfoliating will also help moisturizers penetrate the skin. Try using a pumice stone or a slightly abrasive sponge after your skin has soaked. You can also apply products containing exfoliants, like
salicylic acid
, glycolic acid, lactic acid, alpha hydroxyl acid or
urea
.
Moisturize:
Apply lotions or creams to your skin immediately after bathing. Consider thick
emollients
, such as petroleum jelly. If you have open sores, your dermatologist may recommend applying an emollient before baths. Consider using a humidifier to make the air around you less dry.
Avoid irritants:
Don’t use products that may irritate the skin, like those with dyes and fragrances. Choose clothing made of soft, moisture-wicking materials.
Advertisement
When should I seek medical attention for ichthyosis vulgaris?
Call a healthcare provider if ichthyosis vulgaris is bothersome or you experience signs of skin infection, like:
Fever
Fluid or pus leaking from your skin
Pain or swelling that doesn’t get better
Red streaks on your skin
Yellow crustiness on top of affected areas
How can I best learn to cope with ichthyosis vulgaris?
Some people with ichthyosis vulgaris may be self-conscious about their appearance, which can cause emotional or
social anxiety
. If you’re experiencing psychological effects from the skin condition, talk to your healthcare provider.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ichthyosis vulgaris can cause more than scaly, dry, itchy skin. The rash can make you self-conscious and affect your self-esteem. Although there’s no cure, there are treatments available to help you manage the condition. If you think you have ichthyosis vulgaris, talk to a healthcare provider like a dermatologist. They can diagnose the issue and prescribe medication to help minimize severe symptoms and prevent infections.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/22/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment