Meige Disease (Lymphedema Praecox)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Meige Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Meige Disease
Meige disease is a rare type of lymphedema that happens because of missing lymph nodes and channels. Lymphatic fluid builds up and causes swelling in your lower body, typically around puberty. This is a long-term disease with no cure, but treatments help with fluid drainage.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is Meige disease?
Meige disease (lymphedema praecox) is a rare form of
lymphedema
that usually appears between puberty and your mid-20s. Lymphedema praecox is a genetic condition in which your
lymphatic system
doesn’t develop normally in certain parts of your body. Without the typical
lymph nodes
and channels, lymphatic
fluid
builds up instead of going where it should. This causes swelling.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Because Meige disease gets worse over time, a prompt diagnosis and early treatment are best. Many people find relief from treatments that don’t involve surgery.
How common is this condition?
Meige disease is the most common type of primary lymphedema. (Primary means another condition didn’t cause it.) But it’s still a rare disease. To understand what this means, picture one of America’s largest college football stadiums filled with people under age 20. Now imagine one person in it might have primary lymphedema (1 in 100,000 people). It’s more common in
females
than in males.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of Meige disease?
Meige disease symptoms include swelling (
edema
) in your feet, ankles and legs. This swelling, which may appear at
puberty
, develops slowly over several months. It doesn’t cause pain, but the affected area may feel heavy.
People with lymphedema praecox may also have:
Hearing loss
Extra eyelashes (
distichiasis
)
Bones
in your
spine
that didn’t form properly
Blood vessels
in your
brain
that didn’t form correctly
Meige disease is different from
Milroy’s disease
, which is another form of lymphedema. People with Milroy’s disease have leg swelling in their first year of life. Meige disease shows up years later.
What causes Meige disease?
In people with Meige disease, something goes wrong when their lymphatic system is forming. Researchers have found some
genetic variations
linked to Meige disease. But many people with this condition don’t have an identified genetic link to it.
Advertisement
It only takes one parent with the variant to pass this on to their child. But not all children will experience the condition.
What are the complications?
Complications of Meige disease may include:
Cellulitis
or another type of skin infection in your legs
Papillomatosis (wart-like growths)
Hyperkeratosis
(thickened skin)
Lymphangitis
(inflamed lymph vessels)
Breakdown of
skin
Rarely, lymphedema praecox can become
cancerous
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is it diagnosed?
To make a Meige disease diagnosis, a healthcare provider will:
Perform a
physical exam
Talk with you about your medical history and that of your biological family
Order one or more tests
Tests a provider may use to diagnose Meige disease lymphedema include:
Ultrasound
Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI)
Lymphoscintigraphy
Computed tomography
(CT)
Management and Treatment
How is Meige disease treated?
Although there isn’t a
cure
for Meige disease, treatments help drain lymphatic fluid.
Meige disease treatment includes:
Compression stockings
or devices
Physical activity, like swimming
Lymphatic drainage massage
Leg elevation
Laser therapy
Liposuction
Surgery
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Meige disease?
Lymphedema praecox is chronic (long-term), so you’ll need to manage it throughout your life. The disease tends to get worse slowly over time. But most people get good results without having surgery. You may need surgery if other treatments don’t work for you.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
You can take care of yourself in several ways. You can:
Protect your skin from wounds by using moisturizer and wearing shoes outside
Reduce how much salt you eat to help lessen how much fluid your body holds onto
Replace compression socks or sleeves every three to six months so they keep working well
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You may have frequent appointments at first. But in the long term, you may only see your provider once a year with Meige disease.
Regular visits with your provider can allow them to monitor how you’re doing. They can see if your condition is getting worse or if the treatment you’re using is working.
You should also contact your provider if you see signs of cellulitis or other complications.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
What’s the best treatment for me?
How many hours a day do I need to wear compression garments?
Who in my family may also get this disease?
How much physical activity do I need?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Nobody plans for a chronic health condition. But many people can treat Meige disease without needing surgery. Talk to your healthcare provider about the best ways you can manage your symptoms. Lean on family and friends for support. It can help to talk to someone about how you’re feeling as you learn to manage Meige disease.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment