Voice Disorders: Types, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Voice Disorders
Advertisement
Advertisement
Voice Disorders
Voice disorders affect your ability to speak clearly. They’re usually the result of overusing your voice or issues with your voice box or vocal cords. Symptoms include hoarseness and problems with your pitch and loudness. Most people can overcome voice disorders with voice therapy. Some will need medical or surgical treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Larynx Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What are voice disorders?
Voice disorders affect your ability to speak. They may change the quality, pitch or loudness of your voice. Normally, when you speak, air moves through your lungs, up into your windpipe (
trachea
) and through your voice box (
larynx
). You have two
vocal cords
at the top of your windpipe inside your larynx. They’re in an open position when you breathe. They touch and vibrate as air moves through them, producing the sound of your voice.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But with a voice disorder, something interferes with this process and makes your voice sound different.
Voice disorders may be:
Organic
. There are problems with the structure of your voice box, vocal cords or lungs. Organic disorders are usually structural (like abnormal growths on your larynx).
Neurological
. A disorder affects the nerves that control your larynx.
Functional
. The structures that produce vocal sounds — your voice box, vocal cords and
lungs
— are normal, but you have problems using them. Usually, this happens when you have difficulty using your vocal cord muscles. Additionally, it’s possible for stress, emotion and changes to your psychological state to influence your voice.
Some voice disorders may involve more than one category. For example, you could have a vocal fold paralysis — when one vocal cord doesn’t move the way it should (neurological). In response, the other vocal cord may overcompensate for the paralyzed one, causing you to develop tension in your throat (functional). Or excessive tension (functional) in the throat could lead to the development of vocal fold nodules (organic).
A voice disorder can prevent you from communicating with others or expressing yourself. This can have a serious impact on your quality of life. But there are treatments that can help.
Advertisement
Types of voice disorders
There are many types of disorders that can change your voice. Some of the most common ones include:
Laryngitis
. Irritation or swelling of your vocal cords. It’s usually temporary and results from allergies or an
upper respiratory infection
.
Muscle tension dysphonia.
When the muscles inside and/or around your voice box get too tight. This can also involve the muscles your neck, shoulders and upper back.
Spasmodic dysphonia (laryngeal dystonia)
. A
neurological disorder
that causes spasms in your vocal cords.
Vocal cord lesions
. Benign (noncancerous) growths — like nodules, polyps or cysts — that can affect your voice.
Vocal cord paralysis
.
When your vocal cords aren’t moving as they should. This prevents you from controlling your voice box muscles.
There are also disorders of your upper airway. They don’t involve using your voice, but they do involve your larynx and vocal cords. They include:
Inducible laryngeal obstruction
(ILO), also known as paradoxical vocal fold motion disorder (PVFM) or vocal cord dysfunction
Exercise-induced laryngeal obstruction (EILO)
If you have ILO or EILO, your vocal cords or other structures in your throat may be moving the wrong way when you breathe. This can keep you from taking in full breaths.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of voice disorders?
Symptoms of voice disorders vary depending on the cause. Your voice may sound:
Strained
Raspy or
hoarse
Breathy or airy
Gurgly or wet
Weak and hard to project
Too high or too low
Too loud or too soft
Uneven or shaky, with breaks or gaps in sound
Speaking may hurt or take a lot of effort. It may feel like you have a
lump in your throat
.
What causes voice disorders?
Overusing your voice is the most common cause of voice disorders. You can overuse your voice by yelling, singing or just talking too much.
Sometimes, voice disorders are the result of a short-term (acute) illness like a
cold
,
allergies
or
sinus infection (sinusitis)
. They cause
inflammation
in your throat that changes the way air flows through. Once you recover, your voice usually returns to normal within a few days or weeks.
More complex voice disorders occur when there’s a problem with the structure, muscles or nerves in your voice box or vocal cords.
Risk factors
Anyone can develop a voice disorder, but certain factors increase your risk:
Age and sex
. Being a
female
over 60
Job
. Teachers, singers, telemarketers and other people with professions that require a lot of speaking or voice use (in one
study
of nearly 1,000 teachers, more than half had a voice disorder)
Behaviors
. Drinking alcohol and
smoking
Surgery
. A past surgery involving your throat (like a
thyroidectomy
) or using a breathing tube
Hormonal disorders
. Having
diabetes
,
thyroid disease
or
polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS)
Other medical conditions
. Having a neurological disorder,
autoimmune disease
,
chronic acid reflux
(GERD),
laryngopharyngeal acid reflux
(LPR),
laryngeal cancer
,
substance use disorder
or
alcohol use disorder
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How are voice disorders diagnosed?
Your primary healthcare provider may diagnose a voice disorder. They may refer you to a
speech-language pathologist (SLP)
or
laryngologist
(an
ear, nose and throat doctor
who specializes in voice box disorders). They’ll ask questions about your symptoms and medical history. Your provider may also ask about how your voice challenges are affecting your life at home, work or school.
Your provider will listen closely while you’re speaking. They’ll look closely at your face, head, neck and throat while you speak and breathe. They may ask you to use your voice to say certain phrases or hold out certain sounds with your voice and go high and low in pitch.
Report any symptoms you feel during these exercises. Tell your provider if you have pain, scratchiness or difficulty breathing.
What tests will be done to diagnose this condition?
To see how well your voice box and vocal cords are working, you may need imaging tests:
Laryngoscopy
. Uses a thin, flexible tube (scope) with a video camera attached to examine the back of your throat. Your healthcare provider may take samples from nodules, polyps or cysts and check for diseases (
biopsy
).
Videostroboscopy
. Uses a scope attached to a special camera that shows your vocal cords moving in slow motion when you make sounds.
Laryngeal electromyography (LEMG)
. Uses an electrode to measure the nerve signals produced when you use your voice box muscles.
An
MRI
or
CT scan
. Shows detailed images of your vocal cords and voice box that allow your provider to check for growths.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How are voice disorders treated?
Some short-term voice disorders might improve by resting your voice. Your healthcare provider may advise you to avoid shouting, singing or straining your voice for several days. They may tell you to try to talk as little as possible.
Other treatments include:
Voice therapy
. Speech-language pathologists teach techniques and exercises to help you find the most efficient way to use your voice so you can communicate more clearly. They can teach you how to care for your voice to maintain your vocal health.
Medications
.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
or other medications can help if LPR or GERD is causing your voice issues. Sometimes,
steroids
or
antibiotics
are necessary for certain voice problems.
Medical procedures or surgery
. You may need surgery to remove a lesion on your vocal cords. You may need
botulin toxin injections
to relax tight voice box muscles. For paralyzed vocal cords, your provider may inject a filler to help close the gap between your vocal cords. They may place an implant to help your vocal cords close (
medialization laryngoplasty
).
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Larynx Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis (outlook) for people with this condition?
Voice disorders associated with overuse or acute illnesses are usually temporary and don’t cause permanent damage. If your voice disorder is more complex, it may take a bit of work to
cure
or manage your condition. You may need surgery or several sessions of voice therapy. But most people overcome voice challenges with treatment.
Advertisement
Prevention
Are voice disorders preventable?
Although some voice disorders related to overuse are preventable, many aren’t. Still, you can reduce your risk by taking care of your voice. You can:
Avoid smoking, recreational drugs and alcohol
Drink plenty of water to keep your vocal cords hydrated (when you drink water, it’s absorbed by your body and helps keep your vocal cords sliding past each other with ease)
Take steps to avoid getting sick, like
washing your hands
often
Rest your voice frequently if you have a job that requires a lot of speaking
Learn healthy limits of voice use
If you do have to talk or sing a lot, make sure your body is conditioned for it. Sudden changes in the amount of voice use without enough preparation can cause fatigue and injury.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
The best way to care for your voice is to stick to your treatment plan. But it’s important to attend to your mental health, too. Having trouble speaking can lead people to feel that they can’t express themselves freely. In children, it can cause poor self-esteem. After all, it can be incredibly frustrating and isolating to have to use a lot of effort to get your voice out.
Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re dealing with these issues. Ask them to recommend resources that can help.
When should I seek care?
Schedule a visit with your healthcare provider if you’re noticing unexplained changes in your voice that don’t get better within a few weeks. Early treatment can prevent worsening symptoms. Often, it can prevent long-term damage to your vocal cords that requires more invasive treatments, like surgery.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask include:
What behaviors should I change to improve my voice?
What treatments will I need, and how long will I need them?
What healthcare providers will I need to work with?
How likely is it that my voice issues will resolve completely?
Can you recommend resources to help me cope with having a voice disorder?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Voice disorders can make it difficult to connect with others. But treatment can improve your voice quality. It can get you one step closer to being understood without having to power through voice strain. If you notice a change in your voice that lasts longer than a few weeks, contact your healthcare provider. They can diagnose the cause, so you get the treatment you need.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
You don’t have to live with voice box problems. Cleveland Clinic has the larynx disorder treatments you need.
Larynx Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/10/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment