Root Canal: Procedure & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Root Canal
Advertisement
Advertisement
Root Canal
A root canal clears infection from inside your tooth’s pulp, often resulting from deep cavities or cracks. If you notice pain, swelling or a boil on your gums, it could be time to see your dentist. Root canals are common and help save your natural tooth.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
A root canal treats infected tooth pulp by removing it, filling the canal and sealing the tooth with a crown.
What is a root canal?
A root canal is a procedure that removes infected
pulp
from inside your tooth. Your dentist cleans and seals the canals to prevent further damage and save your tooth. You might need root canal treatment if bacteria reach the pulp and cause pain or inflammation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This can happen if:
You have a deep
cavity
You
crack a tooth
Root canals are common. Good
oral hygiene
can help you avoid needing one.
How do I know if I need this procedure?
You might not notice an
infected tooth
at first, but root canal symptoms might include:
A pimple or boil on your gums that may ooze pus
A swollen jaw from a trapped infection
Darkened tooth color
Loose tooth
from infection weakening nearby bone
Pain that spreads to your jaw, face or nearby teeth
Pain when chewing or touching the tooth
Tender or
swollen gums
If you have root canal pain, don’t wait. Treatment can relieve pain, save your tooth and prevent the infection from spreading. Your dentist can help you decide if it’s the right option for you.
Procedure Details
How should I prepare for root canal treatment?
Before treatment, your provider will examine your tooth with X-rays and other tests to confirm the infection. They may:
Ask if it hurts when you bite down
Check for swelling in your gums or bone
Gently tap your tooth or apply hot/cold to check
sensitivity
Use an electric pulp test (EPT) to see if the pulp is alive
What happens during a root canal procedure?
Your dentist or endodontist will:
Numb the area
with
anesthesia
(if you’re nervous, you may get
medication to help you relax
, and you might be drowsy after)
Place cotton
or a dental dam to keep the area clean and dry during the procedure
Create a small hole
in your tooth’s crown to reach the pulp
Remove the infected pulp
using tiny tools
Clean and disinfect
the inside of the tooth
Fill the empty space
with a rubbery dental material (gutta-percha)
Seal the tooth
with a temporary
filling
Place a permanent
crown
(usually at a later visit) to protect your tooth and restore your bite
Advertisement
Most root canals take about 60 to 90 minutes. Some may require more than one visit.
What happens after root canal treatment?
You’ll rest briefly in the office after your procedure. You’ll likely have two more appointments: one to prepare for your crown and one to place it.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of root canal treatment?
Most root canals are successful and can last for many years — often a lifetime. They can:
Remove infection
Prevent the infection from spreading or damaging your jawbone
Save your natural tooth
What are the risks or complications of this procedure?
Sometimes, root canals don’t work if the damage is too severe. If that happens, your provider may:
Re-treat the tooth with another root canal
Remove the tooth and replace it with an
implant
or
bridge
Recovery and Outlook
How long does root canal recovery take?
Most people recover in less than a week. You might have some lingering sensitivity, but you shouldn’t have pain that lasts longer than that. If you do, call your provider.
How can I support healing?
Good care helps with root canal recovery. These simple steps can support your healing and help you avoid complications:
Avoid
smoking
— it can slow healing.
Brush
after meals and
floss
once a day.
Don’t chew on the treated tooth until your permanent crown is placed.
Eat soft foods
for a few days, like mashed potatoes, yogurt, smoothies or well-cooked pasta.
Use an antibacterial mouthwash to keep germs away.
Additional Common Questions
Do root canals hurt?
Thanks to modern anesthesia, root canals are usually no more painful than getting a filling. You may feel pressure during the procedure, and mild soreness afterward. Let your provider know if anything hurts — their goal is to keep you comfortable.
If your tooth hurts more after treatment — especially if the pain throbs — call your provider. You may still have infected pulp that needs attention.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Have a lingering toothache or feel pain when drinking something hot or cold? You might have an infected tooth. These infections won’t heal on their own, so it’s important to see a dentist. If you need a root canal, your provider will guide you through the process, so you know what to expect. To avoid root canals in the future, brush after meals, floss daily and get regular dental checkups.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Dentistry plays an important role in oral health. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can design a personalized plan that will keep you smiling for the long haul.
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment