Internal Bleeding Signs, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Internal Bleeding
Advertisement
Advertisement
Internal Bleeding
Internal bleeding happens when your blood vessels break and blood collects inside your body. There are several causes of internal bleeding that range in severity. Signs of internal bleeding that mean you need to go to the hospital include lightheadedness, shortness of breath and fatigue.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Internal Bleeding?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Internal Bleeding?
Internal bleeding (
hemorrhage
) happens when your
blood vessels
burst or break and
blood
collects inside your body. This is different from external bleeding — when you bleed due to a wound that breaks your
skin
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are many causes of internal bleeding, and they vary in severity. It can happen almost anywhere inside your body. The bleeding can be sudden and rapid or slowly build up. It can be minor and temporary or severe and require immediate medical treatment.
No type of internal bleeding is normal (except regular
menstrual
bleeding). And it can very quickly become life-threatening.
Get medical help as soon as possible if you think you or someone near you has internal bleeding.
Types of internal bleeding
There are two broad categories of internal bleeding: visible and not visible.
Visible internal bleeding
The most common type of visible internal bleeding is a
bruise
. A bruise is skin discoloration from damaged, leaking blood vessels underneath your skin. Even though there’s blood pooling underneath your skin, you won’t have any external bleeding unless your skin breaks open.
Some types of internal bleeding can become visible when blood leaks from an orifice (body opening) or is in a waste product. For example:
Bowel damage can lead to bleeding from your anus (
rectal bleeding
) or blood in your poop (stool).
A head/
brain
injury can lead to bleeding from your
ears
or
nose
.
Damage to your
esophagus
,
stomach
or duodenum (the connection between your stomach and small intestine) can lead to bloody vomit.
Lung
damage can lead to
coughing up blood
.
Damage to your
urinary tract
can lead to blood in your pee (
hematuria
).
Damage to your
uterus
,
cervix
or
vagina
can lead to abnormal
vaginal bleeding
.
Damage to your
prostate
,
testicles
or seminal tract can lead to
blood in your semen (hematospermia)
.
Advertisement
Not visible internal bleeding
You can have bleeding inside your body that’s not visible. Even though you can’t see it, you’ll likely experience symptoms, like pain, weakness or lightheadedness. The symptoms vary based on the area of the bleeding, the severity of the damage and the amount of blood loss.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of internal bleeding
The way internal bleeding makes you feel varies a lot depending on where it is and how severe it is.
Healthcare providers consider up to 15% of blood volume loss a Class I hemorrhage. People with this amount of blood loss generally don’t have symptoms.
A Class II hemorrhage is a loss of 15% to 30% of your total blood volume. The first signs of this level of internal bleeding may include:
Dizziness
or lightheadedness (due to
low blood pressure
)
Fatigue
and weakness
Nausea and vomiting
Shortness of breath
and increased breathing rate
Increased heart rate
Call 911 (or your local emergency service number) or go to the emergency room if you or someone near you has these symptoms.
Losing more than 30% of your total blood volume can lead to severe symptoms and complications, like:
Confusion
Seizures
Loss of consciousness
Hypovolemic shock
Specific symptoms of internal bleeding
Specific symptoms of internal bleeding in certain areas of your body include:
Head
:
Thunderclap headache
,
vision
issues, confusion and weakness on one side of your body
Chest
: Difficulty breathing,
chest pain
and coughing up blood
Abdomen
: Swelling or a feeling of fullness, abdominal bruising, as well as bloody vomit, pee or poop
Bones
,
joints
and
muscles
: Bruising, swelling and pain (
compartment syndrome
is a medical emergency)
Call 911 (or your local emergency service number) or go to the emergency room if you or someone near you has these symptoms.
Internal bleeding causes
The most common cause of internal bleeding is trauma, like from a vehicle accident or other blunt force or penetrating trauma. But several other types of injuries and conditions can cause internal bleeding.
Gastrointestinal conditions
Several
gastrointestinal (GI) conditions
can cause
bleeding
in your GI tract, including:
Esophagitis
Gastritis
Peptic ulcer disease
Crohn’s disease
Colon polyps
Colitis
Gastrointestinal
cancers
Ruptured aneurysms
An
aneurysm
is a bulge in the wall of an
artery
. Aneurysms can occur in any artery. But they’re more common in your brain (
brain aneurysm
) or
aorta
, either in your chest (
thoracic aortic aneurysm
) or abdomen (
abdominal aortic aneurysm
).
If an aneurysm ruptures (breaks open), it can cause severe internal bleeding.
Internal bleeding causes in females
Causes of internal bleeding that specifically affect
females
include:
Ruptured
ovarian cyst
Ectopic pregnancy
Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH)
Other causes of internal bleeding
Examples of other causes of internal bleeding include:
Hemorrhoids
: Hemorrhoids are swollen, enlarged veins that form inside and outside of your anus (butthole) and rectum. They can cause rectal bleeding.
Bone fractures
: Breaking a bone, especially long or large bones like your thigh bone (
femur
) or
pelvis
, can cause internal bleeding if bone fragments tear blood vessels.
Internal bleeding after surgery
: In rare cases, internal bleeding may continue after your surgeon closes your incision. And in some of these cases, the bleeding can be severe.
Viral hemorrhagic fevers
(VHFs)
: VHFs are a group of
viral infections
that can cause uncontrolled bleeding. Some of these infections include
Ebola virus disease (EVD)
,
Marburg virus disease
(MVD) and
dengue fever
.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Each potential cause of internal bleeding has its own risk factors. For example,
smoking
cigarettes and
high blood pressure
increase your risk of aneurysms. But two major risk factors for internal bleeding in general include:
Blood disorders
: Bleeding disorders like
hemophilia
make it difficult for bleeding to stop and increase your risk of severe internal bleeding.
Blood-thinning medications
: Taking an
anticoagulant
,
antiplatelet medication
and/or high doses of
NSAIDs
can increase your risk of severe internal bleeding if a blood vessel breaks.
Complications of internal bleeding
Complications of internal bleeding happen due to decreased blood flow to your organs, which can mean they don’t get enough oxygen (tissue
hypoxia
). This can lead to:
Organ failure
Coma
Death
If you have internal bleeding in your skull, it can lead to long-term neurological and cognitive (thinking) issues. A
subarachnoid hemorrhage
can lead to
vasospasms
in your brain blood vessels in the following weeks and result in a
stroke
.
Other complications include re-bleeding and complications related to hospitalization, including
deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
and infection.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Diagnosing internal bleeding involves finding its location and what’s causing it.
Advertisement
To do this, a healthcare provider will likely use imaging and laboratory tests. They’ll also do a physical
exam
and ask about your medical history.
Management and Treatment
How is internal bleeding treated?
The treatment for internal bleeding depends on its cause and severity. If it’s a known underlying condition, like a gastrointestinal issue, your healthcare provider will adjust your treatment plan.
If there’s an unknown cause and/or the bleeding is severe, you’ll need treatment in a hospital. Your healthcare team will find the cause and treat it appropriately. You may need:
Surgery
Vitamin K injections (to help stop bleeding)
IV fluids
Blood transfusions
Does internal bleeding heal itself?
Minor internal bleeds may heal on their own if you don’t have a bleeding disorder or take blood-thinning medication. But it’s always a good idea to see your healthcare provider if you have signs of internal bleeding (like bloody poop or pee) and don’t know the reason for it — even if it’s a small amount.
Moderate to severe internal bleeding requires immediate medical treatment in a hospital. It can be fatal if you don’t get treatment in time.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with internal bleeding?
The prognosis (
outlook
) depends greatly on the severity of the internal bleeding and how quickly it’s detected and treated. The sooner you get treatment, the better. This is why it’s crucial to get medical help as soon as possible if you have signs of moderate to severe internal bleeding.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Your blood needs to stay inside your blood vessels for your body to function as it should. When your blood vessels break and you have internal bleeding, it can cause serious — sometimes life-threatening — issues. Don’t take internal bleeding lightly. If you develop symptoms of it or notice blood in your poop, pee, spit or vomit, get medical help as soon as possible.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider