Hyperthyroidism (Overactive Thyroid): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hyperthyroidism
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism, also called overactive thyroid, happens when your thyroid makes and releases high levels of thyroid hormone. It speeds up several bodily functions, causing symptoms like rapid heart rate, weight loss, increased appetite and anxiety. Hyperthyroidism is treatable — typically with medications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Learn the difference between hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.
What is hyperthyroidism?
Hyperthyroidism, also called overactive thyroid, is a condition where your
thyroid
makes and releases high levels of thyroid hormone. It has multiple possible causes. The main
thyroid hormones
are triiodothyronine (T3), thyroxine (T4) and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hyperthyroidism speeds up your
metabolism
, which can affect several aspects of your health. The condition can throw your whole well-being off balance. You may not feel like yourself or even feel out of control of your body. It’s important to get medical treatment if you develop signs of hyperthyroidism so you can get back to feeling like yourself.
How common is hyperthyroidism?
Hyperthyroidism is relatively rare. Approximately 1.3% of people in the United States have it.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) can start suddenly or develop slowly over time.
What are the symptoms of hyperthyroidism?
Hyperthyroidism can impact your entire body, so there are many symptoms. You may experience some of these symptoms and not others, or many of them at the same time. Symptoms of hyperthyroidism can include:
Rapid heart rate (
tachycardia
) and/or
heart palpitations
.
Increased blood pressure
.
Shakiness, like hand tremors.
Feeling anxious, nervous and/or irritable.
Weight loss
despite a regular or increased appetite.
Diarrhea
or more frequent pooping.
Increased sweating
and sensitivity to warm temperatures.
Hair loss
or brittle hair.
Difficulty sleeping (
insomnia
).
Menstrual period changes
, like lighter or missed periods.
Swelling and enlargement of your neck (
goiter
).
Swelling or bulging of your eyes (
thyroid eye disease
).
These symptoms can start suddenly or develop slowly over time. It’s important to see your healthcare provider if you develop hyperthyroidism symptoms.
Advertisement
What causes hyperthyroidism?
Medical conditions and situations that can cause hyperthyroidism include:
Graves’ disease
: This is an
autoimmune condition
that makes your thyroid overactive. Graves’ disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. Your chances of developing it increase if you have a biological family history of
thyroid disease
and/or another autoimmune condition.
Thyroid nodules
: These are lumps or growths of cells in your thyroid gland. They can sometimes produce excess thyroid hormone. Healthcare providers may call this toxic multinodular goiter (TMNG). Thyroid nodules are rarely cancerous.
Thyroiditis
: Thyroiditis is inflammation of your thyroid gland. It can cause hyperthyroidism temporarily. After this phase — the thyrotoxic phase — it may cause
hypothyroidism
(underactive thyroid). When the inflammation goes away, your hormone levels may stabilize.
Consuming excess iodine
: Consuming too much iodine (through foods or medications) can cause your thyroid to produce more thyroid hormone. Iodine is a mineral that your thyroid uses to create thyroid hormone. Receiving IV iodinated contrast (iodine “dye”) or taking
amiodarone
(a medication) may cause hyperthyroidism.
TSH-releasing
pituitary adenoma
(thyrotropinoma)
: This is a growth in your
pituitary gland
that releases excess
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
. Your pituitary gland normally releases TSH to trigger your thyroid to release thyroid hormone. Excess TSH can lead to excess thyroid hormone. This is a very rare cause of hyperthyroidism.
What are the risk factors for hyperthyroidism?
Factors that increase your risk of developing hyperthyroidism include:
Biological family history of thyroid disease and/or autoimmune conditions.
Smoking
.
Pregnancy
(for
postpartum thyroiditis
).
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hyperthyroidism diagnosed?
The diagnostic process for hyperthyroidism may involve multiple steps, including:
A
physical exam
: To start, your healthcare provider will do a physical exam to check for signs of hyperthyroidism, like an enlarged thyroid, rapid heart rate and warm, moist skin.
Thyroid blood tests
: Blood tests can check your thyroid hormone levels. When you have hyperthyroidism, levels of the thyroid hormones T3 and T4 are above normal and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is often (but not always) lower than normal.
Thyroid
antibody
blood test
: This test can check if Graves’ disease is the cause.
Imaging tests
: Various imaging tests of your thyroid can help diagnose hyperthyroidism and its cause. They include a radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) test and scan and a thyroid
ultrasound
. Your provider will go over the options and processes with you and recommend the test they think is best.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for hyperthyroidism?
There are many treatment options for hyperthyroidism. Depending on the cause, some options may be better for you than others. Your healthcare provider will discuss each option with you and help you determine the best treatment plan.
Advertisement
Antithyroid medications
Methimazole
(Tapazole®) and
propylthiouracil
(PTU) block the ability of your thyroid to make hormones. These medications are the most common treatment for hyperthyroidism. They can usually control thyroid function within two to three months. Your symptoms may get better within days to weeks.
Radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy
RAI therapy
involves taking radioactive iodine by mouth in a single capsule or liquid dose. The radioactive iodine targets your thyroid cells specifically and destroys them. RAI usually leads to permanent destruction of your thyroid, which will cure hyperthyroidism. Most people who receive this treatment must take thyroid hormone medication (
levothyroxine
) for the rest of their lives to maintain normal thyroid hormone levels.
Surgery
A surgeon may remove all or part of your thyroid gland through surgery (
thyroidectomy
). This will correct hyperthyroidism but will usually cause hypothyroidism, requiring lifelong thyroid hormone medication.
Beta-blockers
Beta-blockers
are medications that can help manage hyperthyroidism symptoms like rapid heartbeat, nervousness and shakiness. But they don’t change the level of hormones in your blood. Your provider may recommend beta-blockers alongside another treatment.
Each of these treatments has specific side effects and risks. Your provider will go over them with you. Don’t hesitate to ask questions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with hyperthyroidism?
Hyperthyroidism is a treatable condition. Most people do well with treatment. While some forms of treatment require you to take medication for the rest of your life, this will help keep your thyroid hormone levels in a healthy range.
Untreated hyperthyroidism caused by Graves’ disease may get worse over time and cause complications, like Graves’ eye disease (Graves’ ophthalmopathy). If you have Graves’ disease, ask your healthcare provider how you can best manage the condition.
What happens if hyperthyroidism is left untreated?
Complications from untreated or undertreated hyperthyroidism include:
Atrial fibrillation
(Afib).
Congestive
heart failure
.
Infertility
.
Ischemic stroke
.
Osteoporosis
.
A rare and life-threatening complication of hyperthyroidism is
thyroid storm
(thyroid crisis or thyrotoxic crisis). It happens when your thyroid makes and releases a large amount of thyroid hormone in a short amount of time. It’s an emergency that requires immediate medical attention.
Untreated or inadequately treated hyperthyroidism can cause thyroid storm. Stressors like infection, injury or surgery may trigger it.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you’re experiencing signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, it’s important to see your healthcare provider so they can assess your condition and recommend treatment.
Advertisement
If you already have a diagnosis, you’ll likely need to see your provider regularly to make sure your treatment is working.
If you’re experiencing signs of thyroid storm, like a high
fever
and very fast heart rate, get to the nearest hospital as soon as possible.
Additional Common Questions
Does hyperthyroidism cause weight gain?
Hyperthyroidism doesn’t typically cause weight gain. In fact, some people experience weight loss — even with an increased appetite. This is because hyperthyroidism speeds up your metabolic rate, causing your body to use more calories for energy than usual.
Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) slows down your metabolism, which may lead to weight gain.
Can I develop hyperthyroidism during pregnancy?
During early pregnancy, your body needs to produce more thyroid hormones than normal to help the developing fetus. Having thyroid hormone levels that are a little higher than normal is OK, but if your levels increase dramatically, your healthcare provider may need to form a treatment plan. High levels of thyroid hormones can impact not only you but also the fetus.
It can be difficult to diagnose hyperthyroidism during pregnancy because your thyroid hormone levels naturally increase and the other symptoms of pregnancy can mask signs of the condition.
What foods should I avoid with hyperthyroidism?
Eating too many iodine-rich or iodine-fortified foods may cause hyperthyroidism or make it worse in some cases.
If you have hyperthyroidism, your healthcare provider may recommend certain
changes to your diet
. Always consult your provider or a registered dietitian before making drastic changes to your diet. Know that diet changes alone often can’t fix hyperthyroidism. You’ll likely need medical treatment.
If your provider recommends a low-iodine diet, try to avoid the following foods:
Fish.
Seaweed and kelp.
Crab and lobster.
Sushi.
Prawns.
Algae and alginate
Milk and dairy products, like cheese.
Egg yolks.
Iodized salt.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a new diagnosis can be stressful. The good news is that hyperthyroidism is a treatable condition. If you’re experiencing symptoms of hyperthyroidism — like your bodily functions are going too fast — see your healthcare provider. They can have you undergo some simple tests and recommend treatment to get your body back into balance.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s experienced healthcare providers treat all kinds of thyroid disorders, including issues that cause hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/31/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes