47,XYY Syndrome (Jacobs Syndrome): What It Is & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
47,XYY Syndrome (Jacobs Syndrome)
Advertisement
Advertisement
47,XYY Syndrome (Jacobs Syndrome)
47,XYY syndrome (Jacobs syndrome) means you have an extra Y chromosome. It often goes undiagnosed due to a lack of obvious symptoms. But the syndrome is associated with an increased risk of certain diagnoses and physical traits. Treatment mainly addresses any physical, mental health or behavioral issues that develop.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Genetic Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
There are no guaranteed signs or symptoms of 47,XYY syndrome. But it’s associated with certain diagnoses and physical features.
What is 47,XYY syndrome (Jacobs syndrome)?
47,XYY syndrome (or what used to be called Jacobs syndrome) is a condition in which
males
have an additional Y chromosome in their genetic code.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most males have 46
chromosomes
(packages of DNA). This includes one copy of an X chromosome and one copy of a Y chromosome (46,XY). People with 47,XYY have a total of 47 chromosomes (47,XYY). Healthcare providers may call this condition 47,XYY, or XYY for short.
47,XYY is a congenital difference. That means you’re born with it. But the symptoms of this difference are mild enough that only around 10% of cases are diagnosed. 47,XYY affects each person differently.
Most people with 47,XYY:
Have typical production of
testosterone
Have typical male sexual development during
puberty
Produce sperm and have typical fertility
How common is 47,XYY (Jacobs syndrome)?
47,XXY is relatively rare. It affects about 1 out of 1,000 male newborns.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of 47,XYY?
There are no guaranteed signs or symptoms of 47,XYY. But it’s associated with certain symptoms and physical features. Your child may have none or any combination of these.
People with 47,XYY syndrome have an increased chance of:
Anxiety
Asthma
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
Behavioral issues, like excessive aggression and impulsivity
Delayed development
of
fine motor skills
(like writing and using scissors)
Delayed development of speech and language skills
Depression
Enlarged
testicles
Hand
tremors
or other involuntary movements
Learning disabilities
Seizures
Advertisement
Physical traits that may accompany 47,XYY include:
Tall stature — it’s common to be 6’3” (1.88m) and taller at final height
A large head (
macrocephaly
)
Widely spaced eyes (
orbital hypertelorism
)
Weak muscle tone (hypotonia)
Fifth fingers (pinkies) that curve inward (
clinodactyly
)
Larger than typical teeth (macrodontia)
Underbite
Flat feet
(pes planus)
Abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (
scoliosis
)
Some — not all — people with 47,XYY may have
male infertility
due to
oligospermia
or sperm abnormalities.
What causes 47,XYY?
47,XYY happens when there’s an extra Y chromosome in your genetic code. This change happens before birth and can occur in one of two ways:
A sperm cell carries an extra Y chromosome and fertilizes an egg at
conception
. This is the most common form.
Cells divide atypically during early
fetal development
— embryonic development, specifically. Healthcare providers call this 46,XY/47,XYY mosaicism. People with this form only have an extra Y chromosome in some of their cells. It’s less common.
47,XYY isn’t an inherited condition. The extra Y chromosome most often results randomly during the biological parent’s sperm production. A sperm with two Y chromosomes fertilizes an egg, which has an X chromosome, resulting in the syndrome.
Researchers don’t know why these chromosomal changes happen. They seem to happen randomly. It’s also unclear why an extra copy of the Y chromosome is associated with certain conditions and physical features.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is 47,XYY diagnosed?
There are two ways a 47,XYY diagnosis may happen:
Prebirth
. If you get
noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT)
, a
CVS
or an
amniocentesis
during pregnancy, it may detect chromosomal differences in the fetus.
After birth
.
Genetic testing
can detect 47,XYY.
Researchers estimate that 85% to 90% of people with 47,XYY never get a diagnosis. This is because the difference often doesn’t cause obvious symptoms or issues. And the conditions that are associated with it are wide-ranging and have other causes. If someone with 47,XYY does receive a diagnosis, it’s often delayed. The average age of diagnosis is about 17 years.
Management and Treatment
What’s the treatment for 47,XYY ?
There’s no direct treatment or cure for 47,XYY. Medical support and other interventions are mainly for any conditions that may develop.
For example:
Speech therapy
can help with speech and language developmental delays.
Physical therapy
and
occupational therapy
can help with low muscle tone and motor skill issues.
Special educational resources (like an individualized education plan, or IEP) can help with learning disabilities.
Psychotherapy
(talk therapy) can help with mental health conditions and behavioral issues.
Medications may help physical conditions like asthma and seizures.
Orthodontic
and dental procedures can address issues like tooth crowding and underbite.
In vitro fertilization (IVF)
or
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)
can help fertility concerns.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Genetic Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my baby has 47,XYY?
If you found out your baby will have this difference through prenatal testing, you may be overwhelmed. Know that the syndrome affects each person differently. Many people have mild, few or no issues because of it. There’s no way to predict how it’ll affect your child. But the more information you have about the increased risks for your child, the more prepared you can be.
Your child’s healthcare provider will likely recommend a “wait and see” approach. They’ll give you information on signs and symptoms to look out for diagnoses like developmental delays, ADHD and learning disabilities.
As with any child, being attentive to their health — physical, mental, emotional and behavioral — is key. If you notice differences in your child, reach out to their provider for advice. The sooner your child can receive interventions or treatment, the better.
In general, children with 47,XYY live typical lives. They may occasionally need extra support or medical care in certain areas, but so do many children without 47,XYY.
What can I expect if I have 47,XYY?
If you found out you have 47,XYY as a teen or adult, you may be shocked or perplexed. It’s natural to have a lot of questions. Know that your healthcare provider will give you information about the syndrome. You may discover that the syndrome “explains” a lot of your life experiences — or it may just be another detail about you.
Advertisement
Consider finding a support group or a network of other people living with 47,XYY. You can learn more about it and perhaps feel less alone in the diagnosis.
It’s important to note that having 47,XYY doesn’t increase the likelihood of having a biological child with it. 47,XYY isn’t an inherited condition. Some people with 47,XYY experience fertility issues, but most don’t. Be sure to reach out to your provider if this is a concern for you.
What is the life expectancy of a person with 47,XYY?
One study
showed that the lifespan of a person with 47,XYY may be about 10 years less than that of other males. Researchers think this may be due to the conditions and situations that can accompany the difference, like asthma, seizures and behavioral issues (like impulse control).
Staying on top of your health may help increase your life expectancy. Be sure to see your healthcare provider regularly.
Prevention
Can 47,XYY be prevented?
There’s nothing you can do to prevent it. The extra Y chromosome happens randomly.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be overwhelming to learn that you or your child has a chromosomal condition like XYY syndrome. The uncertainty of not knowing exactly how this condition will impact your life can be dizzying. Your healthcare providers are there to help. Whether you received your diagnosis in childhood or adulthood, learning about your risks and treatment options can significantly improve your overall quality of life.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Do certain health conditions seem to run in your family? Are you ready to find out if you’re at risk? Cleveland Clinic’s genetics team can help.
Schedule Genetic Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/05/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider