Clavicle Fracture (Broken Collarbone): Treatment & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Clavicle Fracture (Broken Collarbone)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Clavicle Fracture (Broken Collarbone)
A clavicle fracture (broken collarbone) is a serious injury that can happen in a moment and take a long time to heal. Most clavicle fractures heal with conservative treatment. But you may need surgery if pieces of your broken collarbone move out of place
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Clavicle Fracture?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Clavicle Fracture?
Your collarbone connects to your shoulder joint. Trauma to your shoulder is one way to fracture your collarbone.
A
clavicle
fracture (broken collarbone) is a common injury that happens when the
bone
between your
shoulder blade
and
breastbone
breaks. Treatment is
physical therapy
and wearing a sling or immobilizer to keep the pieces of your collarbone in place while it heals. But you may need surgery if the sections of bone move around.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Types of clavicle fractures
Your healthcare provider might use various terms to describe your fracture. They might describe it as:
Singular/comminuted
: Your clavicle can fracture in one place or in several places. You have a
comminuted fracture
if your collarbone breaks in more than one place.
Displaced/nondisplaced
: Your provider may say you have a displaced fracture if bone pieces that were lined up correctly move out of place.
Your provider may also use a specific classification system to label your fracture as a certain type. These types describe the fracture’s location and whether it affects nearby tissue or ligaments. The classification systems help your provider plan your treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a broken collarbone
Symptoms of a broken collarbone may include:
Bone pain
: You may have
pain in your shoulder
, close to the middle of your collarbone or at the base of your neck.
Difficulty moving your shoulder
: Your shoulder or arm might feel stiff. It might hurt more when you try to move it. You might feel or hear grinding or crackling when you move your shoulder.
Bruising
:
Areas of skin along your clavicle may be darker than normal or
discolored.
Visible misalignment
: Your shoulder may seem to slump unnaturally, or your collarbone may look like it’s higher or lower than the other one.
Skin tenting
: Pieces of bone may stick up under your
skin
to form what looks like a tent or bump over the section of broken bone. That can happen if you have a displaced clavicle fracture.
Swelling
: Your fracture can cause
inflammation
. This makes nearby
muscles
and other soft tissues swell. Your clavicle is close to your skin, so you’ll probably see and feel the swelling.
Advertisement
Fractured clavicle causes
Most broken collarbones happen because of a
traumatic injury
, like:
Falls
: Falling on your shoulder or outstretched arm is a common way to break your collarbone.
Collisions
: Shoulder collisions are common
sports injuries
. Children may also collide during play.
Car accidents
: An accident may cause you to hit the dashboard or may trigger an airbag injury.
Birth trauma
: Babies whose
shoulders get stuck in the birth canal
can get clavicle fractures.
Complications of your fracture
Most clavicle fractures heal completely and without any complications. But you should contact your healthcare provider if you have issues like:
Persistent bone pain
: A break that doesn’t heal may cause bone pain that doesn’t go away.
Bone deformity
: This is a bump on your collarbone that can happen if sections of your broken collarbone heal in the wrong position.
Calluses
:
You have a buildup of hard, thick skin at the spot where your fracture healed.
Frozen shoulder
: The tissue around your shoulder can get stiff or tight if you don’t move it around enough as you heal.
Joint pain
: Damage to the cartilage in your shoulder can make your shoulder joint hurt.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose a fractured clavicle
Get help right away if you think you’ve broken your clavicle. A healthcare provider will:
Ask how you got hurt
Examine the area
Take X-rays to confirm the fracture
X-rays
will show the break location and type. Your provider may do a
CT scan
if you have more than one fracture.
Management and Treatment
How is a clavicle fracture treated?
Most clavicle fractures heal well with conservative treatment. Only a small percentage will need
surgery
. Standard treatment for a broken collarbone includes:
Immobilization
: Your provider will give you a sling or shoulder immobilizer to help keep sections of your collarbone from moving around. You’ll wear this for several weeks.
Pain relief
: You might need prescription
pain medications
during the first week or two of recovery. After that, you can use over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers, like
aspirin
,
ibuprofen
and
acetaminophen
.
Observation
: You’ll have regular checkups. Your provider may do X-rays to confirm that your collarbone is healing well.
Physical therapy
: Wearing a sling may make your soft tissues stiff. Your physical therapist will show you gentle exercises you can do as your clavicle heals. Once the bone has healed, you can work on rebuilding your muscle strength.
Surgery
:
You may need surgery if pieces of your collarbone move out of place or the fracture damages nearby tendons, ligaments, blood vessels or nerves. An
orthopedic surgeon
will put the broken pieces back in place and use pins or plates and screws to keep them there.
Advertisement
Recovery time
Clavicle fracture recovery times may depend on factors like your age and the kind of fracture that you have. On average, healing may take:
Eight to 12 weeks for adults
Six to eight weeks for adolescents
Three to six weeks for kids under 8
About two weeks for a baby
Your healthcare provider will let you know when it’s safe to return to your usual activities.
When should I seek care?
A clavicle fracture is a serious injury. Call 911 (or your local emergency service number) or go to an emergency room if you think you may have one.
If you’re recovering from a broken collarbone, contact a healthcare provider right away if you develop any new or unusual symptoms like:
Faintness
or feeling weak
New pain or pain that gets worse
Numbness or tingling
Shortness of breath
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What should I do and not do with a broken collarbone?
If you’re recovering from a broken clavicle, follow these guidelines.
Do:
Place ice on your shoulder for 20 minutes a few times a day to help ease pain and swelling
Wear your sling or immobilizer all day and night (you can take it off to bathe)
Use pain medications as needed, but only as directed
Move your shoulder, arm and hand a little each day as instructed
Go to all your follow-up appointments with your healthcare provider so they can make sure your clavicle is healing like it should
Advertisement
Don’t:
Mix pain medicines unless your provider instructs you to
Take more than the recommended dose of medications
Drive while you still need your sling or immobilizer
Use your arm to lift, push or pull until your provider says it’s okay
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A clavicle fracture can happen in a moment, disrupt your daily routine and take weeks or months to heal. You may feel awkward about asking people to act as temporary chauffeurs because you can’t drive or reach into a tall cupboard because you can’t lift your arms. Chances are, they’re happy to help because they want you to get well ASAP. Pushing your recovery can backfire and cause complications.
Your healthcare provider will understand if you’re feeling antsy. They’ll keep an eye on your recovery and let you know when you can get back to your daily routine.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment