Hypopnea: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hypopnea
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hypopnea
A hypopnea is a sleep-related breathing event of shallow breathing. It lasts for at least 10 seconds. It causes your body not to get enough airflow. This leads to choking, loud snoring, frequent wakeups and low blood-oxygen levels. You might feel unrested when you awake. Treatment options are available.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Hypopnea?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is a Hypopnea?
A hypopnea is a sleep-related breathing event of shallow breathing. Shallow breathing is when you only inhale a small amount of air. It lasts at least 10 seconds. This causes your airflow and
blood oxygen levels
(the amount of oxygen in your blood) to decrease.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your breathing doesn’t stop completely, as it does with an
apnea
. But shallow breathing may wake you up often in the middle of the night, even if you don’t realize it. You might feel tired during the daytime. And it may affect your mood.
If you aren’t breathing enough during
sleep
, it could affect your overall health. This
sleep condition
may increase your risk of complications like heart disease.
Treatment options are available to help you breathe easier as you sleep.
Types of hypopneas
There are three types of hypopneas:
Obstructive hypopnea
: This is when an airway blockage (like body tissue) leads to shallow breathing events.
Central hypopnea
: Your
brain
isn’t telling your
muscles
to breathe as expected, so you have fewer breathing attempts during sleep.
Mixed hypopnea
: This is a combination of obstructive and central hypopnea causes.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of hypopneas
Daytime symptoms of hypopneas may include:
Daytime fatigue and/or sleepiness
Headaches
Mood changes
Sexual
dysfunction
Nighttime symptoms of hypopneas may include:
Frequent middle-of-the-night wakeups
Choking or gasping sound while breathing
Loud
snoring
A sleeping partner is usually the first person to notice nighttime symptoms. Your partner may tell you about them in the morning.
Advertisement
Hypopnea causes
A partial airway blockage causes an obstructive hypopnea. If something is blocking the path of air into your lungs, you won’t be able to take in all of the air possible.
Some of the most common causes include:
Airway narrowing from a condition like hypothyroidism or obesity
Your jaw shape
Your tonsil size
Central hypopneas happen due to a miscommunication between your brain and your muscles. Under normal circumstances, your brain sends signals to breathing-related muscles to tell them to move when you sleep. Sometimes, these signals don’t get where they need to go. As a result, you aren’t able to breathe as often or as well as you would if you were awake.
Some structural abnormalities in your brain may cause this (like in your
brainstem
). Heart problems may also cause this. It could also be a side effect of taking certain medications. The cause may also be unknown.
Risk factors
You may be more at risk of having hypopneas if you:
Have overweight or obesity
Smoke
Take certain medications (like
sedatives
)
Have
alcohol use disorder
Have a condition that narrows your airway
Complications of hypopneas
Hypopneas may lead to potentially life-threatening outcomes over time if untreated, like:
Heart disease
Heart attack
Stroke
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose hypopneas
A healthcare provider will diagnose hypopneas after a sleep study. During a physical exam, your provider will learn more about your symptoms and your health history.
A
sleep study
identifies how many hypopnea events you have during sleep and how frequently they occur. This overnight test happens at a sleep laboratory. Sensors monitor your heart rate, breathing, blood-oxygen levels and more.
Your provider will use the apnea hypopnea index (AHI) to see how many hypopnea events you have per hour of sleep. They’ll use the AHI score to identify the severity.
Some at-home sleep studies may show your apnea hypopnea index as well. But these can miss certain types of hypopneas.
Management and Treatment
How are hypopneas treated?
Treatment for hypopneas is typically a combination of methods, including:
CPAP machine
: A CPAP machine is a device that increases air pressure in your airway. You’ll wear a mask and turn on the device when you sleep.
Lifestyle changes
: Your provider may suggest reducing your risk factors like managing any underlying conditions, stopping smoking or maintaining a healthy weight.
Oral appliances
(mouthpieces)
: An oral appliance is a device that you put in your mouth when you sleep. It holds your jaw and tongue forward to keep your airway open.
Surgery
: Certain surgeries can remove airway blockages that cause obstructive hypopnea.
Your provider will help you find the right combination of treatments that work best for you. Treatment for hypopneas varies from person to person.
Advertisement
Do hypopneas require a CPAP?
Not all cases require a CPAP. But your healthcare provider may recommend this machine if you have an apnea hypopnea index score that’s moderate to severe, or if it’s mild but you have certain other health conditions or symptoms. Your provider will let you know if a CPAP is a good option to treat hypopneas.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you feel exhausted when you wake up or have frequent middle-of-the-night wakeups. A sleeping partner may mention that they noticed choking or loud snoring while you were sleeping. A provider can help you figure out what’s causing these symptoms.
If you have hypopneas, let your provider know if you notice new or worsening symptoms. It’s important to follow up with your provider regularly so they can monitor how well your treatment plan is going and make adjustments as needed.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
Do I have apneas, hypopneas or both?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
Do I need to use a CPAP machine?
Are there side effects of treatment?
Am I a candidate for surgery?
Can you recommend any lifestyle changes for me?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have hypopneas?
Hypopneas may make getting a good night’s rest difficult. But this is a manageable condition with a variety of treatment options to fit your lifestyle and needs. Your provider will help you find one or a combination of treatments that work best to improve your nighttime breathing. You may need to do another sleep study to see how well your treatment is working.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It isn’t easy living with a sleep-related breathing condition, like having hypopnea. No matter how much sleep you try to get, you’re not breathing enough. This means that you’re waking up more often in the middle of the night. As a result, your daytime hours may feel exhausting. If you’re not getting the rest you need, it’s time to talk to a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Obstructive sleep apnea can keep you from the getting the good night’s rest you need. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can create a treatment plan that helps.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment