Testicular Contusion: Causes, Symptoms, Risks & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Testicular Trauma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Testicular Trauma
Testicular trauma is an injury to your testicle. It can range from a testicular contusion (bruise) to a more severe injury. This damage can happen to your testicles more easily because they’re outside your body. Kicks, baseballs and motorcycle accidents are some causes of an injured testicle. Most cases need basic care, but some require surgery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Testicular Contusion (Testicular Trauma)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Testicular Contusion (Testicular Trauma)?
Testicular contusion is a bruised testicle. These
male
body parts hang outside your body. This puts them at risk of injury. Your pouch-like scrotum covers your testicles. But there aren’t any muscles or bones to protect them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It’s not common, but you can injure your scrotum and testicles. Most of the time, testicles can absorb the shock from an injury without serious damage. At other times, you may need to seek medical care. For example, testicle bruising may also involve a buildup of blood beneath tissues (hematoma).
In addition to bruises, injury to your testicle may cause:
Twisting of a spermatic cord inside it (torsion)
Tearing of your testicle covering (rupture)
Skin coming off your testicle
Your testicle moving out of position
Detachment of a testicle
Your testicles make sperm and hormones. Testicular trauma can get in the way of this task and block blood flow.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of testicular contusion
Testicular contusion symptoms may include:
Severe pain in your scrotum (the sac that holds your testicles)
Visible bruising (discoloration) in your scrotum
Swelling in your scrotum
Pain and discomfort in your lower belly
Nausea and/or vomiting
Fever
Blood in your pee
Pain while peeing
Testicular contusion causes
Many things can cause testicular contusion or trauma, like:
Knives or bullets
Blunt force, like kicks or punches, or things that you can throw (like baseballs)
Car, motorcycle or bike accidents
Machinery accidents
Animal bites
These types of events can cause minor injuries, like scraped skin. They can also cause major problems, like tearing the protective covering over the testicles and causing blood to pool.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Testicular bruises can affect anyone with at least one testicle. You’re at a greater risk of testicular contusion if you ride a motorcycle or play contact sports.
One way to reduce your risk is to wear athletic supporters when you play contact sports. You can also make every effort to be safe when you’re driving, riding bikes or motorcycles, or using machines.
Complications of this condition
Complications of testicular contusion can include:
Infections
Inflammation
Infertility
Low testosterone
Urologic problems
Some injuries may lead to short-term issues with sexual performance.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will start by asking questions about what caused your injury. In a physical exam, they’ll be able to tell if your testicle and the structures around it look and feel normal.
They may order a testicular ultrasound. This is a painless way to give your provider a picture of what’s going on inside your scrotum.
If they don’t see anything wrong in the ultrasound, you probably don’t have a serious injury. The time to worry about a testicle injury is when they see something torn or out of place. A lack of blood flow is another reason for concern.
You may need surgery to diagnose the injury in severe cases, or if you aren’t doing better after 48 hours.
Management and Treatment
How Do You Treat Testicular Trauma?
For mild testicular bruises, your healthcare provider may tell you to:
Rest.
Take over-the-counter pain relievers.
Put ice on the affected area.
Use some type of scrotal support.
Take antibiotics they prescribe if needed.
Your provider will want to treat some types of injuries right away. These types include any that have:
Gone through your scrotum and testicles
Removed a large amount of skin
Shown signs of twisting or blood supply blockage
Your provider may do surgery to repair or reattach your testicle. Rarely, they may need to remove a damaged testicle (orchiectomy). Your provider may suggest sperm banking if they must remove one or both testicles.
Recovery time
You should rest for 24 to 48 hours if you have a mild injury. See your provider if things get worse or you aren’t better in 48 hours.
Swelling from a more severe injury or from surgery may last up to eight weeks.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
It’s a good idea to call or visit a provider if you have a testicular injury, just to be safe. If there’s any question about the severity of your injury, go to your nearest emergency department. See a provider if you have:
An injury that goes through your scrotum
Severe swelling of your testicles with pain and bruising
A fever after injury
Pain that doesn’t stop or gets worse
Blood in your pee that doesn’t stop or gets worse
Trouble peeing
Any symptom that worries you
Advertisement
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
How bad is this injury?
Will I need surgery?
How soon would the surgery take place?
When can I play sports again?
If you’ve had a testicular contusion, you’ll likely have a follow-up visit with a provider in one or two weeks.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have testicular contusion?
Many testicular injuries are mild. People recover relatively quickly. Most people with testicular bruising do recover.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A kick to your testicles brings instant pain. Because your testicles are outside your body, they’re more open to injury. To be on the safe side, talk to your healthcare provider after an injury. Most likely, you’ll be able to use simple treatments for a bruised testicle.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your urinary system, you want expert advice. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work to create a treatment plan that’s right for you.
Urology Care
Urology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment