Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors: Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Ovarian germ cell tumors are growths that occur most often in people 30 and under. The tumors are usually benign (noncancerous) but can be cancerous. Most ovarian germ cell tumors are treatable with surgery. For malignant tumors, your prognosis depends on the tumor type and whether the cancer’s spread.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Ovarian Germ Cell Tumor Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What are ovarian germ cell tumors?
Ovarian
germ cell tumors
develop from reproductive cells (germ cells) inside your ovaries.
Ovaries
are two small pelvic organs that play an important role in the
female reproductive system
. They produce eggs during your reproductive years. The germ cells inside your ovaries eventually mature (“germ”-inate) into eggs. With ovarian germ cell tumors, some of these cells clump together to form an abnormal mass instead.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Ovarian germ cell tumors usually form in just one ovary, but sometimes they appear in both.
Most ovarian germ cell tumors are benign (noncancerous). Rarely, they can be malignant (cancerous). These tumors can spread and damage healthy tissue. Malignant germ cell tumors are a rare form of
ovarian cancer
.
What are the types of ovarian germ cell tumors?
The most common types of ovarian germ cell tumors are:
Mature teratoma (
dermoid cyst
)
: These benign tumors are the most common type of ovarian germ cell tumor. Most people diagnosed are in their teens, 20s or 30s.
Dysgerminoma
: This is the most common type of malignant ovarian germ cell tumor. But most of these tumors (70% of diagnoses) aren’t considered aggressive (fast-spreading) and respond well to treatment. Most people diagnosed are in their 20s or 30s.
Immature teratoma
: This is a fast-growing malignant tumor that can spread from your ovary to other parts of your body (
metastasis
). It’s most common in people 20 years old and younger.
Yolk sac tumors (endodermal sinus tumors)
: These malignant tumors grow quickly and spread fast. They’re most common in people 20 years old and younger. Up to 40% of diagnoses involve children who are too young to have started their
periods
.
Mixed germ cell tumors
: These malignant tumors contain a mix of other tumor types, usually dysgerminoma and yolk sac tumors.
Advertisement
Rarer ovarian germ cell tumors include:
Embryonal carcinoma
.
Choriocarcinoma
.
Polyembryoma.
How common are ovarian germ cell tumors?
Ovarian germ cell tumors are most common in
females
in their reproductive years or younger. They account for up to 70% of ovarian growths in people between 10 to 30 years old. They’re less common in people over 40.
Approximately 95% of ovarian germ cell tumors are benign (mature teratomas). Only 2% to 3% of ovarian cancers are germ cell tumors.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of ovarian germ cell tumors?
It may be difficult to spot signs of ovarian germ cell tumors early on. Benign tumors may not cause symptoms unless they’re large. Symptoms of malignant tumors may not appear until the cancer has advanced.
Symptoms to look out for include:
Abdominal pain
, discomfort or tenderness. (This may start suddenly and be severe.)
Bloated belly
, with or without weight gain in other parts of your body.
Changes in bowel habits
, such as
diarrhea
or
constipation
.
Changes in your eating habits, like
loss of appetite
.
Irregular vaginal bleeding
, such as bleeding when you’re not on your period or after
menopause
.
These tumors can release hormones that can cause changes in your body, including symptoms of:
Early
pregnancy
, like fatigue, nausea or breast tenderness.
Early
puberty
, although this is rare.
What causes ovarian germ cell tumors?
Ovarian germ cell tumors form when sex cells (germ cells) undergo changes (
mutations
) and form a mass. Experts continue to research why this happens, including who’s most likely to develop them.
Although anyone with ovaries can develop these tumors, ovarian germ cell tumors are much more common among people in their reproductive years and younger.
What are the complications of ovarian germ cell tumors?
Treatment is important because even if a tumor is benign, it can potentially burst open (
rupture
) or twist (ovarian torsion). This is more likely to happen if a tumor is large.
Removing the tumor can keep this from happening.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose ovarian germ cell tumors?
After asking about your symptoms, your provider will perform several tests, including a
pelvic exam
to check for growths and other abnormalities in your abdomen, pelvis and vagina. You may also need imaging and blood tests.
Imaging tests
: A
transvaginal ultrasound
is often the first imaging test providers perform if they suspect an ovarian germ cell tumor. This test allows your provider to see inside your abdomen and check for growths. You may also need a
computed tomography (CT) scan
or
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
as part of your diagnosis. These tests can show more detail than an ultrasound.
Blood tests
: You may need a serum tumor marker test, a blood test that checks the levels of certain substances in your body. High levels of
alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP),
lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) or
human chorionic gonadotropin
(HCG) can be signs of ovarian germ cell tumors.
Advertisement
Your provider will need to remove the tumor or the entire affected ovary to make a definitive diagnosis. A
pathologist
will test the cells in a lab to determine the type of tumor and whether it’s benign or malignant.
What are the stages of malignant ovarian germ cell tumors?
If a tumor is malignant, providers classify the cancer using a process called
staging
as part of your diagnosis. They use imaging procedures, like a CT scan or
PET scan
(positron emission tomography scan), to measure the tumor size and determine its location. This information helps your provider determine what treatments you’ll need and the likely outcomes of treatment.
Usually, the lower the stage, the more treatable the cancer is.
Stages for malignant ovarian germ cell tumors are:
Stage 1
: The cancer is just in your ovaries.
Stage 2
: The cancer has spread to other tissues in your pelvis, including your
fallopian tubes
or
uterus
.
Stage 3
: The cancer has spread to your
lymph nodes
or the tissue lining your pelvic organs or abdominal cavity (
peritoneum
), but it hasn’t spread beyond your abdomen.
Stage 4 (metastatic cancer)
: The cancer has grown into your liver or spleen or spread to tissues and organs outside your abdomen, like your
lungs
.
Management and Treatment
How are ovarian germ cell tumors treated?
Most germ cell tumors are treatable. Your treatment plan will depend on the tumor’s size and whether it’s benign or malignant.
Advertisement
Regardless, your provider will take care to conserve as much of your ovary as possible to preserve your fertility if you’re in your reproductive years.
Benign (noncancerous) ovarian germ cell tumors
Healthcare providers remove benign tumors surgically. Sometimes, they need to remove the entire ovary (
oophorectomy
) or part of the ovary (
ovarian cystectomy
) to get rid of the growth. They may recommend open surgery (
laparotomy
) or a less invasive type of surgery that involves smaller incisions (
laparoscopy
).
Benign tumors rarely grow back after providers remove them.
Malignant (cancerous) ovarian germ cell tumors
Treatment depends on the type of tumor and the cancer stage. Common treatments include:
Surgery
: Your provider may recommend an oophorectomy to remove one or both of your ovaries or fallopian tubes. If cancer has spread beyond your ovaries and fallopian tubes, you may need a total
hysterectomy
to remove your uterus and cervix.
Chemotherapy
: During
chemotherapy
, your provider delivers medicine into your veins, usually through an infusion.
Chemotherapy drugs
kill cancerous cells and stop them from multiplying. You may receive chemo treatments over several weeks or months.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Ovarian Germ Cell Tumor Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for people with ovarian germ cell tumors?
The outlook for benign ovarian germ cell tumors is excellent. Benign tumors usually don’t grow back after providers remove them.
Advertisement
The outlook for malignant germ cell tumors varies depending on the tumor type and cancer stage. Cancer specialists determine outlook by calculating how many people with a specific cancer are alive five years after their diagnosis, or the five-year survival rate.
If cancer hasn’t spread beyond your ovaries, there is a 94% to 98% survival rate. Cancers that have spread farther away from the original tumor site have a 73% five-year survival rate. Your provider will monitor you closely during this period to ensure you receive treatment if the cancer returns (
recurs
).
Is ovarian germ cell cancer curable?
It can be, depending on the type of tumor and the stage. For example, the
cure
rate for early-stage dysgerminoma treated with chemotherapy is nearly 100%. More aggressive types, like yolk sac tumors, aren’t curable, but treatment can slow tumor growth and cancer spread.
Your provider can explain the prognosis for ovarian germ cell cancer (including the possibility of a cure) based on your diagnosis.
Prevention
Can I prevent ovarian germ cell tumors?
You can’t prevent germ cell tumors. But you can get regular checkups so your provider can monitor your health and assess your cancer risk.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider about ovarian germ cell tumors?
See a provider immediately if you or your child experiences symptoms of an ovarian germ cell tumor. Some germ cell tumors grow quickly. Finding them early and getting treatment as soon as possible can improve the outlook significantly.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you learn you have an ovarian germ cell tumor, questions to ask include:
Is the tumor benign or malignant?
What tests will I need to determine what treatments I’ll need?
What treatments would you recommend?
What can I expect after treatment?
Will my diagnosis or treatment affect my ability to have a baby?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
See a provider immediately if you or your child experiences symptoms of an ovarian germ cell tumor. In most cases, they’re benign (noncancerous). Surgery can prevent complications like a large tumor bursting or twisting. In the rare instance that a tumor is malignant (cancerous), getting diagnosed and treated early can significantly improve your outlook. Even if you’re not experiencing symptoms, talk to your provider about scheduling regular checkups to monitor your reproductive health and organs.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Ovarian germ cell tumors may be benign or cancerous. Cleveland Clinic’s experts care for all ovarian germ cell tumor types, like dermoid cysts and dysgerminomas.
Ovarian Germ Cell Tumor Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/23/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment