Coagulopathy: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Coagulopathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Coagulopathy
Coagulopathy happens when there’s a problem with how your blood forms clots. Usually, there’s an issue with proteins that help with clotting. Causes include bleeding disorders, like hemophilia and von Willebrand disease. Treatment includes fresh frozen plasma and clotting factor concentrates to replace the missing proteins.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood Clotting Disorders Treatment
Doctors and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Coagulopathy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Coagulopathy?
Coagulopathy involves problems with how your body makes
blood clots
. Your blood forms clots to stop the bleeding when you’re injured. The clot-making process is called
hemostasis
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are two main processes involved. First,
platelets
rush to the site of injury and form a temporary plug. Second, proteins work together to form a strong fibrin mesh that covers the platelet plug. These proteins are called clotting or coagulation factors. You need both platelets and
fibrin
for a strong clot.
Platelet disorders
are a dysfunction of the cells that stop bleeding. Other coagulopathies result from inadequate or dysfunctional proteins.
Not all conditions that cause coagulopathy are medical emergencies. But they can be if you have severe blood loss. See a healthcare provider if you have signs or symptoms of a bleeding disorder.
Seek emergency care if you have bleeding that won’t stop.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of coagulopathies
Coagulopathy disorders can cause prolonged bleeding from cuts or wounds on your skin. But they can involve internal bleeding, too. This can look and feel different from managing a scrape or a cut.
Signs to watch out for include:
Frequent nosebleeds or bleeding from your gums despite good oral hygiene
Extensive bruising (a sign of blood beneath your skin)
Heavy period bleeding (periods that last more than seven days, result in saturating a pad/tampon more often than every two hours, passing clots larger than 1 inch wide)
Joints that are swollen, warm to the touch, stiff or harder to move
Spitting, vomiting or coughing up blood (may look red, pink and frothy or like coffee grounds)
Black, tarry poop
Headaches, vision loss or confusion (may be a sign of
brain bleed
)
Advertisement
Coagulopathy causes
Coagulopathy happens when there’s a problem in the blood clotting process. Usually, this happens because you don’t have enough of a certain protein (clotting factor) to make a stable clot.
There are a range of conditions (including bleeding disorders), events and even medicines that can keep your body from making stable clots. They include:
Cancer, especially some forms of
leukemia
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC)
Hemophilia
Medicines like
heparin
,
warfarin
, other anticoagulants and even aspirin
Platelet disorders (can be inherited from a family member or develop later as an autoimmune disease)
Rare factor deficiencies (can be inherited or develop later as an autoimmune disease)
Severe liver disease
von Willebrand disease
Vitamin K deficiency
Some of these conditions, like DIC, are life-threatening without emergency care. Others, like hemophilia, are chronic conditions that need lifelong management.
Risk factors
Some coagulopathies are inherited. This means that you’re at increased risk if you have a history of bleeding disorders in your biological family.
Taking blood thinners, like heparin or warfarin, may also increase your risk. These medicines prevent dangerous clots. But they may lead to excess bleeding if you’re injured.
Ask your healthcare provider to explain if any blood thinners you’re taking increase your bleeding risk.
Complications of this condition
Losing too much blood is life-threatening without prompt treatment. This is why you should go to the emergency room if you have signs of severe blood loss. Other types of bleeding, like bleeding into joints, aren’t life-threatening. But they can cause long-term problems, like permanently painful and limited joint movement.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider will check for signs of bleeding and ask about your medical history. They may ask about your family’s medical history and medicines you’re taking.
Blood tests providers use to diagnose coagulopathy include:
Complete blood count (CBC)
Fibrinogen test
Prothrombin time (PT) test
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT) test
Sometimes, these tests provide enough information for providers to diagnose what’s causing the bleeding. Or they can help narrow down the list of possibilities. You may need more tests to pinpoint the cause.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Treatment depends on how serious the bleeding is and what’s causing it. In emergency situations, the priority is to stop it. Usually, a healthcare provider gives you the missing or defective clotting factor. This may involve getting an IV infusion, a transfusion or taking medicine by mouth.
Advertisement
You may need:
Antifibrinolytics
Clotting factor concentrates
Cryoprecipitate
Desmopressin
Fresh frozen plasma
Platelet transfusions
Protamine sulfate
Vitamin K
If you have a condition that increases your bleeding risk during surgery, your provider may give you medicine beforehand to manage bleeding.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Schedule an appointment with your provider if you notice signs of a bleeding disorder. Look out for things like bruising easily and frequent nosebleeds.
Seek emergency care if you have severe blood loss. Warning signs are:
Wounds that won’t stop bleeding even after applying firm pressure
Bleeding during pregnancy (call your OB, as this can sometimes be expected)
Feeling lightheaded, weak or confused
New paleness of your skin or inner eyelids
Vomiting blood or bloody/tarry poop
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood Clotting Disorders Treatment
Doctors and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
There isn’t a single outcome for coagulopathy. The condition causing the bleeding will shape your experience. The amount of blood loss you have matters, too.
The good news is that there are treatments to help manage chronic conditions. There are lifesaving emergency treatments available, like fresh frozen plasma and clotting factors.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Coagulopathy can look different depending on the cause. For some people, it involves lifelong care to help their blood clot. For others, it’s a medical emergency. Either way, you have an important role to play. See a healthcare provider if you’re concerned about irregular bleeding.
Advertisement
An early diagnosis can help with managing chronic bleeding disorders. Seek emergency care ASAP if you’re losing too much blood or noticing signs of internal bleeding.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood clotting disorders can be genetic (inherited) or acquired. Cleveland Clinic’s experts diagnose and treat these disorders to lower your risk of complications.
Blood Clotting Disorders Treatment
Doctors and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials