Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma (PTCL)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma (PTCL)
Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are a group of rare blood cancers. They develop in T cells and affect your lymphatic system. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas can appear throughout your body and cause a range of symptoms. Your healthcare provider can recommend the best treatments, including chemotherapy and clinical trials testing new therapies.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma (PTCL)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma (PTCL)?
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) is a rare group of aggressive (fast-growing)
blood cancers
. The cancer starts in lymphatic tissue, like your lymph nodes and spleen. But it can grow within and affect nearly every part of your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
PTCL is an uncommon type of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma
. It accounts for only about 1 out of every 10 cases. This means that there’s still a lot that medical experts are learning about this condition.
Healthcare providers can successfully treat most of these lymphomas. But they often come back. Medical specialists are studying treatments that may help people live longer with this condition.
Types of peripheral T-cell lymphoma
The World Health Organization (WHO) recognizes more than 30 subtypes of PTCL. The three that are most common in the U.S. make up about 6 in 10 of all diagnoses. From most to least common, they are:
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified
: PTCL-NOS includes cases that don’t fit into the more specific subtypes.
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma
(ALCL)
: There are different forms of ALCL. They include primary cutaneous ALCL, which affects your skin. Another type — systemic ALCL — affects other organs in your lymph system.
Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
(AITL)
: This type often causes problems with your immune system. As a result, your body may have trouble fighting infections. Or it may start attacking your own cells, leading to autoimmune diseases.
There are also rarer subtypes:
Adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia
may affect your blood, lymph nodes or other lymph tissue.
Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma
starts in your intestines.
Extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type
grows in your nose, sinuses or throat.
Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma
starts in your liver or spleen.
Subcutaneous panniculitis-like lymphoma (SPTCL)
starts in the bottom layer of your skin.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of peripheral T-cell lymphoma
Each PTCL subtype has specific symptoms. But common ones include:
Belly pain or swelling (a sign of an enlarged spleen)
Drenching night sweats
Persistent fatigue
Skin rash
Swollen lymph nodes
Unexplained fever
Unexplained weight loss
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma causes
Peripheral T-cell lymphomas happen when your
T cells
— a type of white blood cell — change (
mutate
). This makes them turn into cancerous cells that multiply uncontrollably.
Experts don’t know what makes T cells mutate in the first place.
Risk factors
Factors that may increase your risk of PTCL include:
Where you live
: Many subtypes of these lymphomas are more common in Asia (including China, Thailand and Japan), Africa and the Caribbean.
Your age
: The most common subtypes usually affect people over 60.
Your health conditions
: Some subtypes are linked to
celiac disease
,
EBV
and
HTLV-1
. Having a condition that causes a
weakened immune system
may increase your risk.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose peripheral T-cell lymphoma
Your healthcare provider will consider your symptoms and check for signs of PTCL. Diagnosis may involve several tests, including:
Blood tests
: Your provider will check the health of your blood cells. They may test for substances that mean organ damage or viruses related to some types of PTCL.
Imaging tests
: A CT scan, MRI or PET scan can show tumors inside your body.
Biopsies
: Your provider may need to test tissue from your bones, lymph nodes or skin to check for cancer cells.
Genetic tests
: They’ll check cells for mutations that are common in peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
Stages of peripheral T-cell lymphoma
Healthcare providers use
cancer staging systems
to plan treatment. Providers stage PTCL based on factors like the subtype and where the cancerous T cells are. The stages are:
Stage I
: Cancerous T cells are in one lymph node, one cluster of lymph nodes or an organ.
Stage II
: Cancer affects two or more clusters of lymph nodes in the same area of your body.
Stage III
: Cancer affects lymph nodes in both the upper and lower parts of your body.
Stage IV
: Cancer affects lymph nodes and other organs like your lungs, liver or digestive tract.
Management and Treatment
How is peripheral T-cell lymphoma treated?
PTCL is so uncommon that healthcare providers are still learning which treatments work best. This is why your treatment plan will be customized to you. In some cases, the best treatment may be a
clinical trial
evaluating new PTCL treatments.
Common treatments include:
Chemotherapy
: You’ll take a combination of chemotherapy drugs.
Radiation therapy
: You may get this treatment along with chemotherapy.
Targeted therapy
: This treatment zeroes in on specific genetic mutations that turn healthy T cells into cancerous cells. Or it may target proteins that are part of cancerous T cells. Several drug types are being tested in clinical trials.
Immunotherapy
: This treatment is also more commonly available in clinical trials. It helps your immune system fight cancer.
Stem cell transplant
: A stem cell transplant may be the last step of treatment. Sometimes providers use it to treat PTCL that has come back after going away (relapse). There are different types of this treatment. The kind you need depends on your unique case.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll see your provider regularly to check on your response to treatment. They’ll also monitor any treatment side effects you’re experiencing.
But don’t wait for appointments to check in with your provider. Let them know if you’re having new side effects.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis for peripheral T-cell lymphoma?
In some situations, treatment can cure PTCL. But most PTCLs don’t respond as well to standard treatments, like chemotherapy, as other types of lymphomas do. If it goes into remission (no signs or symptoms of cancer), it often comes back. At that point, your provider may suggest a different kind of treatment.
The five-year survival rate of peripheral T-cell lymphoma is
30% to 40%
. This means that 3 to 4 out of every 10 people diagnosed are alive after five years. Still, your life expectancy depends on your unique diagnosis.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Living with lymphoma
may mean rethinking your routines and support networks. Here are some suggestions that may help:
Consider
palliative care
. This care can help you manage symptoms and treatment side effects. It can also help you deal with the emotional challenge of living with a serious illness.
Find support
. PTCLs are rare cancers. You may feel as if you’re alone in this. But you’re not. Talk to your healthcare team about support groups so you can connect with others in your situation.
Take time for self-care
. Self-care is essential. Talk to your healthcare team about ways to manage stress, eat right and stay active through treatment.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are still a bit of a mystery to medical experts. They’re much rarer than other types of non-Hodgkin lymphomas. The subtypes are so different that no one treatment plan works on all of them.
This is why it’s important to see a healthcare provider with a background in PTCLs. They can explain the factors that impact your treatment response. They can connect you with the right treatments, including those available in clinical trials. And they can connect you with others who are living with the same diagnosis. Finding the right support is essential if you’re living with this condition.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you hear that you might have lymphoma, you want care from experts you can trust. At Cleveland Clinic, we craft a treatment plan tailored for you and your needs.
Lymphoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials