Fertility Tests: What They Are & How They Work
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Fertility Tests
Advertisement
Advertisement
Fertility Tests
Fertility tests can tell you why you’re having difficulty getting pregnant. Most experts recommend getting tested if you and your partner have been unable to conceive after one year of having unprotected sex on a regular basis. Healthcare providers use fertility tests to diagnose and treat both male and female infertility.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Male Infertility Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
What is a fertility test?
Healthcare providers use fertility tests to find out why you’re having difficulty conceiving. Fertility experts generally recommend fertility testing if:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You’re under 35 years of age and haven’t conceived after one year of unprotected sex (sex without any type of
birth control
)
You’re over 35 years of age and haven’t conceived after six months of unprotected sex
You have irregular cycles (cycles that are more than 35 days apart)
There are many different types of fertility tests, depending on your needs. At-home fertility testing can tell you whether you’re ovulating, and if so, which days during the month your fertility is at its peak. In-office fertility testing can tell you why you’re having trouble conceiving and give your provider an idea of which treatments might help. To determine the type of fertility test you need, a fertility specialist will do a
physical examination
and ask about your:
Menstrual cycle history
Gynecology history, including any prior pregnancy history
Health history, including any surgeries or long-term illnesses
Prescription medications
Caffeine and alcohol intake
Work environment (whether you have exposure to toxins or chemicals in your workplace)
Sexual history, including how often you have sex now
After gathering this information, your fertility specialist will recommend tests based on your situation. Keep in mind there’s no single best fertility test. Specialists use a wide range of diagnostic tools to find out why you and your partner haven’t conceived yet.
Advertisement
Fertility tests for women
If you’re
female
, fertility tests may include:
Fertility blood tests
. Certain
hormonal imbalances
can interfere with egg production and maturation. This type of test checks hormone levels in your blood at specific points during your
menstrual cycle
. Fertility specialists commonly check levels for progesterone, estradiol, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and prolactin.
Ovarian reserve testing
. Also known as anti-mullerian hormone (AMH), this test combines fertility blood tests with a transvaginal ultrasound. This measures your antral follicle count (AFC) and the AMH hormone produced by your ovaries, which tells your provider whether you have a typical egg count compared to other people your age. This test is only necessary in women needing in-vitro fertilization (IVF), and isn’t necessary in other fertility treatments.
Genetic testing
. This can detect any mutations (changes) in your genes that could impact fertility.
Pelvic ultrasound
. Sometimes called a sonogram, this test generates detailed pictures of your
female reproductive system
. A provider uses this test to see if you have uterine fibroids, ovarian cysts or other abnormalities.
Sonohysterogram
. This is a type of imaging test. It helps your provider see inside your uterus and can help them determine a cause for infertility.
Hysterosalpingogram
. This imaging test uses
fluoroscopy
to take pictures of your uterus and fallopian tubes. It can help your provider determine if fertility issues are due to blockages in your fallopian tubes.
Hysteroscopy
. During this test, your provider inserts a hysteroscope (a thin, lighted tube) into your uterus. This allows them to examine your cervix and the inside of your uterus.
Male fertility tests
If you’re male, fertility tests may include:
Semen analysis
. One of the most common male fertility tests, semen analysis checks the number and quality of your sperm.
Fertility blood tests
. If there are issues with your semen analysis, your healthcare provider will check certain hormone levels in your blood, including
testosterone
,
thyroid-stimulating hormone
,
luteinizing hormone
,
prolactin
, estradiol and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH).
Genetic testing
. Anyone can get genetic testing to see if they have gene changes that could influence fertility.
Testicular ultrasound
. If there are issues with your semen analysis, this is done to take detailed pictures of your scrotum and
testicles
to identify possible infertility causes.
Post-ejaculatory urinalysis
. Your provider may recommend this test to see if you have sperm in your urine (pee). A condition called
retrograde ejaculation
can cause this.
How do fertility tests work?
It depends on which test you take. Some involve a blood draw, and some might involve imaging. But most of the time, it’s a combination of both. In some cases, your healthcare provider can determine a cause of infertility with just one test. Other times, it takes longer.
What’s right for you depends on several different factors, including your
sex
, health history and sexual history. Your healthcare provider can give you more information about the tests they recommend, how they work, how you can prepare and what treatments are available.
Advertisement
If the results are abnormal what are the next steps?
If you get abnormal results of any kind, your healthcare provider will talk with you about possible next steps. Some people might need further testing before pursuing treatment. Others may be able to start fertility treatments right away. Your provider will let you know what to expect in your situation.
Remember, abnormal results don’t mean your journey is over. Getting pregnant naturally can be difficult, but your fertility specialist can help you conceive. There are numerous assisted reproductive treatments available, like IVF and IUI. Your provider can give you resources and help you find support.
Can I do a fertility test at home?
Yes, you can purchase at-home fertility tests online or at your local pharmacy. There are urine (pee) tests that can show your most fertile days each month. Other tests can check the health and volume of your semen.
It’s important to note that an at-home fertility test isn’t a substitute for a fertility specialist. If your test results suggest that conceiving could be challenging, schedule an appointment with a fertility specialist right away. They can run more tests and recommend personalized treatment.
Can you test fertility with an IUD?
It depends. An IUD doesn’t affect future fertility, but it can skew test results. In some cases, you may need to have your IUD removed and wait a while before testing. If you have an IUD, you should check with your healthcare provider before taking a fertility test.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Starting a family is a sought-after milestone for millions of people. But if you’re having trouble getting pregnant, you might wonder if those dreams will ever come to fruition. If you’re having difficulty conceiving, talking to your healthcare provider is the first step. They can tell you which fertility tests to take and, if necessary, refer you to a specialist for treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infertility can change your plans. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can work with you to get to the bottom of male infertility and create a customized treatment plan.
Male Infertility Treatment
Find A Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/15/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment