Vitamin E Deficiency: Symptoms & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vitamin E Deficiency
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vitamin E Deficiency
Vitamin E is an important nutrient that fights free radicals and supports a healthy immune system. If you have a deficiency in it, your body can’t function properly. You can develop nerve issues that can cause numbness and body movement problems. You can usually prevent the condition by eating enough foods that contain vitamin E.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Vitamin E Deficiency?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Vitamin E Deficiency?
Vitamin E deficiency means your body doesn’t have enough
vitamin E
. If you’re deficient in vitamin E, your body isn’t getting and absorbing the amount it needs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
In the U.S., vitamin E deficiency is rare. People usually get all the vitamin E they need through the foods they eat. When the condition does occur, it’s most likely due to a disorder that affects your body’s ability to absorb
fat
. Your body needs a certain amount of fat to properly digest vitamin E.
By eating enough foods that contain vitamin E, you can usually avoid the condition. Your healthcare provider may also recommend that you take a supplement. But see your provider before starting any new dietary supplements.
What happens when your vitamin E is low?
Vitamin E is an
antioxidant
. That means it protects your cells from
free radicals
. Free radicals are chemical reactions that can damage your cells. Your body needs plenty of vitamin E to fight free radicals.
If you lack vitamin E, your
immune system
may have trouble protecting you against illnesses and infections. Vitamin E is also important because it:
Supports healthy skin
Promotes good vision
Prevents
blood clots
Reduces
inflammation
Symptoms and Causes
Vitamin E deficiency symptoms
Vitamin E deficiency symptoms mostly affect your nervous system. These may include
muscle weakness
, vision issues and
problems controlling your body movements
. Other symptoms include
numbness
and fatigue. Severe cases can lead to blindness.
Advertisement
Other symptoms of vitamin E deficiency can include:
Bleeding within the brain
Abnormal growth of blood vessels in the eyes
A blood disorder called
hemolytic anemia
Slow reflexes
Trouble walking
Weakened immune system
What causes vitamin E deficiency disease?
Fat absorption disorders
and certain
genetic disorders
usually cause vitamin E deficiency. Less commonly, low vitamin E intake causes the condition. Vitamin E is found in many foods. So people who are healthy rarely have the deficiency.
Fat absorption disorders
In countries with low rates of
food insecurity
, deficiency of vitamin E is uncommon. If you do have vitamin E deficiency, it’s often due to a disorder that prevents your body from absorbing fat. These diseases include:
Liver disease
Pancreatitis
Cystic fibrosis
Crohn’s disease
Celiac disease
Certain rare genetic diseases can also lead to the condition. These include
abetalipoproteinemia
and ataxia with vitamin E deficiency.
Low vitamin E intake
In countries with high rates of food insecurity, the most common cause of vitamin E deficiency is a lack of vitamin E in the foods you eat. A very low-fat diet doesn’t contain a lot of vitamin E. And your body needs some fat to digest and absorb it.
Who is most at risk?
Newborns — particularly premature infants — have a higher risk of being deficient in vitamin E. That’s because very little vitamin E crosses the
placenta
during
fetal development
. So, when they’re born, they don’t have a lot of the vitamin stocked up. With age, their risk goes down. Babies can usually get the vitamin E they need through breast milk or formula.
Your risk of developing vitamin E deficiency goes up if you don’t eat foods with any fat in them. Your body needs fat to digest and absorb certain vitamins.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose vitamin E deficiency
Your healthcare provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. They’ll also ask about your medical history, including any diseases that increase your risk of a deficiency of vitamin E.
Your provider may also request
blood tests
, including a vitamin E test. This test measures how much vitamin E is in your blood.
Management and Treatment
How is vitamin E deficiency treated?
If you have a lack of vitamin E, your healthcare provider may recommend
vitamin E supplements
. These dietary supplements come in many different forms. They also have different doses.
Be sure to ask your provider before adding a vitamin E supplement to your daily routine. They may tell you that taking a once-daily multivitamin will cover your vitamin E needs. Supplements that contain vitamin E alone usually have much more than you need.
If you have a fat absorption disorder, your provider will focus on treating that, as well.
To prevent any potential disorders from forming, premature babies may receive supplements, too. But full-term babies don’t need them. They should get enough vitamin E through breast milk or formula.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should make an appointment with your healthcare provider if you:
Have any symptoms of vitamin E deficiency, like muscle weakness or numbness
Follow a low-fat eating plan
Know you have a fat absorption disorder
You should see your provider often to reduce your risk of developing a deficiency of vitamin E.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook (prognosis)?
With treatment, your outlook (prognosis) is very good. You should see your symptoms go away quickly.
Without treatment, the symptoms of vitamin E deficiency are very hard to reverse. They’ll continue to worsen, affecting your quality of life.
So, if you have a fat absorption disorder, you should see your healthcare provider regularly. They’ll test you to see if you’re deficient in vitamin E. If you are, you can begin treatment right away.
Prevention
Can vitamin E deficiency be prevented?
You can prevent vitamin E deficiency by eating a variety of foods that contain the nutrient. It can be found naturally in many foods. And some foods are fortified with it. You can
read nutrition labels
to find out which foods contain vitamin E.
If you know you have a fat absorption disorder, talk to your healthcare provider. They’ll provide treatment or recommend a vitamin E supplement.
You can ensure your newborn doesn’t develop the condition by
breastfeeding
for at least six months.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Vitamin E deficiency is rare, but it does happen. The effects it can have on your body can be shattering. Most people get the vitamin E they need through the foods they eat. But certain disorders can lead to a deficiency. So, make sure you check in regularly with your healthcare provider. They can help you prevent the condition by putting together an eating plan that includes all the vitamin E you need.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider