Rett Syndrome: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Rett Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Rett Syndrome
Rett syndrome is a rare, neurological condition that mostly affects females. It targets your child’s movement and growth. A sporadic (random) gene variant causes it. Almost all children diagnosed with Rett syndrome need caregiver support throughout their lives to manage symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is Rett syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is Rett syndrome?
Rett syndrome is a rare
genetic
and
neurological
condition that primarily affects
girls
. A genetic variant causes it and plays an important role in
brain
development. The condition leads to symptoms that affect motor function, communication and cognitive abilities.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
For the first few months of your child’s life, they’ll develop and meet growth milestones as expected. After 6 months, however, your child will lose the ability to perform previously learned skills. This includes purposeful hand use and communication. Symptoms typically show up in stages as your child gets older. Symptoms that affect your child’s development will stop getting worse (progressing) with time. But they won’t go away. Your child will need care and support throughout their life.
Symptoms and Causes
Rett syndrome is a condition that affects your child’s movement and development.
Rett syndrome symptoms
Your child will develop as expected until about 6 months. The first signs of Rett syndrome are
developmental delays
. These start when your child doesn’t reach expected milestones for their age. Examples could include waving, walking and speaking their first words.
As your child gets older, symptoms of developmental regression (loss of learned skills) become more visible.
Symptoms that affect your child’s muscles, movement and behavior include:
Balance
and coordination challenges (difficulty walking)
Difficulty speaking
Difficulty swallowing
or chewing (can lead to trouble maintaining a healthy weight or
malnutrition
)
Muscle weakness or
spasticity
Problems performing familiar movements on command (
apraxia
)
Repeated hand movements like wringing, squeezing or clapping
Advertisement
Other symptoms of Rett syndrome include:
Difficulty sleeping
Gastrointestinal problems (
reflux
or
constipation
)
Intellectual disability
Irritability
Scoliosis
Slow growth
Life-threatening symptoms may include:
Breathing issues
Heartbeat irregularities
Seizures
Rett syndrome facial features
Children with Rett syndrome may have a small head size compared to the rest of their body (
microcephaly
). This can make facial features look more pronounced. But, there aren’t identifiable facial features for this condition.
Many symptoms of Rett syndrome overlap with another condition called
Angelman syndrome
. Some common features include speech and communication impairment, developmental delay, seizures and sleep disturbances. Facial feature changes are common with Angelman syndrome, like deep-set eyes, a wide mouth and widely spaced teeth, for example. These features don’t happen with Rett syndrome.
Rett syndrome stages
This condition progresses in stages that happen as your child gets older. They might experience different symptoms at each stage. Not all children go through every stage. For example, some people with Rett syndrome are never able to walk.
Rett syndrome stages include:
Stage I, early onset, starts when your child is between 6 and 18 months. Your child’s development slows, like delays in crawling or a lack of eye contact. Your child will have
low muscle tone
and feeding challenges.
Stage II, the rapid progressive stage, usually occurs between ages 1 and 4 years. Your child may lose some language skills and the use of their hands. They may constantly wring their hands. Some children also experience behaviors that resemble
autism spectrum disorder
, like a lack of interest in socializing.
Stage III, the plateau or pseudo-stationary stage, usually occurs between ages 2 and 10 years. Your child’s symptoms from stage II may improve, like communication and motor skills. They may show interest in socializing. Seizures are common.
Stage IV, or the late motor deterioration stage, may happen at any time after stage III. Your child may lose walking skills and muscle strength. Your child should keep their communication and thinking abilities.
Rett syndrome causes
A genetic
variant
of the
MECP2
gene causes most cases of Rett syndrome. This gene provides instructions to make the
MECP2
protein. This protein holds the connection (synapse) between nerve cells and helps your child’s brain function as expected.
Not all cases of Rett syndrome affect the
MECP2
gene. Some gene variants (like deletions) or genetic variants to other genes, like
CDJK5
and
FOXG1,
can lead to atypical types. Some unidentified genes can also cause symptoms.
The genetic change occurs spontaneously (randomly). It’s not usually inherited.
Rett syndrome in males
Rett syndrome almost always affects females. This is because the genetic change that causes it happens on the X
chromosome
. You have two X chromosomes if you’re female.
Since males have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome, this condition rarely affects them. A variant on a child’s only X chromosome can lead to
miscarriage
or death during early infancy due to severe symptoms.
Healthcare providers identify this gene change in males as
MECP2
-related severe neonatal encephalopathy. This condition can cause similar symptoms, like intellectual disability, seizures and difficulty with movement.
Complications of Rett syndrome
Your child may be at risk of the following complications, some of which are life-threatening:
Advertisement
Aspiration pneumonia
Epilepsy
Heart dysfunction (
long QT syndrome
)
Lung or breathing issues
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Rett syndrome
A healthcare provider will diagnose Rett syndrome after a
physical exam
and testing. As a parent or caregiver, you might suspect something’s wrong when your child stops meeting developmental milestones for their age during their first year. This will prompt a visit to your child’s
pediatrician
or
primary care physician
.
Your child’s provider will examine your child for symptoms and run tests to rule out conditions with similar symptoms. A
genetic blood test
can identify a gene change to the
MECP2
gene to confirm a diagnosis in most cases. This genetic screening doesn’t require any special preparation or a hospital stay.
A diagnosis usually happens after 6 months of age and before 18 months. This is when symptoms start.
Since Rett syndrome is so rare, a diagnosis usually doesn’t happen quickly. Your child’s care team will make sure they’ve ruled out all other possible conditions before making an official diagnosis. This can be frustrating as you wait for answers, but a clear diagnosis helps your child’s care team treat their symptoms.
Management and Treatment
How is Rett syndrome treated?
Treatment varies based on your child’s specific symptoms. For example,
medications can treat seizures
and movement challenges. If your child has difficulty with motor skills and language, their provider may recommend:
Advertisement
Occupational therapy
Physical therapy
Speech therapy
For children 2 years of age and older, a medication called trofinetide showed success during
clinical trials
. It’s the first FDA-approved treatment specifically for Rett Syndrome. It’s not a cure but is considered a disease-modifying treatment. You’ll need to discuss and work closely with your medical team to explore this option.
In addition, your child may benefit from:
A brace or surgery for scoliosis
Frequent monitoring for heart abnormalities
Nutritional support
Special education programs in school
There isn’t a cure for Rett syndrome. Your child’s providers can help manage their symptoms throughout their life.
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you notice your child misses developmental milestones for their age, especially after 6 months.
If your child has a Rett syndrome diagnosis, let their provider know if they have any side effects from treatment or if you notice new or worsening symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Rett syndrome life expectancy
Many people with Rett syndrome live a high quality of life well into their 40s and beyond. If symptoms are mild, your child may have a normal life expectancy. Health complications may shorten life expectancy.
Your child’s provider is the best person to ask about their life expectancy. They understand and can explain the outlook of your child’s unique situation.
Advertisement
Rett syndrome prognosis
Rett syndrome is a lifelong condition. Symptoms affect each person differently. Your child may be able to regulate their movements, walk and communicate on their own. But they’ll still need around-the-clock care throughout their life.
Your child will also need to schedule regular visits with their care team to make sure they have appropriate symptom management and to prevent complications. Some cases of Rett syndrome can cause early death if complications arise.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be challenging to learn that your child has a rare neurological condition. You may feel worried or concerned that your child isn’t growing like others at their age. While your child’s body needs more time and care as they grow, don’t give up hope. Your child’s providers will be with you every step of the way to make sure they get treatment for their symptoms as needed.
Researchers, through clinical trials, are finding new treatment options to help children diagnosed with Rett syndrome. If you have any questions about your child’s outlook or treatment, let their providers know.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your child has a neurological condition, you want them to have the best care. At Cleveland Clinic Children’s, we offer compassionate, personalized treatment.
Neurology Care
Neurology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment