Norrie Disease: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Norrie Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Norrie Disease
Norrie disease is a rare inherited eye disease that affects your baby’s retina. The disease typically causes blindness at birth or within the first few months of your baby’s life. This condition mostly affects male babies. Babies with Norrie disease may also have hearing loss, behavioral changes and developmental delays.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Norrie Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Norrie Disease?
Leukocoria, also known as “white pupil” or “cat’s eye reflex,” is a common sign of Norrie disease.
Norrie disease is a rare X-linked recessive genetic disease that causes congenital blindness and hearing loss. Babies who have it are born blind or lose their vision by the time they’re a few months old. Your baby may also develop hearing loss as they grow up.
Males
are more likely to have this disease, too.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The condition occurs when a
genetic change
happens during
fetal development
. The change affects how the fetus’s
retina
and
inner ear
develop. The combination of hearing and vision loss often leads to developmental delays, behavioral issues and intellectual disabilities.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Norrie disease
Blindness
at birth or soon after birth is the most common symptom of Norrie disease. Other symptoms include:
Hearing loss
: The condition may affect inner ear development. Hearing loss may start in early childhood and get worse as your child grows up.
Behavioral changes
: Norrie disease may impact your child’s behavior. For example, 1 in 4 people with Norrie disease have a
neurological disorder
that causes them to laugh or cry uncontrollably (
pseudobulbar affect
).
Developmental delays
: Symptoms may include delays in rolling over and sitting up, as well as issues with
fine motor skills
.
Intellectual disabilities
: Your child may have issues with learning, reasoning and everyday life skills.
Norrie disease causes
Norrie disease happens when the
NDP
gene changes. The change affects the norrin protein that helps retinas develop. The genetic change also affects the development of
blood vessels
that supply blood to your retina and inner ear. The change can lead to several eye disorders known as NDP-related retinopathies.
Advertisement
How is this disorder inherited?
People inherit this Norrie disease through an X-linked
recessive
inheritance pattern. This genetic change means only one change on the X
chromosome
needs to pass from one biological parent to their male child for that child to inherit the change.
Risk factors
A family medical history of Norrie disease increases the risk that your child will inherit the genetic change that causes it. If someone in your family has this disorder, you may want to talk with a
genetic counselor
to learn more about your risk of having the disease or passing the genetic change on to a child.
Complications
People with Norrie disease may have certain conditions associated with the genetic change that leads to Norrie disease. Those conditions include:
Autism
: About 1 in 4 people with Norrie disease also have autism or autism-like symptoms.
Peripheral vascular disease
: Some people with Norrie disease develop
venous ulcers
or other problems related to blood circulation.
Seizures
: Though less common than other features, seizures may affect about 1 in 10 people with Norrie disease.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this disorder
An
ophthalmologist
will do an
eye exam
. They’ll look for signs of Norrie disease, like
retinal detachment
or if your child’s pupils look white. They’ll ask if any family member has Norrie disease. They may do
genetic tests
to look for the genetic change that causes the disease.
Management and Treatment
How is Norrie disease treated?
There isn’t a treatment to restore your child’s vision. Their ophthalmologist may recommend laser and/or specific surgeries to ease
eye pain
or manage conditions like retinal detachments and
cataracts
. If your child has hearing loss, they may benefit by:
Wearing
hearing aids
Having
cochlear implants
Receiving
speech therapy
Your child may also benefit from educational support services. It’s important to talk to administrators at your child’s school to learn what resources are available.
When should I seek care?
Some babies with Norrie disease have vision loss within the first few months of life. And they may develop hearing loss as they grow up. You should talk to your child’s pediatrician if you notice changes in your child, like:
Difficulty following moving objects or people with their eyes
Tilting or turning their head when they look at things close up
Not reacting to changes in light, movement or sound
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for Norrie disease?
Your child and you will face lifelong challenges. Those challenges will vary depending on how Norrie disease affects your child. Your child’s
team
of healthcare providers is your best resource of information about ways the condition may affect your child. But in general, they’ll have regular check-ups, including:
Advertisement
Eye exams
: Your child should have annual eye exams even if they don’t have vision. Their ophthalmologist will check for issues like eye pain or cataracts.
Hearing tests
: Your child should see an audiologist every six to 12 months. Their
audiologist
will do hearing tests to check your child’s hearing.
Well-child check-ups
: Your child will need routine visits with a
pediatrician
to monitor their overall health.
How can I help my child?
Your child may need help with managing daily life. Children with Norrie disease may have trouble going to
sleep
and staying asleep. Ask your child’s pediatrician for help if your child isn’t getting enough rest.
How do I take care of myself and my family?
You need to take care of yourself so you can take care of your child. That may be easier said than done. You may feel like there aren’t enough hours in the day. Here are some suggestions that may help:
Don’t go it alone
. Members of your extended family, your friends and others may be able to take care of daily tasks so you can focus on your child and family.
Find support
.
Check out support groups for families and others who care for children who have needs like your child’s. It may help to connect with others who can relate to your situation.
Pay attention to your health
. Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re coping with exhaustion or mental health issues like
anxiety
and
depression
. They’ll suggest treatments or strategies that can help.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A Norrie disease diagnosis is a life-changing event. It means your child is blind or will become blind while they’re still very young. They may lose their hearing, too. They’ll need medical care and extra support as they grow up and for the rest of their life.
You may feel overwhelmed by all the ways that Norrie disease will affect your child. Their care team understands if you have lots of questions and concerns. They’ll be ready to answer questions. More than that, they’ll have suggestions for resources and programs that will help you and your child manage the challenges that Norrie disease may bring.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/30/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment