Baby Eczema Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Baby Eczema
Advertisement
Advertisement
Baby Eczema
Baby eczema, or infantile atopic dermatitis, is a common yet uncomfortable skin condition in babies, toddlers and children. Genetics and environmental triggers lead to an itchy, dry rash on different parts of your baby’s body. There isn’t a cure, but you can relieve your child’s symptoms with baby eczema cream and medication.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Baby Eczema?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Baby Eczema?
Baby eczema, or infantile
atopic dermatitis
, is a common
skin condition
that causes patches of your baby’s skin to become dry, itchy and sensitive. It appears most often on your infant’s scalp, forehead and cheeks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Eczema
(pronounced “eg-zuh-MUH”) affects between 10% and 20% of children worldwide. For many babies, the condition is
genetic
. They’re born without enough of a special protein that produces a strong barrier between their
skin
and environment. With an impaired skin barrier, irritants and
allergens
can break through. This leads to an itchy
rash
and other uncomfortable symptoms.
There’s no cure for baby eczema. But learning what triggers your baby’s eczema rash can help you avoid it. When a flare-up does occur, moisturizers and medication can help you manage your child’s symptoms.
Symptoms and Causes
Baby eczema symptoms begin after interaction with a trigger that irritates their skin.
Symptoms of baby eczema
The telltale sign of infant eczema is a bumpy rash on certain areas of your baby’s body. In babies younger than 6 months, eczema rash most commonly affects their scalp and face. You may notice it on their forehead, cheeks, chin and around their mouth. After 6 months, the rash may appear around your baby’s elbows and knees.
In babies with lighter skin, the rash will be red. In babies with darker skin, the rash will probably appear as a darker version of their skin tone. The skin around their elbows and knees may be paler.
Other infantile atopic dermatitis symptoms may include:
Severe itching
that can interrupt sleep
Dry skin
that may crack and bleed
Blisters
Oozing from the eczema rash
Advertisement
What causes eczema in babies?
A combination of genetics and environmental factors causes baby eczema.
Genetics
Babies who have a biological family history of
seasonal allergies
,
asthma
or atopic dermatitis are more likely to develop the condition.
Many babies with eczema are born without enough of a special protein called filaggrin. This protein is responsible for forming a protective barrier between your baby’s skin and their environment. Without enough filaggrin, the top layer of your baby’s skin (
epidermis
) won’t work properly. Your baby will have trouble keeping moisture in their skin.
Environmental factors
Genetics is only one part of the equation. Environmental triggers can make infantile atopic dermatitis worse. Exposure to many different things in your baby’s environment can set off a flare-up. Irritants and allergens can break through your baby’s skin. Then, symptoms of eczema can develop.
What triggers baby eczema?
Your baby’s skin is unique. It can react to different triggers in its environment. Some of the most common triggers include:
Allergens, like
pet dander
,
dust
,
pollen
and certain
foods
Baby items, like wipes, powder or heavily fragranced lotions
Fabrics, like clothing, bedding and blankets
Household items, like soaps, shampoos and
laundry detergents
Infections, like the
common cold
Temperature factors, like heat, dry air and
sweat
If you can figure out what’s triggering your baby’s eczema, you can find ways to avoid it. This will hopefully cut down on the number of flare-ups your baby experiences.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose baby eczema
If you notice your baby has symptoms of eczema, take them to see their
pediatrician
as soon as possible. With early treatment, your baby’s provider may be able to use less medication. Prompt treatment can also prevent eczema from getting worse, which can make it harder to treat.
Your baby’s pediatrician can usually diagnose infantile atopic dermatitis with a physical exam. The appearance and location of the rash on your baby’s skin can help with their diagnosis. They may also ask you questions about products you use or other environmental exposures that may be triggering your baby’s eczema.
If your baby’s symptoms are severe or keep coming back, their pediatrician may refer you to a
dermatologist
or an
allergist
.
Management and Treatment
How do you cure eczema?
There’s no cure for baby eczema. Treatment is available to help your baby’s skin heal and relieve their symptoms.
Treatment for infantile atopic dermatitis
involves a three-pronged approach:
Moisturization
: Applying a moisturizer to your baby’s skin will help repair their skin barrier. Baby eczema cream keeps your baby’s skin hydrated and reduces the
inflammation
that’s causing their symptoms. Choose a moisturizer designed for babies and products that don’t contain fragrances. The best time to apply moisturizers to your baby’s skin is after a bath and a couple of times throughout the day when their skin appears dry.
Topical
corticosteroids
: Rubbing a steroid ointment on your baby’s skin can also help decrease inflammation and relieve your baby’s symptoms. For mild eczema, apply topical over-the-counter 1%
hydrocortisone ointment
twice a day for no longer than one week. For moderate to severe eczema, your baby’s provider may recommend a prescription-strength ointment.
Avoid environmental triggers
: If you’re able to identify what triggers your baby’s infantile atopic dermatitis, avoiding it can help your baby’s skin heal and prevent future eczema flare-ups. An allergist may
test your baby’s skin
to determine if they’re allergic to certain things in their environment that they come into contact with regularly.
Advertisement
What is the 3-minute rule for eczema?
The 3-minute rule means you should apply moisturizer to your baby’s skin within three minutes of taking them out of the bath.
After
giving your baby a warm bath
, gently pat them dry. Be careful not to rub their skin. Then, immediately rub a baby eczema cream onto their slightly damp skin.
This locks in the moisture from the water, which helps protect their skin barrier. It also provides relief from
itching
and prevents dryness.
How soon after treatment will my baby feel better?
After treatment begins, your baby’s symptoms may start to lessen within a couple days. It could still take several weeks before your baby’s skin heals completely.
When should my baby see their healthcare provider after treatment?
Visit your baby’s provider if their skin shows signs of an infection. Babies diagnosed with eczema are at a high risk of developing an infection. This is because the protective skin barrier doesn’t work as it should. Scratching can also break open your baby’s skin, exposing their body to
bacteria
and
viruses
. Signs of an infection include:
Fluid-filled blisters or sores
A yellow crust forming around their eczema rash
Swelling and a dark red to purple tone to their rash
Pain or sensitivity to the touch
Fever
or
chills
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my baby has baby eczema?
Eczema causes your baby’s skin to be dry and itchy. They may try to scratch their skin to relieve the itchiness. It may be hard to prevent your baby from scratching their skin. But scratching can increase your baby’s chance of an infection.
Advertisement
To prevent this, keep their skin moisturized with baby eczema creams, ointments or lotion. Rehydrating your baby’s skin can reduce their symptoms and prevent itchiness. Visit your child’s provider if their symptoms get worse or they have signs of an infection.
Does it go away on its own?
Your baby will need treatment for eczema to go away completely. The best treatment is moisturization. Using a moisturizer daily or several times a day will keep your baby’s skin hydrated.
Some cases of baby eczema clear up by the time children start school. Other children may have symptoms of eczema throughout adolescence and into adulthood. Either way, your child may experience sensitive skin or flare-ups of eczema symptoms throughout their life.
Prevention
Can infantile atopic dermatitis be prevented?
Because genetic factors contribute to eczema in babies, there’s no way to completely prevent the condition. But you can help your baby reduce their risk of developing a flare-up of symptoms by:
Avoiding triggers, like irritants and allergens
Using moisturizer on your baby’s skin daily
Giving your baby five- to 10-minute baths with warm — not hot — water
Choosing moisturizers or ointments designed for babies
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between baby eczema and baby acne?
Symptoms of baby eczema and
baby acne
can look similar, but there are differences between the two conditions. Baby acne causes
pimples
to form on your baby’s skin. Eczema causes dry, itchy patches of skin that form a rash.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s concerning when a new rash shows up on your baby’s skin. Where did it come from? What should I do? Your baby isn’t able to vocalize that they’re itchy. But you can stay a step ahead of infantile atopic dermatitis by scheduling times throughout the day to apply baby eczema cream to their skin. You might also consider putting mittens on your baby’s hands. This way, they can’t scratch at their skin, which can make their symptoms worse.
If your baby develops symptoms of eczema, take them to see their pediatrician right away. Their provider will start treatment and tell you how to keep your baby’s skin hydrated and healthy.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider