Tennis Elbow (Lateral Epicondylitis): Treatment & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tennis Elbow (Lateral Epicondylitis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tennis Elbow (Lateral Epicondylitis)
Tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis) is an overuse injury that affects a tendon in your elbow. It happens when you do a repetitive motion like twisting or swinging your lower arm a lot. Most people get better with a few months of nonsurgical treatment and rest.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Sports Medicine Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Tennis Elbow?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Tennis Elbow?
Tennis elbow gets its name from being a common racket sports injury. But anyone who overuses their elbows can develop it.
Tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis) is a tendon injury that causes pain and inflammation in your elbow. It’s usually a repetitive strain injury.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Repetitive strain injuries
happen when you use a part of your body to repeatedly do the same kind of motion so often that it damages your tissue.
Tennis elbow gets its name from being a common injury among tennis players. It happens when you overuse the tendon that connects your forearm muscles to your elbow. The medical term for tennis elbow is lateral epicondylitis. Epicondylitis is inflammation in that tendon. Lateral epicondylitis means the inflammation is on the lateral side. It’s the outside edge when you hold your arms at your sides with your palms facing forward.
Tennis elbow is one of the most common causes of elbow pain. Even though it’s named for tennis, that’s not the most common cause. Experts estimate that more than 9 in 10 people develop it for other reasons.
Any motion that makes you grip or twist and swing your forearm often can cause lateral epicondylitis. Visit a healthcare provider if you have an elbow injury or feel pain that doesn’t get better on its own in a week. Seeing a provider as soon as the pain starts can increase your treatment options. And how well they work.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of tennis elbow
The most common lateral epicondylitis symptoms include:
Elbow pain, especially on the outside of your elbow
Stiffness
Swelling
A weakened grip, especially when you’re trying to hold something like a racket or pen
Advertisement
How do you know if you have tennis elbow?
You can’t know for sure you have tennis elbow without visiting a healthcare provider for a diagnosis. Lots of people with tennis elbow feel a specific kind of pain in their elbow and arm. The pain usually feels:
Sharp or burning
Worse when you twist or bend your arm
Like it spreads from your elbow down to your forearm and into your wrist, especially at night
You might notice more pain when you use your arm for common motions. It might hurt when you turn a doorknob, open a jar or shake someone’s hand. Your grip may feel weaker in these motions. Even if you’re not using a lot of strength.
Does tennis elbow affect one or both arms?
Most people develop lateral epicondylitis in their dominant arm. That’s the side you naturally use for most activities. You’re most likely to have tennis elbow in whichever arm you use the most for a repetitive activity. It’s the arm you hold a racket or tools with.
It’s less common, but it’s possible to develop tennis elbow in both arms at the same time.
Lateral epicondylitis causes
Any motion or activity that you do too often can trigger tennis elbow. Extra stress from repetitive movements builds up over time. Eventually, that added use and stress on your tendon causes tiny tears. Those lead to symptoms you can feel and notice.
A sudden arm or elbow injury can also cause lateral epicondylitis. But this is less common.
Risk factors
Anyone can develop tennis elbow. But you may be more likely to if you:
Lift more than 45 pounds (22 kilograms) regularly
Are older than 40
Smoke
Have
obesity
Play sports that make you swing or twist your arms a lot
Have a job or hobby that makes you use tools or get in positions that put lots of stress on your elbows
Complications of this condition
Tennis elbow usually doesn’t cause serious complications. If you keep using your injured elbow before your tendon heals, you can increase your chances of rupturing (tearing) it.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will diagnose tennis elbow with a physical exam and some tests. They’ll examine your injured elbow and ask about your symptoms. Tell your provider when you first noticed pain, stiffness or other symptoms. And if any activities make symptoms better or worse.
Lateral epicondylitis tests
Your provider may use some of the following tests to check for damage inside your arm and take pictures of your elbow:
X-ray
Ultrasound
MRI
EMG
Management and Treatment
What are tennis elbow treatments?
Your provider will suggest treatments to help your tendon heal. The most common treatments include:
The RICE method
: This is usually the best way to fix tennis elbow.
Over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers:
Over-the-counter
NSAIDs
or acetaminophen reduce swelling and relieve pain. Talk to your provider before taking these medications for more than 10 days in a row.
Physical therapy
: A physical therapist will give you stretches and exercises to strengthen the muscles around your elbow and increase your flexibility.
Wearing a brace
: Wrist and elbow braces will allow your tendon to rest so it can heal. Your provider will tell you which kind of brace you’ll need and how often to wear it.
Platelet-rich plasma
: Your provider will take a sample of your blood and then process it to concentrate platelets. These proteins encourage healing. Then, they’ll inject that blood sample into your elbow.
Corticosteroids
: These are prescription anti-inflammatory medications. Your provider may give you
cortisone shots
. Corticosteroids aren’t as common as other treatments because they may not relieve pain. Especially if you’ve had it for more than six weeks.
Tenotomy
:
Your provider will poke a needle through your skin and into your injured tendon using an ultrasound to guide them. They’ll break down and remove damaged tissue to encourage your body’s natural healing process.
Shockwave therapy
: Your provider will direct a specific pressure frequency where your tendon is injured. The shockwaves encourage your body to speed up the healing.
Surgery
: It’s rare to need surgery. Your provider may suggest surgery if you’re still having severe symptoms after several months of conservative treatments. A surgeon will remove damaged tissue and repair your tendon.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you think your elbow is injured or you notice any of the following signs:
It’s hard to move your elbow or arm.
Your elbow is swollen or discolored.
You’re in severe pain that makes it hard to do your usual activities.
You have pain that’s bad enough to affect your sleep.
The pain lasts more than a week.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Sports Medicine Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have tennis elbow?
You should expect to take a break from the physical activities that caused tennis elbow. You may need to stop doing some activities completely, or do them with modifications (like wearing a brace while you work or taking breaks more often).
People almost always make a full recovery from tennis elbow. You should be able to resume all your usual activities once your tendon heals, even if you need surgery.
How long tennis elbow lasts
Tennis elbow can last anywhere from a few months to more than a year. It usually takes around six months to recover, but some people need longer (up to 18 months).
How long it’ll take you to recover depends on a few factors:
What caused the tennis elbow
How damaged your tendon is
Which treatments you need
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between tennis elbow and golfer’s elbow?
Tennis elbow and
golfer’s elbow
are similar conditions. They’re both repetitive strain injuries caused by overusing your arm and elbow.
Tennis elbow affects the tendon on the outer (lateral) part of your elbow. Golfer’s elbow affects the tendon on the inner (medial) part of your elbow. The medical term for golfer’s elbow is medial epicondylitis.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It’s confusing to learn you have tennis elbow if you’ve never swung a racket in your life. But tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis) is named for the kinds of arm motions that can irritate and damage a tendon in your elbow. You don’t need to be a Wimbledon contender to have tennis elbow. In fact, most people who have it don’t even play tennis.
You’ll probably need a few months of rest and nonsurgical treatments. This will help your injured tendon heal. Your provider will tell you which treatments will be best for you and how long you’ll need to avoid certain activities or motions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If an injury puts you on the bench, you want experts by your side. Cleveland Clinic’s sports medicine specialists can get you back in the game.
Schedule Sports Medicine Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment