Nystagmus: Definition, Causes, Testing & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nystagmus
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nystagmus
Nystagmus is rapid, uncontrollable eye movements. If you have nystagmus, your eyes may move up and down, side to side or in a circular motion. Sometimes people are born with it (congenital nystagmus), but you can also develop it later in life (acquired nystagmus). Glasses, contact lenses, medications and surgery are potential treatments.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Nystagmus symptoms like dizziness require a call to your provider.
What is nystagmus?
Nystagmus (pronounced “ni-STAG-muhs”) is a condition where your eyes make rapid, repetitive, uncontrolled movements. Your eyes may move in different directions:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Side to side (horizontal nystagmus).
Up and down (vertical nystagmus).
In a circle (rotary or torsional nystagmus).
The movements can follow different patterns. Your eyes may:
Drift in one direction and then jerk in the opposite direction to correct (jerk nystagmus).
Drift back and forth in a steady, pendulum-like motion (pendular nystagmus).
These eye movements can cause problems with
vision
, depth perception,
balance
and coordination.
Types of nystagmus
Nystagmus affects both children and adults. There are two types: congenital or infantile (onset at birth or in the first few months of life) and acquired (onset after 6 months of age).
Congenital or infantile nystagmus
Babies born with nystagmus usually show symptoms between 6 weeks and 3 months of age. Sometimes, parents pass nystagmus on to their children, but the exact cause isn’t always clear. Children with congenital nystagmus often have it in both eyes. Their eyes usually move side to side. The main symptom is blurry vision.
Acquired nystagmus
Acquired nystagmus develops later in life and is more common in adults. Nystagmus may be a symptom of a medical condition affecting your brain, eyes or ears. Or, it may not be related to a condition at all. It may just be how your body works. Sometimes nystagmus results from alcohol and drug use. Adults with acquired nystagmus often describe their vision as shaky.
Advertisement
Spasmus nutans is a form of acquired nystagmus that affects children. It’s usually diagnosed between 6 months and 3 years old. This type of nystagmus usually improves without treatment between ages 2 and 8.
How common is nystagmus?
Researchers don’t know for sure how many people in the general population have nystagmus. Previous studies have reported that anywhere from 6 to 24 people out of every 10,000 have some type of nystagmus.
Is nystagmus a serious condition?
Nystagmus itself isn’t considered dangerous. But it may be associated with serious health conditions, especially those affecting your brain, such as
stroke
, brain tumor, toxicity, head trauma (injury) and inflammatory diseases.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of nystagmus?
The biggest sign of nystagmus is uncontrollable movement in your eyes. The symptoms of nystagmus depend on the condition causing it and include:
Feeling as if your surroundings are moving (
oscillopsia
).
Shaky or blurry vision.
Balance problems.
Light sensitivity or trouble seeing in the dark.
Dizziness or feeling like you’re spinning (
vertigo
).
What causes nystagmus?
Your brain controls eye movement in conjunction with the structures in your ear, called the vestibular system. It automatically adjusts your eyes when you move your head so that the image you see remains in focus. In people with nystagmus, a problem prevents your brain, the vestibular system and your eyes from working together.
Nystagmus could indicate another eye problem, a neurological condition or a problem with the parts of your
inner ear
that control balance and coordination.
Nystagmus causes and risk factors include:
Developmental problems with your brain or eye.
Retina
or
optic nerve
disorders.
Inner ear disorders
, such as benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) and
Ménière’s disease
.
Stroke
.
Brain tumor.
Eye or head trauma (injury).
Alcohol or drug use.
Albinism
(lack of pigmentation in the skin).
Vision problems, including
nearsightedness
or
astigmatism
.
Certain medications, such as antiseizure drugs.
Diseases affecting your
central nervous system
, like
multiple sclerosis (MS)
.
Eye problems in babies, including
strabismus (crossed eyes)
, focusing issues and
cataracts
.
Sometimes, there isn’t a clear cause. This is called idiopathic nystagmus.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is nystagmus diagnosed?
An eye care specialist called an
ophthalmologist
typically diagnoses nystagmus. They’ll perform an
eye exam
and ask about your symptoms. They’ll check for eye problems related to nystagmus, including strabismus, cataracts or issues with your retina or optic nerve. Other specialists, such as brain doctors (
neurologists
) and ear doctors (otorhinolaryngologists), can also diagnose nystagmus and test you for brain or inner ear conditions causing it.
Advertisement
Tests to diagnose nystagmus
You may need additional tests with different providers to learn what’s causing nystagmus. An ophthalmologist may perform tests to see if an eye disease is causing nystagmus. A
neurologist
may perform tests to see if a brain condition is causing nystagmus. An
otorhinolaryngologist
or
audiologist
may test to see if nystagmus relates to an inner ear condition.
Tests may include:
A neurological exam.
An ear exam.
Eye movement recordings (such as
electronystagmography
and
v
ideo-nystagmography
).
Imaging tests to capture pictures of your brain, such as
CT scan
(computed tomography scan) or
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging).
Genetic tests
to identify inherited
genetic mutations
(errors in your DNA) associated with some forms of congenital nystagmus.
Management and Treatment
Can nystagmus be corrected?
The correction of nystagmus depends on the medical condition responsible for it.
Sometimes, treating the underlying condition can correct acquired nystagmus. For example, treating an inner ear condition causing nystagmus can improve symptoms like shaky vision or dizziness. In some conditions, your brain and vestibular system compensate for the damage, and nystagmus goes away or decreases over time.
Certain types of congenital nystagmus may disappear later in life. Other types can’t be cured completely, but proper treatment can manage symptoms.
Advertisement
What are the treatments for nystagmus?
Your healthcare provider will recommend treatment based on what’s causing your nystagmus. They’ll also consider your health history and personal preferences.
Glasses or contact lenses
Clearer vision can help slow the rapid eye movements associated with nystagmus. Your provider may recommend
eyeglasses
or
contact lenses
to manage symptoms. You may need prism lenses, which limit how much your eyes must move to see clearly.
Medications
Some medications can reduce nystagmus symptoms in adults, such as
gabapentin
(antiseizure),
baclofen
(muscle relaxant) and
onabotulinumtoxina
(Botox®). Your healthcare provider will determine whether you would benefit from any medications.
Eye muscle surgery
In rare instances, your provider may recommend
strabismus surgery
. During this procedure, a surgeon repositions the muscles that move the eyes. This surgery doesn’t cure nystagmus, but it improves your eye movement. You won’t have to tilt or turn your head as much to see clearly.
Vision correction surgery
If you have nystagmus and are nearsighted, you may benefit from laser
vision correction surgery
— such as
LASIK
. Laser eye surgery doesn’t cure nystagmus, but it improves your vision. Improved vision can reduce your nystagmus symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have nystagmus?
Nystagmus can make everyday tasks more challenging. Sometimes, it limits the types of jobs and hobbies you can have.
Advertisement
Nystagmus rarely goes away completely, but it can improve over time. Your healthcare provider can help you find a treatment that works for you.
Prevention
How can I prevent nystagmus?
Currently, there’s no way to prevent nystagmus. But you can reduce symptoms by treating the underlying cause.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your healthcare provider immediately if you notice any changes in your vision or have difficulties with balance or coordination. Remember that nystagmus can be a symptom of serious health issues. Prompt diagnosis and treatment are essential.
If you’ve already been diagnosed with nystagmus, inform your provider if your symptoms worsen.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Nystagmus can weaken your sight, sense of balance and ability to judge distances. The condition can’t be cured completely, but treatments can help manage symptoms. Ask your healthcare provider for resources. Learning everything you can about nystagmus can help you choose the best treatments. It can help you manage your condition so you can continue doing the things you enjoy.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/04/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment