Cystic Kidney Disease: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cystic Kidney Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cystic Kidney Disease
Cystic kidney disease causes cysts to form in or around your kidneys. There are different types of cystic kidney disease. Some are the result of abnormal genes. Others start during fetal development or due to kidney failure. Symptoms commonly affect how you pee. Treatment often includes medication, dialysis or a kidney transplant.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Chronic Kidney Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Cystic kidney disease causes cysts to develop on your kidneys. Cysts may affect kidney function and lead to kidney failure.
What is cystic kidney disease?
Cystic kidney disease describes a group of conditions that cause fluid-filled sacs (cysts) to form in or around your
kidneys
.
Kidney cysts
can prevent your kidneys from filtering wastes and excess water out of your blood. Cystic kidney disease can lead to
kidney failure
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Another name for cystic kidney disease is renal cystic disease.
How common is cystic kidney disease?
It depends. Some cystic kidney diseases are very common. For example, simple kidney cysts occur in about 1 out of every 10 people. But other forms of cystic kidney disease are rare.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of cystic kidney disease?
The various cystic kidney diseases have different symptoms. But some of the most common symptoms include:
Back pain
Flank pain
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
)
Trouble peeing, including not peeing as much as you usually do
Enlarged kidneys or kidney masses
Headaches
High blood pressure
Kidney infections
Kidney stones
What causes cystic kidney disease?
Cystic kidney diseases have different causes. Some may result from
genetic variations
. Others might develop over time due to diseases,
birth defects
or age.
Cysts occur when renal tubule pieces detach from a larger parent tube. Your kidneys have thousands of tiny tubes that clean your blood and release pee into your
bladder
.
Who does cystic kidney disease affect?
Risk factors for cystic kidney disease vary widely across the different types. But in general, you’re more likely to get cystic kidney disease if you’re:
50 or older
Have
chronic kidney disease
(CKD) or kidney failure
Have an abnormal gene
What are the complications of cystic kidney disease?
Some of the more common complications of the various cystic kidney diseases include:
Advertisement
Kidney failure
Heart valve
problems (more common if you have
polycystic kidney disease
)
Liver cysts
and
pancreatic cysts
(more common if you have polycystic kidney disease)
Problems with growth and
development delays
in infants
Diagnosis and Tests
How is cystic kidney disease diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will ask you about your symptoms and review your medical history. They’ll also order one or more of the following imaging tests to check for kidney cysts:
Prenatal ultrasound
or
kidney ultrasound
CT scan
MRI
A provider will also likely order
blood tests
and a pee test (
urinalysis
) to see how well your kidneys are filtering your blood.
Management and Treatment
Is cystic kidney disease curable?
Simple kidney cysts that don’t cause any symptoms may not need treatment. A healthcare provider may monitor the cysts and perform annual ultrasounds to make sure they don’t grow. If the cysts are painful or cause other symptoms, they may perform
fine-needle aspiration
to drain the cyst or
laparoscopic surgery
to cut or burn away the cyst tissue.
If you develop kidney failure from cystic kidney disease, a provider may recommend:
Dialysis
to clean your blood when your kidneys no longer work
Kidney transplant
(you may get a kidney from a living or deceased organ donor)
Blood pressure medications
(antihypertensives) to manage high
blood pressure
Lifestyle changes to manage high blood pressure, including at least 30 minutes of activity per day, maintaining a healthy weight for you and avoiding tobacco products, including
smoking
Should a polycystic kidney be removed?
It depends. Unless you’re in a lot of pain or have other symptoms, healthcare providers usually don’t recommend removing your kidneys, even if they stop filtering wastes. They may still filter excess water from your body. But a provider may recommend a
nephrectomy
to remove your damaged kidneys if they cause a lot of pain or other symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Chronic Kidney Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have cystic kidney disease?
There’s no cure for cystic kidney disease. But there are many treatment options to slow the progression of polycystic kidney disease. You may need dialysis or a kidney transplant.
At what age do people with PKD go into kidney failure?
This can vary. It depends on the specific genetic variation. But it often has a similar pattern in a given family. PKD (polycystic kidney disease) involves two major
genes
—
PKD1
and
PKD2
. People with the
PKD1
gene variation tend to go on to kidney failure sooner (around mid-50s) than people with the
PKD2
gene variation (early 70s).
Your healthcare team will give you a better idea of what to expect according to your unique situation.
What is the life expectancy of someone with polycystic kidney disease?
Nearly 80% of people with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease have preserved kidney function at 50. Over 50% have preserved kidney function into their early 70s.
About one-third of babies who have autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease at birth don’t survive. Babies who do survive need treatment for the rest of their lives.
Advertisement
Prevention
How can I prevent cystic kidney disease?
There’s no way to prevent cystic kidney disease. But talking to a healthcare provider when you first notice symptoms and working with a
nephrologist
may help slow the progression of some forms of cystic kidney disease.
Living With
What foods should I avoid with kidney cysts?
You may need to work with a renal
dietitian
to develop kidney-friendly eating patterns if you have chronic kidney disease or reduced kidney function due to cystic kidney disease. This may include:
Avoiding foods high in sodium (salt)
Limiting the amount of protein you eat
Eating
heart-healthy foods
Avoiding foods that have high amounts of the
electrolytes
phosphorus and potassium, including dairy, beans, bananas, oranges and potatoes
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Call a healthcare provider or get to the nearest emergency room if you have the following signs of sudden kidney failure, including:
Abdominal pain
Trouble peeing, including not peeing as much as you typically do
Swelling (
edema
), especially around your hands, ankles or face
Feeling very tired (
fatigue
) or drowsy
Itchy skin
Loss of appetite
Nausea
and
vomiting
Shortness of breath
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your provider:
How will you diagnose cystic kidney disease?
Does cystic kidney disease affect one or both kidneys?
Do I need treatment?
What treatment do you recommend?
How can I help take care of my kidneys?
Can you recommend a nephrologist or renal dietitian?
Can you recommend any cystic kidney disease support groups?
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
Is a cyst in the kidney serious?
It depends. Simple kidney cysts don’t make your kidneys larger, replace kidney tissue or affect how well your kidneys work. They usually don’t develop into a serious problem.
Complex kidney cysts can affect the size, structure and function of your kidneys. They can also be a sign of
kidney cancer
.
If you have a kidney cyst, healthcare providers will monitor it for changes and recommend treatment, if necessary.
Are there different types of cystic kidney disease?
Yes, there are several types of cystic kidney disease. Some types are genetic. That means they develop because of variations in certain genes in your body. If you have a genetic kidney disease, you usually inherit the gene variations from one or both of your biological parents. A genetic variation can also start with you. Other types of cystic kidney disease may develop during your lifetime (acquired).
What are some genetic cystic kidney diseases?
Some genetic cystic kidney diseases include:
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD)
. PKD causes cysts that enlarge your kidneys and affect how they work by crowding out the filtering units of your kidney.
Glomerulocystic kidney disease (GCKD)
. GCKD is an autosomal dominant condition (only one biological parent needs to have the genetic variation to pass it on to their child) that causes cysts to develop. It also causes the space in your kidneys near your
urinary system
to get bigger.
Medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD)
. MCKD is an autosomal dominant condition that causes cysts to develop in the inner (corticomedullary) part of your kidneys. It leads to
inflammation
and
scarring
of your renal tubules, which help your kidneys filter waste.
Nephronophthisis
. Nephronophthisis is an autosomal recessive condition that’s very similar to MCKD. But it affects infants, children and teenagers. It usually leads to kidney failure before adulthood.
Advertisement
What are some non-genetic cystic kidney diseases?
Simple kidney cysts
. These types of cysts are common and typically affect people 50 and over. In most cases, they don’t harm your kidneys. But in rare cases, they can transform into complex cysts that require monitoring because they have the potential to become cancerous (malignant).
Acquired cystic kidney disease
. This disease causes cysts to develop over time due to
chronic kidney disease
(CKD) or kidney failure. It tends to affect people on dialysis.
Multicystic dysplastic kidney
. Multicystic dysplastic kidney is when one or both kidneys don’t develop properly in the uterus. Cysts cover most of one or both of your kidneys.
Medullary sponge kidney
. This is a rare condition in which cysts form on the innermost part of your kidneys and block your renal tubules.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Cystic kidney disease describes a group of disorders that cause cysts to form in or around your kidneys. Some cases are mild, and you may not experience any symptoms or need any treatment. But others can have a greater effect on your kidneys and prevent them from working. Managing cystic kidney disease is possible, and many people can live for years with proper treatment. Trusted family members and friends can help you cope with your feelings and overcome difficulties. Support groups are also available to help you safely and confidentially share your feelings and experiences.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
You can’t reverse chronic kidney disease (CKD), but you can manage it. Cleveland Clinic healthcare providers are here to help you keep your CKD under control.
Chronic Kidney Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment