Heart Health Quiz
Search
Advertisement
Advertisement
February 26, 2024
/
Health Conditions
/
Heart Health
How Healthy Is Your Heart? Take This Quiz To Find Out
Age, sex and genetics are just a few factors that can affect your risk of developing coronary heart disease
We’ve all questioned the trustworthiness of our ticker from time to time. It’d be hard not to! After all,
heart disease
is the leading cause of death in both
the U.S
.
and
the wider world
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
We can’t change our past or control our future. But knowing our personal risks for coronary heart disease (CHD) can still be empowering. Whether this quiz is the wake-up call you need to prioritize your health and wellness, a cause to celebrate your hard work or a way to pass the time, we hope it offers you some insight into the different factors impacting your heart health.
Take the quiz
Don’t worry, there are no right or wrong answers on this quiz. Just opportunities to learn!
1. Do you have high blood pressure (hypertension)?
There are two numbers involved in
measuring blood pressure
: systolic and diastolic. Systolic blood pressure measures the amount of force your blood exerts on the walls of your arteries while your heart is contracting (pumping blood). Diastolic pressure — which is always lower — is the same measurement, but it’s for your heart at rest, in between beats.
What counts as
high blood pressure
, or hypertension? According to the American Heart Association, a person has hypertension if:
Their systolic blood pressure is over 130.
Their diastolic blood pressure is over 80.
According to cardiologist
Ashish Sarraju, MD
, hypertension strains the heart and increases wear and tear on blood vessels, making blockages more likely.
It’s worth noting that, while it’s rarer, people with chronic
low blood pressure
(hypotension) are also at risk for heart disease. It’s a Goldilocks thing — you want your blood pressure to be in the “just right” range. Not too high or too low.
Advertisement
2. What’s your biological sex?
Men
have a higher risk of CHD than women do. But the risk of CHD goes up
during and after menopause,
more or less evening out the risk.
3. How old are you?
The older you get, the more likely you are to develop CHD.
According to the National Institute on Aging, your risk goes up significantly at age 65
. That’s because, Dr. Sarraju says, the longer you live, the more likely you are to develop (or exacerbate) other risk factors.
Maybe your blood pressure climbs as you get older, which is extremely common. Or maybe you — as many people do — become less physically active. The hormone fluctuations that are a natural part of the aging process also reduce the flexibility of your arteries, which can eventually lead to
atherosclerosis
. And it takes time for plaques to develop and clog your arteries.
You get the idea: Your heart doesn’t work in isolation. It ages right along with the rest of you, responding to both the passage of time and the other changes occurring throughout your body.
4. Does your biological family have a history of heart disease?
The
genetic (inherited) make-up
of some individuals increases their chances of developing CHD.
When you look at your biological family tree, Dr. Sarraju recommends you do more than just take note of the branches that include heart disease. You should also think about how closely you’re related to those individuals — and how old they were when they developed CHD.
It’s especially important to let your providers know if you have relatives who developed heart disease before the age of 50 or had high cholesterol at a young age. It could be a sign of an inherited condition called
familial hypercholesterolemia
(FH). While an FH diagnosis is nobody’s idea of a good time, Dr. Sarraju explains that an early diagnosis can be life-changing — in a good way. Preventive treatment for FH may significantly reduce your risk of heart disease.
5. Do you have high cholesterol?
High cholesterol
(hyperlipidemia) can contribute to the build-up of plaques in your bloodstream. Those plaques can clog the blood vessels leading to your heart, narrowing them and potentially blocking blood flow.
Cholesterol
can be high for many reasons, some of which (like your diet) are in your power to change. But Dr. Sarraju is quick to note that high cholesterol can also be hereditary.
Total cholesterol greater than 200 mg/dL is considered borderline high, and above 240 mg/dL is high. You also want your LDL cholesterol (the
“bad” cholesterol
) to be less than 100, and your HDL cholesterol (the “good” cholesterol) to be 60 or higher.
Not sure what your cholesterol level is? Contact your provider and tell them you’d like to get a
lipid panel
done. It’s a simple blood test that will provide quick insight into your cardiovascular health. If it turns out your cholesterol is too high, your provider may suggest you take medications called
statins
to lower it.
Advertisement
6. Do you smoke?
At this point, it’s common knowledge that smoking is bad for your health. It’s normal to think first about conditions like
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) and
lung cancer
, but smoking also does a number on your heart. In fact, it’s the most important of the known, changeable risk factors for CHD.
Nicotine speeds up the heart and narrows the arteries, making it harder for enough blood to get through. And prolonged use of
nicotine patches
and
nicotine lozenges
also
raises your risk for heart disease. That’s why Dr. Sarraju says it’s important for nicotine replacement therapy to be short-term. It definitely shouldn’t be your whole smoking cessation plan.
If you’re ready to
quit smoking
but aren’t sure how to go about it — or if your previous attempts haven’t worked out — speak to a provider. They’ll be happy to help you through the process.
7. How physically active are you?
You’ve probably heard it before: Experts recommend 30 minutes of
moderate-intensity exercise
five times a week. If that time commitment or level of physical activity feels unattainable, don’t despair: When it comes to your cardiovascular health, every little bit helps. Do what you can, as often as you can, and slowly build to a
five-day-a-week routine
.
Advertisement
As the name suggests, regular
cardio workouts
are a particularly great way to improve your heart health and reduce your risk of developing CHD. In addition to improving your circulation and increasing the amount of oxygen in your blood, over time, cardio can also reduce both your blood pressure and your heart rate. It may even help raise your “good”
HDL cholesterol
and reduce the “bad”
LDL cholesterol
.
If you have a disability that limits your ability to engage in physical activity, have a conversation with your provider about it. Together, you can determine what kind and amount of exercise is appropriate for you. Remember: Any activity is good activity, from chair yoga to
pool walking
, from breathing exercises to
physical therapy
. Your provider may even be able to point you in the direction of accessible exercise facilities.
8. What do your meals look like?
According to Dr. Sarraju, it’s best to limit your consumption of the following types of food:
Red meat
and organ meat
Refined grains (as opposed to
whole grains
)
Added sugars
and
excessive salt
Highly processed
and fast foods
Tropical oils (as opposed to liquid plant oils like
olive oil
)
High-fat dairy products
Alcohol
When it comes to heart health, the gold-standard eating plan is
the Mediterranean diet
. In fact,
studies have shown
it’s significantly more effective for reducing heart disease risk than a reduced-fat approach. And unlike crash or
fad diets
, the Mediterranean diet is sustainable in the long term, which is key to keeping your heart healthy as you get older.
Advertisement
9. Have you been diagnosed with diabetes?
According to the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), people living with diabetes — be it Type 1 or Type 2 — are two times more likely to develop heart disease than people who don’t have diabetes. Those are scary statistics, but here’s the thing: The lifestyle changes that doctors recommend for managing
diabetes
also
have a positive impact on your heart health.
Want to be more proactive about lowering your hemoglobin
A1C
? Talk to your provider and, if available, get connected with a diabetes care and education specialist. You can also find help through the
American Diabetes Association
.
10. How stressed are you — and how well do you cope with stress?
“You almost gave me a heart attack!”
“That call just raised my blood pressure.”
“Calm down! Don’t have a coronary!”
We’ve long understood the connection between
stress and heart health
— so much so that we reference it in casual conversation. And as time’s gone by,
that relationship has been validated
by researchers.
“Chronic stress can damage our heart both directly and indirectly,” Dr. Sarraju states. Let’s start by reviewing the direct impact.
When we’re under stress for prolonged periods of time, our cortisol levels go up.
Cortisol
is a stress hormone that impacts every part of our body, including the systems that regulate our blood pressure. It also causes chronic
inflammation
.
Cortisol is actually supposed to
suppress
inflammation. But when you’re in a constant state of
fight or flight
, your body basically gets used to all that cortisol, making it ineffective. Chronic inflammation is linked to cardiovascular disease, as well as weight gain and blood sugar issues.
Stress also hurts our heart indirectly. That’s because many of us — for perfectly natural reasons — cope with stress in unhealthy ways.
We lie awake at night worrying. We indulge in “
comfort foods
.” We smoke like chimneys or down cup after cup of our caffeinated beverage of choice. We numb ourselves with alcohol or drugs. And we let
self-care activities
like exercise or
mindfulness practices
fall by the wayside.
That might make you feel better in the short term. But Dr. Sarraju explains that those coping strategies actually
increase
our cortisol levels in the long term, creating a vicious cycle.
If your stress levels feel unsustainable or unhealthy, it’s time to talk to your provider. They can test your inflammation and cortisol levels. They can also refer you to mental health professionals who can help you
learn better (and more effective!)
ways to cope with stress
.
You’re more than a ‘score’
Now that you've taken the quiz, you might be wondering, what's your score? But you're more than a number — and assessing CHD risk is complicated. Sure, numbers are valuable. And there are lots of resources out there that treat CHD risk as a quantifiable thing. But it’s also important to
qualify
risk. To allow for gray areas, complexities, exceptions and uncertainties. After all, very little in life is certain.
In reviewing the risk factors we’ve compiled, you’ve probably noticed that there’s only so much we can do about our CHD risk profile. We don’t get to trade in our relatives’ medical histories for new ones — and we’ve yet to discover the mythical fountain of youth. But there are some elements of our overall health that we
can
change. And when we make heart-healthy choices, we tip the scale ever-so-slightly back in our favor.
Not sure how to quit smoking, cope with stressful situations or reduce your blood pressure and cholesterol? Dr. Sarraju recommends speaking with your provider. Not only can they advise you, but they can also connect you with a wide range of resources, including other healthcare specialists. With their help, you can play the best possible hand with the cards you’ve been dealt.
Learn more about our
editorial process
.
Health Library
Cardiovascular Disease
Overview
Signs and Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Health Library
Cardiovascular Disease
Overview
Signs and Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Advertisement
Related Articles
February 27, 2025
/
Heart Health
What Intermittent Fasting Can Do for Your Heart
Studies show intermittent fasting may help you lose weight, improve blood pressure and more
February 24, 2025
/
Heart Health
Can You Exercise With a Leaky Heart Valve?
Most people with this heart condition can and should exercise, but check with your provider to see what (and how much) is safe for you
April 26, 2024
/
Nutrition
Heart-Healthy Foods To Add to Your Grocery List
Eating more natural, whole foods can lower your risk of heart and cardiovascular diseases
February 19, 2024
/
Heart Health
How Weight Affects Your Heart
Having underweight, having overweight and having obesity can be dangerous for your heart
December 27, 2023
/
Heart Health
7 New Year’s Resolutions To Improve Your Heart Health
Resolve to move a little more, drink a little less, eat a little healthier, sleep a little better and destress a lot
October 9, 2023
/
Heart Health
7 Ways To Keep Your Heart Young
Avoid smoking, eat a good diet and exercise to prevent your heart from aging prematurely
January 21, 2022
/
Heart Health
How Making Your Heart Work Harder Makes It Stronger
Unlock the secret of your body’s hardest-working organ
October 16, 2020
/
Heart Health
How Does Salt Affect Heart Health?
The scoop on low-sodium diets
Trending Topics
Sleep
Breathing Problems? Try These Sleep Positions
If you’re feeling short of breath, sleep can be tough — propping yourself up or sleeping on your side may help
Mental Health
What Is Anxious Attachment Style — and Do You Have It?
If you fear the unknown or find yourself needing reassurance often, you may identify with this attachment style
Nutrition
Are Prebiotic Sodas Good for You?
If you’re looking to boost your gut health, it’s better to get fiber from whole foods
Health Categories to Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Ad
Rendered:
Wed Oct 29 2025 16:50:54 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)