Cervical Cap: Contraceptive, How To Use & Effectiveness
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Cervical Cap
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cervical Cap
Cervical caps create a physical barrier to prevent sperm from entering your cervix and uterus. It’s a form of birth control. Cervical caps are most effective when used with spermicide. They’re available by prescription and come in three different sizes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Birth Control Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
A cervical cap covers a woman's cervix to prevent pregnancy.
What is a cervical cap?
A cervical cap is a small cup you put in your
vagina
before sex to prevent
pregnancy
. It’s made of silicone or rubber. The cap covers your
cervix
so
sperm
can’t reach an
egg
. Suction helps it stay in place.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Some people describe a cervical cap as a sailor’s hat. It has a wide, upturned brim with a dome or bowl in the center. It has a strap across the dome to help you remove it after use. The only cervical cap approved in the U.S. is called FemCap®.
Cervical caps come in different sizes (small, medium and large). Your healthcare provider helps “fit” your cervical cap and writes you a prescription. Certain changes in your body, like
having a baby
, can affect the size you need. If that happens, you’ll need to be refitted. Using the right size is key. A poor fit can make the cap less effective and increase your risk of
pregnancy
.
How effective are they?
A cervical cap is less effective if you’ve had a
vaginal delivery
. This is because your vagina and cervix stretch during childbirth. The cervical cap is about 80% to 90% effective if you haven’t given birth. It’s about 60% to 74% effective if you have.
Cervical caps only work when they’re used correctly. If you don’t follow the instructions or use it consistently, your chance of pregnancy goes up. The cap must fit snugly over your cervix.
You can add
spermicide
to the cervical cap to kill any sperm that might get around the cap. This also increases the cap’s effectiveness.
Advertisement
Cervical caps aren’t as effective as other birth control options, like
patches
,
rings
, or
intrauterine devices (IUDs)
.
How do I insert a cervical cap?
To insert a cervical cap:
Wash your hands
Apply spermicide to the cervical cap in the dome (or bowl) area and the flat part of the brim
Apply spermicide to the groove between the brim and dome
Get into a comfortable position (most people squat or put one leg up on a chair or counter) and separate the lips of your
vulva
with one hand
Find your cervix by inserting your finger into your vagina (your cervix is shaped like a donut and feels like the tip of your nose), and pick up the cap with your other hand
Squeeze the cap and slide it into your vagina with the strap facing down
Be sure the cap covers your entire cervix (you can check the placement by inserting a finger into your vagina)
You may need to practice inserting your cervical cap until you get it right. Before each use, check the cap for holes or other damage that may allow sperm to sneak through the barrier. If your cervical cap is damaged, don’t use it.
How long can you leave it in?
Keep your cervical cap in place for at least six hours after the last time you have sex. Don’t leave it in longer than 48 hours total. If you have sex again, make sure to add more spermicide each time.
How do you remove a cervical cap?
To remove a cervical cap:
Squat or lay down in a comfortable position
Use your fingers to find the strap
Push up on the dome to break the suction
Pull the cap down and out with your finger hooked in the strap
Finally, wash your cervical cap with warm water and mild soap. Let it dry completely. Then, place it in the container it came in.
How long does it last?
With proper care, a cervical cap can last for up to two years. Be sure to clean it after each use and store it safely. Check regularly for any signs of damage or wear. Some tips for caring for your cervical cap include:
Wash it with mild soap and warm water only
Let it air dry
Don’t use anything other than spermicide in your cervical cap
Check your cap for holes or cracks by filling it with water and looking for leaks
Where can I buy a cervical cap?
Cervical caps are available through prescription only. Most health insurance plans cover
birth control
devices. But you’ll need to get a prescription from your healthcare provider.
What are the benefits of a cervical cap?
Some of the benefits of using a cervical cap include:
Cervical caps are affordable and reusable
You can use a cervical cap for repeated sexual intercourse within 48 hours
Most partners don’t feel cervical caps when they’re in place
It’s easily reversible, so you can get pregnant right after you remove it
Cervical caps don’t contain
hormones
You can insert it six hours before sex, so it doesn’t interrupt foreplay
Advertisement
What are the disadvantages?
Cervical caps require consistent and proper use every time you have sex. Cervical caps can come out of place during sex, especially if they aren’t the right size. Other disadvantages include:
It requires a prescription
Your provider needs to fit you for one
You have to wash them and care for them properly
They may irritate your vagina
You have to remember to remove it after two days (48 hours)
They offer no protection against
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Your provider needs to refit your cervical cap after:
Any pregnancy with a vaginal birth
Abortion
or
miscarriage
Pelvic surgery
Significant weight loss or weight gain
What are the risks?
Using a cervical cap may increase your risk of developing:
Urinary tract infections
Inflammation of your cervix
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS)
It’s important to remove your cervical cap after 48 hours to reduce your risk of developing TSS. You can also develop TSS if you wear a cervical cap during your
period
. If you can’t remove your cervical cap, visit your provider so they can remove it for you.
Who should not use cervical caps?
If you have a history of these conditions, a cervical cap may not be right for you:
An irregular
Pap test
in the past
Inflammation of your cervix
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS)
Advertisement
You also shouldn’t use a cervical cap if:
Your cervix is an irregular shape
You’ve had surgery on your cervix or vagina
You’re allergic to silicone, rubber or spermicide
You’re on your period
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you’re using a cervical cap for birth control and experience the following symptoms:
Pelvic or abdominal pain
Foul-smelling
vaginal discharge
A swollen, itchy or red vulva
Your vagina feels painful, sore or uncomfortable
You should also contact your provider if you can’t remove the cervical cap or it gets stuck (this is rare).
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Birth Control Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
Can a partner feel a cervical cap?
It’s possible. Most partners won’t feel it, though, especially if it’s in the right position.
Is a cervical cap an IUD?
No, an IUD is a completely different birth control device.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A cervical cap is a small, reusable birth control device that blocks sperm to prevent pregnancy. It’s not super effective. But it can be more effective if you use it with a spermicide. It’s also less effective if you’ve had a vaginal childbirth. If you’re thinking about using one, talk to your healthcare provider. They’ll need to fit you for the right size and show you how to put it in and take it out. Be sure to follow the instructions that come with it. You should take the cap out within 48 hours of having sex. Leaving it in longer can increase your risk of health problems.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your birth control needs to work for you. At Cleveland Clinic, we help you find the right birth control option to fit your goals and lifestyle.
Schedule Birth Control Counseling
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment