Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
COVID-19 (Coronavirus)
Advertisement
Advertisement
COVID-19 (Coronavirus)
COVID-19 is an illness caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. It spreads through respiratory droplets. Symptoms include fever, cough, shortness of breath, runny or stuffy nose, body aches and more. COVID can cause mild to severe illness. Early treatment with antiviral medications can reduce your symptoms and your risk for severe illness.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Cold, Flu & COVID-19 Care
Find a Walk-in Location Near You
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is COVID-19?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is COVID-19?
COVID symptoms can range from mild and cold-like to severe and life-threatening.
COVID-19 is a respiratory illness caused by the SARS-CoV-2
virus
, a type of coronavirus. Symptoms range from mild and cold-like to severe and life-threatening.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Coronaviruses have typically caused
common colds
. But in 2019, a new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, started infecting humans and causing severe illness. At the peak of the pandemic — when COVID was spreading around the world —
tens of thousands
of people were hospitalized every day in the U.S. alone. Millions of people have died.
Medical professionals’ understanding has grown a lot since the start of the pandemic. The virus itself keeps changing — we’ve gone through variants alpha, beta, gamma, delta and now omicron. Scientists have developed treatments and
vaccines
that have reduced the number of people ending up in the hospital.
But COVID isn’t “over.” It can still make you severely ill, cause symptoms that last months or years, and be fatal.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of COVID-19
COVID symptoms include:
Fever
Sore throat
Headache
Tiredness (
fatigue
)
Body aches
Chills
Stuffy
or
runny nose
Cough
Shortness of breath
Loss of
or
altered
sense of smell and taste
Difficulty thinking and focusing (
brain fog
)
Digestive symptoms, like
diarrhea
,
nausea
and
vomiting
Some people have no symptoms but can still spread the virus.
COVID causes
SARS-CoV-2 virus causes COVID. It’s a type of coronavirus, a group of viruses that also cause common colds. But this isn’t the first time a coronavirus has caused serious illness.
SARS
, a severe respiratory disease that spread between 2002 and 2004, was also a coronavirus.
Advertisement
COVID spreads through respiratory droplets. This means you can get it from coughing, sneezing and talking. You might also get it from touching contaminated objects and surfaces.
Risk factors
You’re at an increased risk of being hospitalized with COVID-19 if you:
Are over 65
Are
pregnant
Smoke
or used to smoke
Have received a solid organ or
stem cell transplant
You’re also at an increased risk if you have:
A blood disorder such as
sickle cell disease
or
thalassemia
Cancer
Cerebrovascular disease, such as
stroke
Chronic conditions that affect your lungs, kidneys, liver or heart
Congenital conditions like
cerebral palsy
or
Down syndrome
Diabetes (Type 1 or Type 2)
HIV/AIDS
or a
compromised (weakened) immune system
Mental health conditions, such as
depression
or
schizophrenia
spectrum disorders
Neurological conditions, like
dementia
or
Alzheimer’s disease
Obesity
Substance use disorders
such as alcohol, opioid or cocaine use disorder
Tuberculosis
Complications of COVID
COVID can cause serious complications, even if you don’t feel very sick. These include:
Pneumonia
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS)
Blood clots
, including
pulmonary embolism
(PE) or
deep vein thrombosis
(DVT)
Heart inflammation (
myocarditis
/
pericarditis
)
Cardiac arrest
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
(MIS-C)
Long COVID
, a condition where pain, extreme fatigue and other symptoms last for months or years after a COVID infection
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose COVID
Healthcare providers diagnose COVID by swabbing your nose with a soft-tipped stick and testing it with a nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT), like a
PCR test
. You can also test at home with a
rapid antigen test
.
Management and Treatment
How is COVID treated?
COVID can be treated with antiviral medications. These include
nirmatrelvir/ritonavir
(Paxlovid®),
remdesivir
(Veklury®) and
molnupiravir
(Lagevrio™). When taken within the first five days, antivirals can help you feel better and reduce your risk of severe illness and long COVID.
If you’re severely ill and hospitalized, your healthcare provider might treat you with:
Monoclonal antibody
treatment
Supplemental oxygen
Corticosteroids
Mechanical ventilation
Recovery time
Many people recover from symptoms like congestion, sore throat and cough in about two weeks. But tiredness, shortness of breath and other symptoms can linger for weeks or even months afterwards.
How long are you contagious with COVID?
You can be contagious with COVID from a couple of days before your symptoms start to about eight to 10 days after.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have symptoms of COVID, talk to your provider early to see if you should take an antiviral. See your provider if your symptoms last longer than four weeks, especially if they aren’t improving.
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 or get to an emergency room if you experience:
Advertisement
Difficulty breathing
Chest pain
Severe leg pain, warmth or other signs of deep vein thrombosis
Blue or gray skin, lips or nails (
cyanosis
)
Confusion
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Cold, Flu & COVID-19 Care
Find a Walk-in Location Near You
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have COVID?
The outlook for COVID is different for everyone. Some people have only mild symptoms. Some get very sick and need to be hospitalized. Sometimes, your symptoms seem to get better and then get much worse. Always seek emergency medical attention for severe symptoms, no matter when they happen.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Over-the-counter medications can help ease some of the symptoms of COVID, though they won’t treat the virus itself. If your child has COVID, talk to their pediatrician before giving them medications to make sure they’re safe to take.
Prevention
Can COVID be prevented?
Making sure you’re up to date with a current
COVID vaccine
is the best way to reduce your risk of getting sick with COVID — and reduce your risk of severe illness
if you do get sick
. You’re also less likely to get long COVID if you’re vaccinated.
You can also reduce your risk by washing your hands frequently and wearing a mask when COVID is spreading. Be courteous and
avoid being around others
if you’re sick or might’ve been exposed to someone who’s sick.
If you have a compromised immune system, the monoclonal antibody medication pemivibart (Pemgarda™) might be an option. A provider gives it to you in an IV (through your vein) to reduce your risk of getting COVID (pre-exposure prophylaxis).
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
How long should I quarantine after a positive COVID test with symptoms?
According to current CDC recommendations in the U.S., you should self-isolate until you’ve met both of the following criteria:
It’s been five days since your symptoms first appeared and your symptoms are improving.
You haven’t had a fever for 24 hours and you haven’t used fever-lowering medications during this time.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
The beginnings of the COVID pandemic might seem far away at this point. Remembering things like elbow bumps and virtual birthday parties might even seem quaint. But COVID had a devastating effect on the world — and it seems to be here to stay. Vaccinations and antiviral medications can help reduce your risk of severe illness.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cold, flu or COVID-19? Cleveland Clinic will help you figure out what to do next.
Get Cold, Flu & COVID-19 Care
Find a Walk-in Location Near You
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment