What Is a Surgeon? Definition & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Surgeon
Advertisement
Advertisement
Surgeon
A surgeon is a highly trained medical professional who’s qualified to perform surgery. There are many types of surgeons, including general surgeons, cardiothoracic surgeons, neurosurgeons and orthopedic surgeons. Your primary care provider may refer you to a surgeon if you need specialized care or treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is a surgeon?
A surgeon is a doctor with additional training in performing operations. This means they use the latest tools and technologies to find and fix issues inside your body. Your
primary care provider
may refer you to a surgeon if you need surgery or other types of specialized care.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are many different types of surgeons, each with their own area of expertise. For example, a neurosurgeon operates on your brain while a cardiac surgeon works on your heart. No matter their specialty, all surgeons are prepared to manage your care before, during and after your surgery.
What does a surgeon do?
Surgeons are responsible for:
Assessing your condition and reaching a diagnosis
Identifying the type of surgical and/or nonsurgical treatment you need
Performing the operation
Leading a team of healthcare providers involved in the operation, including surgical assistants,
anesthesiologists
and
nurses
Managing your care after surgery (postoperative care)
Despite their title, surgeons often also provide nonsurgical treatments. For example, they might prescribe pain medications, advise your diet or refer you to physical therapy.
If you need surgery, your surgeon will help you understand why. They’ll also explain the best type of operation and approach for you. You may need traditional (open) surgery, where a surgeon makes cuts (incisions) to access the inside of your body. Or your surgeon may recommend a type of minimally invasive surgery such as laparoscopy or robotics.
Your surgeon will develop a care plan tailored to your needs and see it through from start to finish.
Advertisement
What are the different types of surgeons?
The American College of Surgeons recognizes 14 types of surgeons, each with their own specialties (listed below). Some surgeons choose to further specialize in a more focused area within their fields.
Cardiothoracic surgeon
: Manages conditions affecting organs in your chest
Colorectal surgeon
: Manages conditions affecting your small intestine, colon, rectum and anus (butthole)
General surgeon
: Does surgery on a wide range of conditions affecting many different areas of your body (many surgical specialists complete five years of general surgery training before pursuing sub-specialty training)
Gynecologic oncologist
: Diagnoses and treats cancers affecting the female reproductive system
Neurosurgeon
: Manages conditions affecting your brain, spinal cord and nerves
Obstetrician-gynecologist (OB-GYN)
: Has expertise in both
obstetrics
and
gynecology
, cares for pregnant women, delivers babies (including by C-section) and manages conditions affecting the female reproductive system
Ophthalmologist
: Delivers total eye care, including eye surgery
Oral and maxillofacial surgeon
:
Manages conditions and injuries affecting your maxillofacial area (jaws and lower face), roof of your mouth (palate) and teeth
Orthopedic surgeon
: Manages conditions affecting your musculoskeletal system
Otolaryngologist
: Manages conditions affecting your head and neck
Pediatric surgeon
: Does surgeries in babies and children
Plastic surgeon
: Does surgeries that restore function to areas of your body affected by congenital (present at birth) conditions, major illnesses or injuries
Urologist
: Manages conditions affecting your urinary system, reproductive organs and adrenal glands
Vascular surgeon
: Manages issues with your blood vessels
What training does a surgeon receive?
It takes years of extensive, rigorous training to become a surgeon. All surgeons in the U.S.:
Earn a bachelor’s degree (typically four years)
Complete medical school or dental school, depending on the specialty (typically four years)
Complete a residency program (three to seven years, depending on the specialty)
Have the option of completing a fellowship in a chosen subspecialty (typically one to three years)
Take one or more exams to earn board certification
Surgeons — like all other medical professionals — engage in continuing education throughout their careers. This means they do things like attend conferences and take classes to keep up with the latest knowledge and technologies in their field.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be hard to trust someone else with caring for your body — especially when that care involves surgery. There’s no surefire way to ease the nerves you might feel when you or a loved one needs an operation. But learning more about the different types of surgeons and the training they receive may help you feel a little more confident and comfortable with what’s happening.
You can’t always choose or talk to your surgeon in advance. But when you can, it’s a good idea to ask lots of questions. Find out what surgeries they’ve done in the past. Ask what they’ll do to make this surgery safe and successful. Learn about how they’ll support your post-op care. The more information you get in advance, the less anxious you’ll be on your surgery day.
Advertisement
For non-urgent operations, it’s also reasonable to ask for a second opinion.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us