Factor V Leiden: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Factor V Leiden Thrombophilia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Factor V Leiden Thrombophilia
Factor V Leiden thrombophilia is a genetic condition that makes your blood more likely to clot when it shouldn’t. You may develop clots in your legs (deep vein thrombosis) or your lungs (pulmonary embolism). Prompt treatment is lifesaving. Avoid tobacco use, excessive alcohol and estrogen-based therapies to lower your risk of these complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood Clotting Disorders Treatment
Doctors and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Factor V Leiden Thrombophilia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Factor V Leiden Thrombophilia?
Factor V Leiden thrombophilia is an inherited
blood clotting disorder
. This means you’re born with a gene change that makes your blood more likely to
clot
when it shouldn’t. You have a higher risk than those without this condition of developing:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
. This is the formation of blood clots in your deep veins. Usually, these form in leg or arm veins. But they can also develop in veins in your liver, kidneys, brain or eyes.
Pulmonary embolism (PE)
. This is a blood clot that travels through your bloodstream to one of your lungs.
Having this condition doesn’t automatically mean you’ll develop DVT or PE. In fact, the vast majority of people (9 out of 10) never develop abnormal blood clots. But the disorder raises your risk compared to people without the disorder.
The prevalence of factor V Leiden varies by ethnicity. In general, it’s more common among people who are white in the U.S. and Europe.
In the U.S., this disorder affects:
About 5 in 100 people of European descent
About 2 in 100 Hispanic people
About 1 in 100 people who are Black or Native American
Fewer than 1 in 100 people of Asian descent
Around 1 in 5 people who develop a
blood clot in their veins
have the factor V Leiden variant.
This condition’s name is pronounced “FAK-ter five LYE-den.” The “V” stands for the number five in Roman numerals.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of factor V Leiden thrombophilia
The gene change itself doesn’t cause any symptoms. It’s possible to have this disorder and never even know it. But you may develop symptoms if a blood clot forms.
Advertisement
If you have symptoms of DVT or a PE, call 911 or your local emergency number. Or ask someone to drive you to the nearest emergency room.
Symptoms of deep vein thrombosis include:
Swelling
, warmth and skin color changes in your leg or arm
Tenderness or pain in your leg or arm
Larger-than-normal veins
near your skin’s surface
Pain in your belly or
flank
(if blood clots affect veins in your abdomen)
Severe, sudden
headache
and/or
seizures
(if blood clots affect veins in your brain)
Symptoms of a pulmonary embolism include:
Sudden
shortness of breath
Sharp
chest pain
that feels worse when you take deep breaths, cough or sneeze
Cough, which may produce blood
Wheezing
Fast heartbeat (
tachycardia
)
Feeling anxious
Feeling lightheaded or
fainting
Causes of factor V Leiden thrombophilia
A
gene variant
causes factor V Leiden. “Coagulation factor V” is the name of a protein that helps your blood clot when needed, like after an injury. Your
F5
gene tells your body how to make this protein.
Most people are born with two normal copies of the
F5
gene. But if you inherit an abnormal copy, you have the factor V Leiden variant (sometimes called a mutation). “Leiden” is the city in the Netherlands where researchers discovered this gene variant.
The factor V Leiden variant tells your body to make a protein that has one small change in its structure. This change makes the protein resist other proteins (protein C and protein S) that stop excessive clotting. Without this check, factor V can make your blood clot when it shouldn’t.
Does this pass down within families?
Yes. You inherit this condition from one or both of your biological parents. Factor V Leiden follows an
autosomal dominant
inheritance pattern. That means only one of your parents has to pass the gene variant on to you for you to inherit it.
Most people with factor V Leiden inherit just one abnormal gene copy (heterozygous). Rarely, you can inherit two abnormal gene copies — one from each parent (homozygous).
Risk factors for developing a blood clot
You’re more likely to develop a blood clot if you:
Inherited two copies of an abnormal
F5
gene (homozygous)
Have a history of DVT or PE in your biological family
Have additional blood clotting disorders
Undergo surgery
Are
pregnant
Take estrogen-based therapies like certain forms of
contraception
or
hormone replacement therapy
Talk to your healthcare provider about your risk for developing blood clots and what precautions you should take.
Complications of this condition
If you have factor V Leiden thrombophilia, you may experience:
Advertisement
DVT or a PE before age 50
Multiple episodes of DVT or PE
Blood clots in less commonly affected
veins
, like those in your liver or brain
DVT or a PE during pregnancy or
postpartum
DVT or a PE soon after starting birth control pills or hormone therapy
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Blood tests
(including
genetic testing
) can show if you have factor V Leiden thrombophilia. Your healthcare provider may suggest testing for the condition if:
You have a history of DVT or PE, particularly at a younger age than expected
One or more of your biological family members have a history of blood clots
Management and Treatment
How is factor V Leiden thrombophilia treated?
It’s a lifelong condition. There’s no cure or treatment for the gene variant itself. Instead, treatment involves breaking up any blood clots that form and lowering your risk of future clots. Your provider may recommend:
Anticoagulant medication
(blood thinners) to break up clots and prevent new ones
Compression stockings
to improve blood flow in your legs and lower the risk of clots
Placement of a
vena cava filter
to prevent blood clots from traveling to your lungs
Surgery
to remove blood clots
How long you need to take blood thinners depends on your risk of blood clots coming back. Some people only need to take them for a few months. Others need them long term. Your provider will explain the best treatment plan for you.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit your provider for a
yearly checkup
. If you’ve been diagnosed with DVT or a PE, you’ll have frequent follow-up appointments so your provider can check treatment progress. If you’re taking warfarin, you’ll need routine blood testing (
prothrombin time test
) to check how well your medication is working.
It’s also important to talk to your provider:
Before using contraception or hormone replacement therapy
Before becoming pregnant
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood Clotting Disorders Treatment
Doctors and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy of someone with factor V Leiden?
Factor V Leiden doesn’t affect
life expectancy
in most people. Even if you develop a blood clot, prompt treatment can prevent a fatal outcome. It’s important to talk to your provider about any concerns you have related to life expectancy or future complications.
What should I avoid if I have factor V Leiden?
Your healthcare provider will tailor advice to your needs. In general, you should avoid:
Smoking
, vaping and other tobacco use
Long periods of sitting
Drinking too much
alcohol
, or drinking any alcohol on long plane flights
Using estrogen-based contraception and hormone replacement therapy (talk to your provider first)
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between factor V deficiency and factor V Leiden thrombophilia?
These are two different genetic conditions. Both conditions involve changes to the
F5
gene. With factor V Leiden, the change makes your blood clot too easily. But with factor V deficiency, the change stops your blood from clotting when it should.
Advertisement
Factor V deficiency is a rare bleeding disorder that affects about 1 in 1,000,000 people. It can involve recurrent nosebleeds,
heavy menstrual bleeding
and prolonged bleeding after surgery.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you or a loved one has factor V Leiden thrombophilia, you might worry about what the future will bring. It may ease your mind to know that most people with this disorder never have a blood clot. But if you do develop clots, there are treatments that can help. Following your provider’s guidance can help you find and manage problems early before they interrupt the flow of your life.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood clotting disorders can be genetic (inherited) or acquired. Cleveland Clinic’s experts diagnose and treat these disorders to lower your risk of complications.
Blood Clotting Disorders Treatment
Doctors and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment