Laryngectomy: Procedure & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Laryngectomy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Laryngectomy
A laryngectomy is surgery to remove part or all of your larynx, usually due to cancer or trauma. It can change how you breathe, talk and swallow, but there are ways to manage life after the procedure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Larynx Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What is a laryngectomy?
A laryngectomy is surgery to remove all or part of your
larynx
(voice box). Your larynx sits just above your
trachea
(windpipe) and connects your
mouth
and
nose
to your
lungs
. It plays a key role in breathing, swallowing and speaking.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your healthcare provider may recommend a laryngectomy if your voice box is severely damaged or diseased. Common reasons include:
Laryngeal cancer
Irreversible injury or trauma to your larynx
You may need a partial laryngectomy (removing part of the larynx) or a total laryngectomy (removing all of it).
Fewer people need laryngectomies now than they did years ago. That’s because fewer people smoke, and healthcare providers have new ways to treat your throat without removing your voice box.
Procedure Details
How should I prepare for a laryngectomy?
Before surgery, your healthcare provider will do a physical exam and may order tests like:
A
chest X-ray
to check your lungs
An
EKG
to check your heart rhythm
Blood tests
You’ll also meet with specialists like
speech-language pathologists
(SLPs) and swallowing therapists who’ll help you prepare for recovery and life after surgery.
If you smoke, your team may help you quit. You might also meet with a dietitian to talk about an eating plan after surgery.
Before your surgery day, your care team will give you instructions. Most people need to stop
blood thinners
. You may also need to stop eating and drinking the night before.
What happens during a laryngectomy?
You’ll be asleep under general anesthesia. Here’s what your surgeon will do:
Make an incision
: They’ll cut into the front of your neck.
Remove your voice box
: They may remove part or all of it, including vocal cords. Nearby
lymph nodes
or throat tissue might also come out.
Create a stoma
: This is a new opening in your neck to help you breathe. A tube goes into the stoma.
Place a voice prosthesis (optional)
: If you’re getting one, the surgeon makes a small hole between your windpipe and
esophagus
to place it.
Close the incision
: They’ll close the cut with stitches.
Advertisement
What happens after this surgery?
You’ll stay in the hospital for one to two weeks. At first, you’ll get
food through a tube
. Once it’s safe to swallow, your team will help you eat by mouth again.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Larynx Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the risks or complications?
Like any surgery, this one has risks. These can include:
Damage to nearby organs, like your windpipe or esophagus
Fistulas
(abnormal openings between your throat and skin)
Limited neck or shoulder movement
Low thyroid function (can affect your energy and metabolism)
Stoma problems like irritation or care difficulties
Trouble eating, swallowing or speaking — especially at first
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time?
Most people need two to three weeks to recover from this surgery. It may take longer depending on your surgery and how fast you heal.
What should I know about post-total laryngectomy care?
This surgery often removes cancer, but you might still need treatments like
radiation
or
chemotherapy
.
You’ll learn new ways to breathe, eat and talk. A speech therapist will help with communication. You’ll also learn how to care for your stoma — the new breathing hole in your neck.
Follow all post-surgery instructions from your provider. They’ll help you heal and adjust.
Can you speak after a laryngectomy?
After a laryngectomy, you’ll need to find new ways to communicate. Because the surgery removes your vocal cords, your voice will sound different. But with support from a speech-language pathologist, you can learn to speak again. Several tools and techniques can help.
Voice prosthesis
This small device fits over your stoma. It lets air from your lungs move into your throat to create vocal sound. Your healthcare provider can help decide if this is right for you.
Electrolarynx
This is a device you hold against your neck. It makes vibrations to help you speak. The voice sounds robotic, but it’s easy to learn.
The voice sounds robotic, but it’s a reliable option for communication after surgery.
Esophageal speech
This method uses air trapped in your throat to make sound. It takes time to learn, but it doesn’t need any devices.
Nonverbal communication
You may also:
Learn sign language
Type on a phone or tablet
Use gestures or facial expressions
Write thoughts down
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Call your provider if you develop a fever, pus around your incision or other signs of infection after your laryngectomy.
If you have
chest pain
or trouble breathing, call 911 (or your local emergency number) or go to the emergency room right away.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Facing a laryngectomy can feel overwhelming, even scary. It’s OK to have big emotions — frustration, fear, even hopelessness. Don’t keep those feelings to yourself. Talk to your healthcare provider. They can connect you with resources to help you through treatment. You might also benefit from speaking with a counselor or joining a local or online support group. The more you learn about your situation, the more confident and empowered you’ll feel to make informed decisions about your care.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
You don’t have to live with voice box problems. Cleveland Clinic has the larynx disorder treatments you need.
Larynx Disorder Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment