High Arch Feet (Pes Cavus): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
High Arch Feet (Pes Cavus)
Advertisement
Advertisement
High Arch Feet (Pes Cavus)
“Pes cavus” means having high arch feet. But it can also mean more than that. When you have very high arches, they can cause pain and instability when you walk. They may also cause other changes to your feet over time. High arch feet that progress this way can be a sign of an underlying medical condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Foot Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
If you have very high arches, it can affect the way you walk, leading to secondary to issues like ankle instability.
What is pes cavus (high arch feet)?
Pes cavus is having high arch feet. Your arches are the flexible part of your soles, between your heel and the ball of your foot. They usually arch a little when your feet are at rest, and they flex when you walk.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Some people have higher arches than usual. High arches never flatten or touch the ground, even when you’re putting your weight on them. If you make a footprint, there will be no middle part of your foot.
You may have high arches naturally or because of a medical condition. If it’s mild, pes cavus (cavus foot) may not cause any issues. But it can cause issues for some people, and it can also be progressive.
Walking with a high instep puts more stress on other parts of your foot. This can cause discomfort, and sometimes injury. Some people develop bone and muscle changes from walking on high arch feet.
Symptoms and Causes
What symptoms can pes cavus (cavus foot) cause?
If high arch feet cause you symptoms, the first ones you’re likely to notice are:
Foot pain,
especially in the ball or
heel
Ankle pain
and swelling
Arch pain
Over time, you may develop:
Corns and calluses
on the parts of your foot that take more pressure
Ankle joint
instability, causing it to frequently roll or even
sprain
Inward-curling toes (
claw toes
or
hammertoes
)
Some people develop
chronic pain
from
repetitive strain injuries
, like:
Metatarsalgia
(
inflammation
in the ball of your foot)
Plantar fasciitis
(inflammation in a
ligament
in your heel)
Peroneal tendonitis
(inflammation in a
tendon
in your outer ankle)
Advertisement
How does pes cavus affect walking?
Walking on high arch feet causes supination (under pronation). This means you tend to walk on the outsides of your feet, putting more pressure on less flexible parts: the ball, the heel and the outer toes.
A normal foot rolls from the outside of the foot toward the inside (pronates) when you step on it. This helps it absorb shock and adapt to uneven surfaces. But high arches don’t roll very well, so your feet stay on the outer edge instead.
How does pes cavus change your foot?
When pes cavus (cavus foot) progresses and causes further musculoskeletal changes to your foot, these changes take one of two forms. Healthcare providers call them pes cavovarus and pes calcaneocavus:
Pes cavovarus (cavovarus foot).
Cavovarus foot is the most common variation of pes cavus. It combines high arches (
cavus
) with an inward-tilting heel (
varus
). The big toe is flexed to point down (plantarflexed,) making the whole foot arch. It’s also called hollow foot or claw foot.
Pes calcaneocavus (calcaneocavus foot).
Calcaneocavus foot is a less common variation. In this version, your heel (calcaneus) is flexed upward (dorsiflexed), while your forefoot is flexed downward, making your arches highest in the back. It’s sometimes called posterior pes cavus.
What are the complications of high arch feet?
High arches can cause progressive deformity of your foot, making walking increasingly painful and unstable. Besides repetitive strain on your foot itself, this may also cause secondary problems, like:
Knee pain
Back pain
Foot and ankle arthritis
What causes pes cavus?
Many people are born with high arches, so genetics are certainly a factor. However, in other cases, high arch feet can be a symptom of another condition, such as
spina bifida
or muscular dystrophy.
Muscle imbalances in your lower body can cause anatomical changes leading to high arch feet. When some
muscles are abnormally weak
, others become abnormally tight and pull your foot out of shape.
Neuromuscular disorders
are the most common reason for these muscle imbalances. These disorders affect how your nerves communicate with your muscles, often leaving some muscles inactivated.
Many of these are
genetic disorders
that children inherit at birth. But they progress very slowly, so they may not be diagnosed right away. High arch feet in children may be one of the first symptoms.
Examples of hereditary causes include:
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
Muscular dystrophy
Spina bifida occulta
Neuromuscular disorders can also happen during your life, due to things like:
Advertisement
Diabetes-related neuropathy
Spinal tumors
Stroke
Injuries and contractures can also cause cavus foot. For example, misaligned bones may cause muscle imbalances. Not moving enough after an injury can cause your tissues to tighten and contract.
Sometimes, babies are born with muscle contractures, not because of a neurological disorder or injury, but because it happened in the womb.
Clubfoot
is a congenital contracture that can cause pes cavus.
Diagnosis and Tests
How are high arch feet diagnosed?
An
orthopaedist
can diagnose cavus foot during a physical exam. They’ll observe how you stand and walk. They might ask you to move your foot in different ways to learn where it’s flexible and where it’s rigid.
To learn more about your condition, they might follow up with imaging tests, like a
foot X-ray
or
MRI
. If they suspect a neuromuscular disorder, they might suggest an
EMG
test or a
nerve conduction study
.
Management and Treatment
How do healthcare providers treat pes cavus?
Treatment depends on how severe your condition is and whether it’s likely to get worse. If your condition and your symptoms are mild, treatment focuses on physical therapy and pain relief.
Possible treatments include:
Orthotics
.
Special shoes or shoe inserts can help place your foot in a more favorable position for walking. You can get orthotics over the counter, or an
orthotist
can design you custom ones.
Braces, splints or casts.
Wearing a brace, splint or cast on your feet is one way to gently stretch the tight tissues over time. Some people wear one at night, and others all the time for several weeks.
Physical therapy.
A
physical therapist
can prescribe exercises to do at home or with their assistance. This can help improve the strength and flexibility of the muscles involved.
Pain relievers
.
Over-the-counter medications, like
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
, can help ease pain and swelling after walking. Simple icing can also help.
Advertisement
Can you fix pes cavus?
If your feet are severely deformed, or your provider expects them to keep getting worse, you might need surgery. The goal of surgery is to relieve pain by making your feet bear your weight more evenly.
Surgery for pes cavus may include:
Osteotomy:
Realigning and reshaping your bones
Soft tissue release:
Making small cuts in soft tissues to relieve tension
Tendon transfer
: Replacing a nonfunctional tendon with a functional one
Joint fusion
:
Fusing two bones in a joint together
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Foot Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Do high arch feet get worse without treatment?
In general, high arch feet related to neuromuscular disorders do tend to worsen over time. If you have this type of pes cavus, you can expect to need treatment sooner or later — and sooner might be better.
High arch feet that run in your family without any related disorder probably won’t worsen. Cavus foot due to an injury tends to be stable. Your orthopaedist can tell you what to expect from your condition.
What is the prognosis after pes cavus treatment?
If you have a progressive condition that’s likely to get worse over time, you’ll have the best results from treating it sooner. This is especially true for children, whose bodies are still forming and flexible.
Timely surgery can help prevent pes cavus from causing increasing deformity and becoming rigid. Once the condition has advanced, you’ll need more significant surgery to fix it, and it might not fix everything.
Advertisement
Rehabilitation after surgery is important to its long-term success. That means following your provider’s advice on how and when to start using your foot again and keeping up with your physical therapy.
Depending on your condition, you may need to continue with physical therapy or home exercises indefinitely. Those with progressive disorders may need additional treatment down the road.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk for high arch feet?
Because high arch feet are either genetic or caused by an underlying condition, there really isn’t a way to prevent the problem from occurring. However, high arch pain can be successfully managed with proper monitoring and treatment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
High arch feet don’t always cause problems, but if they do, you should see a qualified healthcare provider. High arches that cause symptoms are often a sign of an underlying medical condition.
Children who begin to develop
walking abnormalities
and progressive changes in their feet might have an unrecognized neuromuscular disorder. Treating them sooner will give them the best outcome.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
An aching foot or heel can bring your favorite activities to a halt. Cleveland Clinic’s foot pain experts are here to help you heal and get back on your feet.
Foot Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/17/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment