Myopic Degeneration (Degenerative Myopia): What It Is
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Myopic Degeneration (Degenerative Myopia)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Myopic Degeneration (Degenerative Myopia)
Myopic degeneration happens when you have severe nearsightedness. The strain it causes affects your eyes in ways they weren’t meant to tolerate. Without treatment, myopic degeneration can worsen and lead to permanent vision loss and blindness. But early detection and care can slow or limit how severe this disease gets.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Myopic Degeneration?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Myopic Degeneration?
Myopic degeneration happens when severe
nearsightedness
damages your
retina
, causing vision loss. Also known as degenerative myopia or pathologic myopia, this can worsen over time. Not everyone with severe nearsightedness will develop the changes that can cause eye damage and vision loss, but experts estimate that it affects about 1 in 33 people worldwide.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of myopic degeneration
The main early symptom of myopic degeneration is being severely nearsighted. As myopic degeneration progresses, it can cause areas of your vision — especially near the center of your vision — to change and worsen. That can cause symptoms like:
A spot — often near the center of your vision — where things look
blurry
or a
blind spot
Difficulty seeing some colors
Needing brighter lights to see well
Straight lines looking wavy or distorted
Seeing
floaters
or
flashes
in your vision
If your eye care specialist suspects you have the condition, some of the signs of myopic degeneration they’ll look for include:
Changes in the shape of your macula
Changes in your retina, like bleeding, thinning, layer separation or bulging
Macular holes
Macular pucker
(scar tissue)
Myopic degeneration causes
Severe nearsightedness causes myopic degeneration. Your myopia is severe if your vision prescription is -6.00 diopters or higher. Or you might have an eye with a front-to-rear length of 26 millimeters. When you try to focus, your eye muscles work more than they should to help you see better. Your retinas can’t handle that kind of stretching and strain, which leads to retinal damage.
Risk factors for myopic degeneration
There are a few clear risk factors for myopic degeneration:
Advertisement
Myopia severity
. The more severe your myopia (or the higher your myopic prescription), the greater your risk of developing myopic degeneration.
Eyeball length
. The greater the size of your eye, the greater your risk of developing myopic degeneration.
Age
. Your age — or possibly how long you’ve had myopia — seems to increase your risk of developing myopic degeneration.
Experts also suspect that other factors could contribute to the development of myopic degeneration or how severe it is. They include:
Family history and genetics
. There’s evidence that myopia can run in families. But more research is necessary to understand if and how genetics and family history really do factor in.
Sex
.
Females
may be more likely to develop myopic degeneration.
Race and ethnicity
. People of Asian descent may be at a higher risk, though research isn’t conclusive.
Environmental factors
. These include things in your everyday life that could make you more likely to develop myopia or make existing myopia more severe. Examples include jobs or hobbies that require a lot of up-close focusing, whether you use corrective lenses and more.
Complications of myopic degeneration
The main complications all have to do with your retinal tissue. The complications are:
Neovascularization
. As your retinal tissue thins, older blood vessels break and bleed. Your body makes new blood vessels to restore circulation, but those new vessels further damage your retinal tissue.
Layer separations
. Thinning retinal tissue also increases the risk that the layers of your retina will separate from each other, or that your retina will
tear
or
detach
.
Low vision
. The above changes can lead to permanent vision loss, low vision and
blindness
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose myopic degeneration
Eye care specialists
can diagnose myopic degeneration using different tests, most of which are part of routine
eye exams
. Most of the changes from myopic degeneration aren’t things you can feel or vision changes you can see. Instead, they’re changes that a trained medical professional knows to look for and can see using specific methods, tests or devices. They’ll also have you look at the
Amsler grid
, which helps your provider detect any blind spots or distortions in your visual field.
There are also imaging tests that may help with diagnosing myopic degeneration. They include:
Fluorescein angiography
and indocyanine green angiography
Optical coherence tomography
Eye ultrasound
Management and Treatment
Myopic degeneration treatment
Treatment for myopic degeneration prevents worsening and reverses complications when possible.
Advertisement
Some of the most important treatments include:
Vision correction
. Corrective lenses (like in
eyeglasses
or
contacts
) keep your eyes from straining. That can help limit or slow retinal changes.
Medications
. Your body uses a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) to grow new blood vessels. Anti-VEGF drugs block that protein from doing its job.
Laser therapy and
photodynamic therapy
. Some laser and light-based eye treatments limit bleeding and damage in the back of your eye. This can slow the progress of myopic degeneration.
Eye surgery
. Some of the complications of myopic degeneration require surgery to repair. Surgery can stop layers from separating, preventing rapid, irreversible vision loss.
Your eye care specialist is the best person to tell you more about the specific options and what you can expect from them.
What questions should I ask my eye care specialist?
Some questions you may want to ask your eye specialist include:
How severe is my myopic degeneration?
What can I do to limit or slow the disease?
What treatment options do I have?
How often do I need regular eye checkups and care?
What symptoms can wait for an appointment?
What symptoms mean I need immediate medical attention?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have myopic degeneration?
If you have myopic degeneration, what you can expect varies. For some people, it’s progressive (it worsens over time). The more severe your myopia or the greater your eyeball length, the more disruptive this condition tends to be.
Advertisement
Without regular eye care, myopic degeneration is more likely to lead to permanent eye damage and vision loss. While those complications are sometimes unavoidable, regular eye care may make it possible to limit or at least delay them.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having nearsightedness can be enough of a hassle, especially when it’s severe. But when nearsightedness damages your eyes, you might feel worried or anxious. Myopic degeneration is a common issue worldwide, so experts continue to seek new and better ways to treat it.
If you have myopic degeneration, your eye care specialist can offer treatment options and help you manage your symptoms. This way, you can stay focused on the things that matter most to you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s ophthalmologists and optometrists have the highest training available. We provide exams, vision correction and care for many eye conditions.
Get Eye Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment