Paroxysmal Hemicrania: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Paroxysmal Hemicrania
Advertisement
Advertisement
Paroxysmal Hemicrania
Paroxysmal hemicrania is a sudden, one-sided headache that lasts up to 30 minutes. These headaches happen frequently throughout the day. It can feel like an intense, sharp or stabbing pain. A type of NSAID called indomethacin is the most common treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Headaches and Migraines Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is paroxysmal hemicrania?
Paroxysmal hemicrania is a type of
headache
that causes sudden, severe head pain on one side of your head. You’ll usually feel pain behind your
eye
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When headache symptoms happen, it’s also known as a headache attack. Pain and other symptoms of a headache attack come and go in waves that last up to half an hour. You might only feel these waves a few times throughout the day, but some people can experience them up to 40 times per day and last between two to 30 minutes.
This is a primary headache disorder, which means it isn’t caused by an underlying condition.
Paroxysmal hemicrania headaches are treatable. A healthcare provider will help you manage them.
What are the types of paroxysmal hemicrania?
There are two types of paroxysmal hemicrania:
Chronic
: Headache attacks happen daily for a year or longer. Symptom-free periods may happen but last fewer than three months.
Episodic
: There’s a break (more than three months) in between headache attacks.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of paroxysmal hemicrania?
The most common symptom of paroxysmal hemicrania is a headache with the following features:
Pain on one side of your head (it doesn’t switch sides).
Headache symptoms that happen suddenly.
Pain that lasts up to half an hour.
Attacks that happen frequently throughout the day.
With a paroxysmal hemicrania headache, you’ll also experience the following symptoms on the same side of your head:
Eye redness
.
Tearing.
Runny
or stuffy nose.
Sweating.
Flushing.
Restlessness or agitation.
Eyelid swelling or drooping.
Advertisement
What does paroxysmal hemicrania feel like?
People with paroxysmal hemicrania headaches usually say the pain on one side of their head feels:
Sharp.
Intense.
Squeezing.
Throbbing.
In between headache attacks, the same side of your head as the headache may feel:
Dull.
Sore.
Tender.
What causes paroxysmal hemicrania?
Experts don’t know exactly why paroxysmal hemicrania happens. Healthcare providers found a connection in several cases between head and/or neck trauma and these headaches.
What triggers paroxysmal hemicrania?
Triggers are things that cause symptoms. Bending or rotating your head or applying pressure to parts of your neck may trigger paroxysmal hemicrania.
What are the risk factors for paroxysmal hemicrania?
Paroxysmal hemicrania can affect anyone.
Females
are more likely to develop this type of headache. They’re more common in adults than kids and teens, but in general, this is a rare disorder.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is paroxysmal hemicrania diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose paroxysmal hemicrania after learning more about your symptoms. They’ll begin with a
physical exam
. Tell your provider where you experience head pain, how long headache attacks last and how long you experience symptoms.
Your provider may ask you to keep a headache journal. This is a record of your symptoms, when they happen and how you feel.
Testing can help your provider rule out other conditions with similar symptoms. This may include
blood tests
or an imaging test like an
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) scan.
Management and Treatment
How is paroxysmal hemicrania treated?
A medication called
indomethacin
treats paroxysmal hemicrania. This is a
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
. It reduces
inflammation
and relieves pain.
There are common side effects of indomethacin like
dizziness
,
vomiting
and gastrointestinal problems. Your provider will let you know what side effects to look out for.
Sometimes, side effects or other factors lead your provider to choose another type of medication to treat paroxysmal hemicrania. Alternative options may include:
Other NSAIDs (
aspirin
,
naproxen
and
diclofenac
).
COX-2 inhibitors
(
celecoxib
and rofecoxib).
Calcium channel blockers
(
verapamil
and flunarizine).
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Headaches and Migraines Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for paroxysmal hemicrania?
Paroxysmal hemicrania is a treatable type of headache. A healthcare provider can help you manage it with medications like indomethacin. It could take some time to find the right dosage for your body’s needs.
There are side effects possible after taking an NSAID long term. Your provider will tell you how often you’ll need follow-up visits to monitor your overall health and make sure you don’t have any new or worsening symptoms. If anything about your treatment plan or how you feel doesn’t seem right, contact your healthcare provider.
Prevention
Can paroxysmal hemicrania be prevented?
As the cause isn’t well understood, there isn’t a clear way to prevent paroxysmal hemicrania.
Advertisement
Living With
What can I expect if I have paroxysmal hemicrania?
Paroxysmal hemicrania can take a toll on your mental health and emotional well-being. Living with severe pain can be challenging. It can interfere with your ability to get out of bed and continue with your routine when a sudden headache happens many times throughout your day. Interruptions from these headache attacks may make you feel trapped or like they’ll never end.
A healthcare provider can help you treat and manage these headache attacks throughout your life.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you have frequent, severe, one-sided headaches without a known cause.
If you have paroxysmal hemicrania, let your provider know if you have new or worsening symptoms or experience any side effects from medications you take.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
How long and how often should I take medication?
What side effects should I look out for?
Will these headaches return after treatment?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A severe headache can stop you in your tracks. They’re annoyances that make getting through your daily routine extremely difficult to impossible. Whether you want to go to work, read a book or spend time with your friends and family, paroxysmal hemicrania headaches have another plan. Luckily, your healthcare provider will help you manage these headaches, so you can get back to your life without pain.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Do you have headaches that won’t go away? Or ones that come back regularly? Cleveland Clinic’s headache and migraine experts are here to help.
Headaches and Migraines Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/03/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment