Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Retinitis: Symptoms & Causes
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Retinitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Retinitis
CMV retinitis is a serious eye condition caused by cytomegalovirus, a herpes virus. It most often affects people with compromised immune systems. It’s treated with antiviral medications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is cytomegalovirus retinitis?
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis is a serious
eye
infection. It often happens in people with
immune systems
that don’t work as well as they should. The term “retinitis” means inflammation of your
retina
, which is the part of your eye that senses light.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
CMV is a necrotizing virus, meaning that the virus destroys tissue. It’s part of the
herpes
family of viruses. Most people get CMV at some point in their lives and don’t even know it. But the virus can reactivate in people with weakened (compromised) systems, sometimes causing CMV retinitis.
This includes people who:
Have HIV/AIDS.
Are receiving
chemotherapy
.
Take immunosuppressant medications because they’ve had an organ transplant,
bone marrow transplant
or have autoimmune conditions.
CMV retinitis can result in long-term
vision
loss. In fact, it’s the main cause of blindness among people with
HIV/AIDS
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs and symptoms of cytomegalovirus retinitis?
You may not have symptoms of CMV retinitis right away. When you do develop them, symptoms may include:
Floaters
in your eye.
Blind spots that move (
scintillating scotoma
).
Decreased side vision (
peripheral vision
).
Seeing wavy images (metamorphopsia).
Blurred vision
.
Sensitivity to light (photophobia).
Red eye
.
Eye pain
.
The symptoms may start in one eye and then go on to your other eye.
What causes cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis?
If you’re infected with CMV, the virus can affect your retina, causing CMV retinitis. In adults with weakened immune systems, this is usually a reactivation of the virus rather than a new virus.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis diagnosed?
An
ophthalmologist
, or another type of eye care provider, will talk to you and ask you about your medical history and symptoms. Then they’ll do an
eye examination
after dilating your eyes.
Dilated pupils
open widely, making it easier to see inside your eyes. Your provider will examine your retinas and other areas of your eyes for signs of disease. If you have retinitis, your provider may order lab work to identify its cause.
Management and Treatment
How is cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis treated?
Antiviral medicines can treat CMV retinitis, but they can’t cure it.
Your provider may decide to give you one — or a combination — of the following antiviral medications:
Valganciclovir
, given orally.
Ganciclovir
, given intravenously (IV) or as an intravitreal injection (IVI, or a shot into your eye).
Foscarnet
, given as an IV or IVI.
Cidofovir
, given as an IV or IVI.
Letermovir
, given orally.
Fomiversen.
Treatment takes weeks because there’s an initial period of therapy followed by maintenance therapy.
Complications of CMV retinitis treatment
Antiviral treatment of CMV retinitis may cause your immune system to have a strong response, which can lead to
uveitis
. Uveitis causes eyes to be red, swollen and painful.
Sometimes, the drugs that treat CMV retinitis stop working for you. There are treatments that may help with ganciclovir-resistant CMV retinitis. These include
leflunomide
and T-lymphocyte infusion.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have CMV retinitis?
The best prognosis (outlook) happens with prompt treatment. Untreated CMV retinitis can lead to
low vision
, even to the point of blindness.
Another condition that may happen as a result of CMV retinitis is
retinal detachment
, which means that your retina tears away from its supporting tissue. You can have surgery to repair this serious condition.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have any sudden changes in eyesight — like dark spots in your vision or pain — get immediate medical help. Retinal detachment is a medical emergency.
It’s important to have regular eye exams if you have a weakened immune system.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider about CMV retinitis?
You may want to ask your provider some questions about CMV retinitis, including:
How often should I schedule appointments?
Is there anything I should avoid?
How long will treatment last?
When should I call you or go to an emergency room?
Can you provide resources to help me
cope with vision loss
?
Am I eligible for clinical trials?
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis and HIV retinopathy?
The term “retinopathy” means disease of the retina. Both CMV retinitis and HIV retinopathy affect your retina, causing damage that can lead to vision loss. But different viruses cause them. The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can cause HIV retinopathy, while CMV causes CMV retinitis.
Advertisement
Healthcare providers treat CMV retinitis with
antiviral medication
. They usually don’t treat HIV retinopathy, also called HIV microvasculopathy.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If your immune system is compromised, you likely spend a lot of time thinking about your symptoms and inside medical offices. You might not want to make regular trips to the ophthalmologist on top of everything else. But if you develop cytomegalovirus retinitis, you’ll have the best outcome if you get a diagnosis and start treatment as soon as you can. Regular eye exams are important because you might not notice symptoms of CMV retinitis until you start having vision loss.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/30/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment