Vampire Breast Lift (PRP Breast Lift): What It Is, Results, Risks
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Vampire Breast Lift (PRP Breast Lift)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vampire Breast Lift (PRP Breast Lift)
A vampire breast lift (VBL) augments your breasts without surgery. Providers inject platelet-rich plasma (PRP) to improve skin texture and make your breasts appear fuller. Side effects are minimal, but may include bruising, swelling and tenderness, and there’s no downtime. Long-term complications and effectiveness of PRP breast lifts aren’t known.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What is a vampire breast lift?
A vampire breast lift (VBL) is a procedure to improve (augment) the look of your breasts if surgery isn’t yet warranted. VBL uses injections of
platelet-rich plasma
(PRP). This procedure is also known as a PRP breast lift.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What is platelet-rich plasma (PRP)?
Platelet-rich plasma comes from your blood. PRP contains proteins that promote blood clotting and help with cell growth.
Providers separate PRP from the rest of your blood in a centrifuge, a machine that spins your blood at high speeds. The centrifuge separates your blood into three components:
Platelet-rich plasma.
White blood cells
.
Red blood cells
.
Why is a vampire breast lift done?
People may opt for a PRP breast lift if a surgical
breast lift
isn’t yet warranted. Providers who inject PRP into their patients’ breasts claim that it:
Increases
elastin
(a protein that allows tissue to stretch).
Promotes growth of
collagen
(a protein that provides structure to your body).
Stimulates new cell growth.
A vampire breast lift may help to:
Improve skin texture and tone.
Make your breasts look lifted and fuller.
Reduce the look of
wrinkles
,
stretch marks
and
scars
.
Does a vampire breast lift really work?
Scientists haven’t studied the effectiveness vampire blood lifts, also known as PRP breast lifts. The long-term side effects and risks aren’t known. If you're considering breast lift options, be sure to consult with a board-certified
plastic surgeon
or dermatologist about the risks of this particular treatment.
Treatment Details
What happens before a PRP breast lift?
Before a PRP breast lift, you’ll have a consultation with your provider to talk about what you want to achieve. Your provider will:
Advertisement
Ask about your health history.
Examine your breasts.
Discuss your desired outcome from the procedure.
If you decide to move forward with a PRP breast lift, your provider may suggest that you:
Stop taking some medications, such as
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
and aspirin, for a week before the procedure.
Wear comfortable clothing to your appointment.
Remove jewelry and keep it at home.
What happens during a vampire breast lift?
During a vampire breast lift, your provider will take a blood sample, usually from your arm. They’ll spin the blood in a centrifuge machine to separate the PRP.
Your provider will apply a numbing cream to your breasts to decrease your sensitivity during the procedure. Then they use a thin needle to inject PRP into areas throughout your breasts.
The injections generally take about 20 minutes. The entire procedure usually lasts less than an hour.
What happens after a vampire breast lift?
Most people don’t have any side effects after a vampire breast lift. Some people experience side effects for a few days, such as:
Bruises
.
Swelling.
Tenderness.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of a vampire breast lift?
People who have a VBL breast lift instead of surgical
breast augmentation
may have:
Fewer complications.
Less pain.
Shorter recovery time.
What are the risks or complications of a PRP breast lift?
You may experience some pain during the blood sample and injections. But any discomfort is usually mild.
Because a PRP breast lift isn’t surgery, it can’t:
Completely lift saggy breasts.
Give your breasts a new shape.
Increase your breast size.
Reduce excess skin.
Reposition your nipples.
This procedure isn’t recommended if you’re:
At high risk of
breast cancer
or have had breast cancer.
Breastfeeding
.
Pregnant.
Because there haven’t been scientific studies on vampire breast lifts, the long-term effects aren’t known. It’s also unclear whether a PRP breast lift can affect a mammogram. Be sure to tell your provider about the procedure if you have a
mammogram
.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time after a PRP breast lift?
After a PRP breast lift, you may notice your breasts becoming gradually firmer and smoother over a period of three to four weeks. Final results may not appear for two to three months. Any changes can last up to two years.
When can I go back to work or school, drive or eat?
You can usually return to your regular activities immediately. Your healthcare provider will offer guidance suitable for your recovery.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you have any of these symptoms after a vampire breast lift:
Bleeding.
Excessive bruising.
Pain.
Swelling that doesn’t go away.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A vampire breast lift uses injections of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) to enhance your breasts. Side effects and recovery time from a PRP breast lift are usually minimal. Scientists haven’t studied the safety or effectiveness of this procedure. If you're considering a breast lift, talk to your provider and weigh the pros and cons of the available procedures.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need cosmetic or reconstructive plastic surgery, you’ll need skilled, detailed and compassionate providers. At Cleveland Clinic, we’re here to help.
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/04/2021.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment