Left Ventricular Non-Compaction (LVNC) Cardiomyopathy
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Left Ventricular Non-Compaction Cardiomyopathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Left Ventricular Non-Compaction Cardiomyopathy
Left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy is a rare heart condition. It’s typically a congenital issue, meaning you’re born with it. In LVNC cardiomyopathy, your lower left heart chamber doesn’t develop properly. As a result, your heart may not pump blood through your body as efficiently as it should.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Congenital Heart Disease in Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is LVNC?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is LVNC?
With LVNC, your heart’s left ventricle doesn’t develop properly. It’s spongy and thick instead of smooth and firm.
Left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) cardiomyopathy is a condition in which your lower left
heart chamber
(left ventricle) doesn’t develop properly. Instead of being firm and smooth, your left ventricle is spongy and thick. This is because your spongy layer of heart muscle is bigger than it should be — and bigger than your smooth (compacted) layer. The abnormal layer also has grooves or channels (trabeculations). These are visible in diagnostic images of your heart.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
LVNC
cardiomyopathy
is typically a congenital heart condition. This means you’re born with it. Without treatment, LVNC can lead to serious heart problems.
Usually, your left ventricle pumps oxygen-rich blood from your lungs to the rest of your body. With LVNC, your left ventricle can’t contract and relax as it should. As a result, your heart can’t efficiently pump blood throughout your body. This condition may also result in abnormal heart rhythms (
arrhythmias
) or sudden cardiac death.
Left ventricular non-compaction is rare. Experts estimate that only up to
12 in 1 million
people get an LVNC diagnosis each year. The actual number of people with the condition may be higher. People who don’t have symptoms may not have a diagnosis.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of LVNC
LVNC symptoms can range from mild to severe. Many people with left ventricular non-compaction have no symptoms. Others may have:
Blood clots or stroke
Difficulty lying flat
Dizziness
Fainting
Fatigue
Heart palpitations
Inability to do physical activities
Abnormal heart rhythm
Leg swelling
Shortness of breath
LVNC causes
Usually, you develop LVNC cardiomyopathy because of a gene change (
variation
) you have before you’re born. This gene change may occur randomly, or you may inherit it from one or both biological parents.
Advertisement
LVNC can also have an association with other forms of congenital heart disease and cardiomyopathy, as well as with genetic syndromes like
Fabry disease
or neuromuscular disorders. Variants that cause left ventricular non-compaction may happen in genes involved in the production of cardiac proteins. Genetic testing can confirm that you have these variants.
But LV non-compaction isn’t always genetic. Some
females
develop LVNC cardiomyopathy for no known reason during their first pregnancy. Experts think this may occur because pregnancy can put extra stress on your heart muscle. In some, symptoms go away after pregnancy. Others deal with LVNC cardiomyopathy long-term.
Some athletes and people with
sickle cell anemia
or kidney issues may also have extra non-compacted muscle.
Often, experts don’t know the cause of left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. Healthcare providers describe LVNC as isolated when you don’t have symptoms or a known genetic cause. Other LVNC types have links to certain syndromes, forms of heart muscle disease and heart issues present at birth.
Risk factors
LVNC cardiomyopathy happens more often in males. This condition may also have a link to heart problems present at birth, like certain valve issues or abnormal holes inside your heart. Certain conditions can also put you at a higher risk of LVNC, like:
Barth syndrome
Becker muscular dystrophy
Danon disease
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Fabry disease
Noonan syndrome
Roifman syndrome
Toriello-Carey syndrome
Complications of this condition
Physical activity may set off abnormal heart rhythms. Some people develop severe heart problems, including sudden cardiac death. This is when your heart suddenly stops beating.
About 2 in 3 people with LVNC cardiomyopathy will develop
heart failure
. Blood clots are possible, as well. They can cause a stroke,
TIA
, heart attack or other issues.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose LVNC
You can get an LVNC diagnosis as an infant, child or adult. Your healthcare provider will likely start with a physical exam and medical history. Then, they’ll use several tests to diagnose LV non-compaction, including:
Echocardiograms
to check how your heart pumps blood
Electrocardiograms
(EKGs) to study your heart’s electrical signals
Imaging tests
, like cardiac CT scans and MRIs, to look at your heart’s structure
Coronary angiograms
to look at how blood flows through your heart’s arteries
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
LVNC treatment varies depending on the symptoms you have. You may not need treatment if you don’t have symptoms.
Your provider will likely tell you to limit your physical activity. Exerting yourself can lead to dangerous heart rhythms.
Advertisement
In some cases, you can reverse LVNC cardiomyopathy. People who get this condition because of pregnancy, sickle cell anemia or athletics can often reverse it. If you can’t reverse LVNC, medicines or a procedure can improve your quality of life, help you manage symptoms and lower your risk of complications.
Medicines
Your healthcare provider may prescribe medicines like:
Blood pressure medicines
to open your blood vessels and get rid of excess salt and fluid
Antiarrhythmics
to prevent abnormal heart rhythms
Anticoagulants
to prevent blood clots
Procedures
Your provider may suggest a procedure, like a (an):
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
if you’re at risk for cardiac arrest
Pacemaker to keep your heart in a normal rhythm
Heart transplant for a severe case of LV non-compaction
Recovery time varies for these procedures. You may spend a few days in the hospital after getting a device, but you’ll be there more than a week after a heart transplant.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if medicines or other treatments aren’t helping you. You’ll likely also need regular checkups. These may include an annual EKG. If you don’t have symptoms, you may need to get an echocardiogram every few years to monitor the condition.
If you have left ventricular non-compaction, or you think you could, you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
Advertisement
What’s the most likely cause of LVNC?
Do you recommend genetic testing for LVNC cardiomyopathy?
What are the signs that I need urgent care for a heart problem?
How much physical activity is OK for me to do?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Congenital Heart Disease in Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have LVNC?
The outlook for LVNC cardiomyopathy varies. The prognosis is worse for people with abnormal heart rhythms, blood clots that cause issues and a left ventricle that isn’t working well. Some people with LVNC have a typical life expectancy.
Left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy can be fatal. But it often isn’t. Most people who have it don’t die from the disease. It’s important to have regular visits with a heart expert. They can help you manage your heart health to lower your risk of having more heart problems.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Symptoms like having trouble catching your breath make everyday life difficult. If you have LVNC cardiomyopathy, it’s important to have regular visits with your healthcare provider. They can give you treatments to reduce your risk of future issues and improve your quality of life.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you were diagnosed as a child or later in life, Cleveland Clinic is here to treat your adult congenital heart disease.
Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Congenital Heart Disease in Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment