Truncus Arteriosus: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Truncus Arteriosus
Advertisement
Advertisement
Truncus Arteriosus
Truncus arteriosus is a rare congenital heart defect that affects how blood flows out of your baby’s heart. Instead of a separate pulmonary artery and aorta, your baby has a single vessel called a truncus. This interferes with normal blood flow to your baby’s lungs and the rest of their body. Surgery within weeks of birth can be lifesaving.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Truncus Arteriosus?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Truncus Arteriosus?
Truncus arteriosus is a congenital heart defect. It causes oxygen-poor and oxygen-rich blood to mix before leaving your baby's heart.
Truncus arteriosus (also called a common arterial trunk) is a
heart
defect some babies are born with. It means your baby has just one, rather than two,
arteries
that carry blood out of their heart. And there’s just one
valve
, called the truncal valve, controlling this blood flow.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Normally, the main
pulmonary artery
sends oxygen-poor blood to your baby’s lungs. The
aorta
sends oxygen-rich blood to the rest of their body. But with truncus arteriosus, a single artery leaves your baby’s heart instead. As a result, oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor blood mix.
This inefficient system overworks your baby’s heart and lungs. It also prevents your baby’s
organs
and tissues from receiving enough oxygen. That’s why providers classify truncus arteriosus as a
critical congenital heart defect
. Your baby needs surgery soon after birth to correct the problem and have normal
blood flow
.
About
1 in 15,984 babies
born in the U.S. have truncus arteriosus. It’s rare compared to other congenital heart defects. Of all babies diagnosed with a heart issue, around 2% have truncus arteriosus.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of truncus arteriosus
Signs and symptoms typically appear within the first few days of life and include:
Blue or gray skin color (
cyanosis
), especially around your baby’s mouth and fingertips
Excessive sleepiness
Fast heart rate
Slow weight gain
Trouble breathing
Trouble feeding, including falling asleep or sweating while feeding
Weak
pulse
About 1 in 3 babies with truncus arteriosus have
DiGeorge syndrome.
This means they may have symptoms affecting other parts of their body, too.
Advertisement
Truncus arteriosus causes
Scientists don’t fully understand what causes truncus arteriosus. In children born with certain genetic syndromes, like DiGeorge syndrome, the
gene variations
that cause the disorder are responsible for this heart defect. More generally, we know that truncus arteriosus happens when the fetal heart doesn’t develop correctly during
pregnancy
.
Normally, a fetal blood vessel called the truncus separates into two distinct arteries before your baby is born. The aortopulmonary septum (a wall of tissue) marks the boundary between the two vessels and prevents blood from mixing.
But for unknown reasons, the truncus might not form in this way. Instead, the truncus remains (persists) as a single common artery. That’s why providers sometimes call this condition “persistent truncus arteriosus.” The truncus itself is a normal part of
fetal development
, but it’s not supposed to persist past birth.
Risk factors
Your baby may have a higher risk of developing truncus arteriosus or other
congenital heart defects
if you’re pregnant and:
Have
diabetes
Have certain
viral infections
, like
rubella
Use
alcohol
or recreational drugs
Are exposed to
lead
or other harmful substances (
teratogens
)
What other heart conditions are associated with truncus arteriosus?
Babies with truncus arteriosus usually also have a
ventricular septal defect (VSD)
. This is a hole in the wall that separates their two lower heart
chambers
(ventricles).
The hole causes blood from both ventricles to mix before passing through the truncal valve. This is the single valve that controls blood flow out of your baby’s heart. Normally, a baby should have two separate valves (
aortic valve
and
pulmonary valve
) controlling blood flow out of the two arteries.
Other heart defects that may occur with truncus arteriosus include:
Anomalous coronary artery
Atrial septal defect (ASD)
Interrupted aortic arch
Right aortic arch (a type of
vascular ring
)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers usually diagnose truncus arteriosus during a baby’s first few days of life when signs appear. If providers suspect a heart issue, they’ll perform an
echocardiogram (echo)
. This test can reveal truncus arteriosus and other heart abnormalities.
It’s also possible for
pulse oximetry
— part of
routine newborn screenings
— to show low oxygen levels before symptoms develop.
Sometimes, providers notice truncus arteriosus before birth on a
prenatal ultrasound
. If your provider thinks there might be a heart defect, they may do a fetal echocardiogram. This test provides a more detailed look at fetal heart anatomy.
Truncus arteriosus types
Your child’s provider may say your child has a specific type of truncus arteriosus. These types describe the anatomy of your child’s left and right pulmonary arteries, which carry blood to their
lungs
. These arteries normally branch off the main pulmonary artery. But with truncus arteriosus, the branch arteries start in different spots:
Advertisement
Type 1
. One pulmonary artery arises from the truncus before splitting into two branch arteries.
Type 2
. There’s no single pulmonary artery arising from the truncus. Instead, the two branch pulmonary arteries directly arise from the truncus. Their points of origin are close together.
Type 3
. Two branch pulmonary arteries directly arise from the truncus, but their points of origin are farther apart than in type 2.
Type 4
. The pulmonary arteries don’t arise from the truncus. Instead, they branch off the thoracic aorta (the part of your baby’s aorta that runs through their chest). Providers no longer consider this a type of truncus arteriosus but instead a form of
pulmonary atresia
.
Other variations are possible. Providers use this knowledge of your child’s anatomy to guide surgery.
Management and Treatment
How is truncus arteriosus treated?
Babies with truncus arteriosus need
heart surgery
within the first weeks of life. The most common procedure is called a Rastelli repair, which creates two separate paths for blood to leave your baby’s heart.
Your baby’s surgeon will:
Use a patch to close the hole in your baby’s heart (VSD)
Create a new aorta using the existing blood vessel (truncus)
Create a new aortic valve using the existing truncal valve
Place an artificial tube (conduit) and artificial valve to create a new pulmonary artery and valve
Advertisement
These are the basic steps for repairing truncus arteriosus. Your baby’s surgery may include other steps if they have other heart defects that need repair. Your baby’s surgeon will explain exactly what’s necessary for their unique heart anatomy.
Follow-up surgeries
Down the road, your child will need more surgeries to keep their heart and blood vessels working normally. For example, the artificial pulmonary conduit doesn’t grow with your child, so they’ll need a new one as they get older. Your child may also have issues with their heart valves.
Your child’s surgeon will tell you more about future surgeries and what they’ll involve. Your child will likely need another surgery within three to 10 years after their first one, and possibly more after that.
When should I seek medical care for my child?
Follow the appointment schedule your child’s care team provides. Your child will need routine appointments with a heart specialist (
pediatric cardiologist
). They’ll transition care to an adult congenital
cardiologist
around their 18
th
birthday, and they’ll need to follow up with cardio for the rest of their life.
This ongoing care is very important. Your child’s providers will:
Run tests, including imaging tests and
cardiac catheterizations
, to see how your child’s heart is functioning
Perform additional surgeries, as needed, to address issues with the conduit or valves
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can a baby survive with truncus arteriosus?
Yes, but they need surgical repair to survive. The survival rate for truncus arteriosus surgery is 80% to 97%, according to the latest
research
. Survival depends on many factors, including the complexity of a baby’s heart anatomy.
About 75% of babies who have surgical repair are alive 20 years later. Most deaths occur within one year of repair. About 92.5% of babies who survive to one year after surgery are alive at 20 years.
Your child’s care team can tell you more about the factors that might affect your child’s
life expectancy
.
Can you live a normal life with truncus arteriosus?
There’s limited research on how truncus arteriosus (after surgical repair) affects a person’s quality of life. One
study
showed children have
reduced exercise tolerance
and a lower health-related quality of life compared to their peers. Another
study
showed adults have reduced physical functioning but a similar quality of life as their peers overall.
What it means to have a “normal life” can vary from person to person. Quality of life is a subjective experience. It’s important to talk to your child about how they’re feeling — physically and emotionally. As they get older, encourage them to ask their doctors questions. Even when you don’t have all the answers or know the “right” thing to say, simply being there for your child will help them feel loved and supported.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’ve just learned your baby has truncus arteriosus, you might feel scared or overwhelmed. You may want to learn every possible thing about this diagnosis and what it could mean for your baby’s future. Understanding the science is important. But it’s also important to know that congenital heart disease affects each person a little differently.
The statistics or outcomes you read about don’t necessarily predict your child’s future. They’re just a snapshot of what we know so far. Lean on your child’s care team for guidance. It may also help to connect with an organization that supports families of children with congenital heart disease.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment