Pec (Pectoral) Implants: Surgery, Scars, Before & After
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Pec (Pectoral) Implants
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pec (Pectoral) Implants
Pec implants can enhance the shape and look of your chest. Some males get pec implants as cosmetic surgery to improve their appearance. Some need pec implants as reconstructive surgery to treat a sunken or asymmetrical chest. Plastic surgeons perform pec implants.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Details
Overview
Pectoral implants can enhance your body's appearance and treat certain conditions that may be present at birth.
What is a pec implant?
Pec implants, or pectoral implants, give your chest muscles (pectorals) more contour. The implants can make your chest appear more muscular. A plastic surgeon places pec implants through incisions in your armpits.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What are your pectorals (pecs)?
Your pectoralis muscles connect the front of your chest to your upper arm bones and shoulder blades (scapula). These muscles lie underneath your
breasts
.
You have a pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscle on each side of your body.
The pectoralis major muscle
starts at your
collarbone
(clavicle). It extends across the upper part of your chest and connects to your upper arm bone (humerus). This muscle helps you rotate your arms and draw them forward. This is the larger chest muscle. It creates most of your chest bulk and contour.
The pectoralis minor muscle
sits behind your pectoralis major. It starts at your ribcage and attaches to your shoulder blades. This muscle helps you draw your shoulders forward and downward.
What are other names for pectoral implants?
You may also hear these terms for pectoral implants:
Male chest enhancement
Male pec implants
Muscle augmentation (enlargement)
Pectoral augmentation
Pectoral enhancement
Who gets pec (pectoral) implants?
You might want pec implants to:
Enhance body appearance.
Many
men
get pec implants as part of
cosmetic surgery
to boost their self-confidence. You may want a pec implant if you desire a more sculpted chest beyond what you’re able to achieve through exercise. Or you may want to address asymmetry or underdeveloped chest muscles.
Treat a chest issue.
Some people get pec implants as part of
reconstructive surgery
to treat birth defects. For instance,
pectus excavatum
causes your breastbone or chest to sink inward. And people born with Poland syndrome don’t have chest muscles on one side of their bodies (pectoral aplasia).
Advertisement
Who is a candidate for pectoral implant surgery?
The ideal candidate for a pectoral implant procedure is someone who:
Is exercising and strength training to build chest muscles
Has fully formed adult muscles
Doesn’t
smoke
(nicotine increases your risks of surgical complications and slows healing)
Has realistic expectations
Do pec implants come in different sizes?
Pec implants are made from medical-grade silicone. They’re solid and don’t leak like some silicone gel
breast implants
.
Pec implants come in different shapes and sizes. Depending on your needs, you may get different implant sizes on the left and right sides of your body. You and your surgeon can work together to select the implant most likely to help you achieve your desired look.
If you need reconstructive surgery because of a medical condition, your surgeon may recommend custom pec implants. A lab uses your chest measurements to customize the pec implants to fit your physique.
What do pec implants feel like?
Pec implants are designed to feel firm, like muscle.
What other procedures may take place with a pectoral implant?
Your plastic surgeon may recommend other
body contouring procedures
to help you get the sculpted look you want. These procedures may include
liposuction
or a
tummy tuck
(abdominoplasty).
Treatment Details
Who performs pec (pectoral) implant surgery?
A
plastic surgeon
who specializes in cosmetic or reconstructive procedures performs pec implant surgery. This outpatient procedure may take place in a surgical suite at your provider’s office, surgical center or hospital. You usually go home the same day.
What happens before pec (pectoral) implant surgery?
Follow your surgeon’s instructions on how to prepare for pec implant surgery. You may need to:
Get a
physical exam
and blood tests to ensure you’re in good health
Be photographed to help your surgeon plan the procedure and compare before-and-after results
Avoid eating and drinking for a certain period of time before the procedure
Not take certain medications before surgery, including vitamins and supplements
Skip lotions and deodorant on the day of surgery
Take
antibiotics
to lower your risk of postoperative infection
Quit smoking
several weeks before the procedure.
What happens during pec (pectoral) implant surgery?
First, you’ll receive general
anesthesia
or heavy sedation to ensure that you sleep through the procedure. Then, your surgeon:
Makes an approximately two-inch incision into the
skin
on each of your shaved armpits
Inserts special surgical tools into the incisions to create a space (pocket) between your pectoralis major and minor muscles
Slides the pec implants through the incisions and positions the implants into these pockets
Closes the incisions with dissolvable or removable stitches (Removable stitches come out in one to two weeks)
What happens after pectoral implant surgery?
Your healthcare team will monitor you as you wake up from the anesthetic. Once your team feels you’re ready, you’ll need someone to drive you home. You should follow your surgeon’s instructions for
incision care
. You’ll go home wearing a compression garment to keep the implants in place and minimize swelling (
edema
). You may wear this compression garment for up to six weeks.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of pec implants?
A pec implant can:
Create a more contoured chest
Add volume to your chest
Make the left and right sides of your chest more symmetrical
Treat birth defects that affect how your chest looks
What are the risks of pectoral implant surgery?
In rare instances, a pec implant may move or shift. This can give your chest an asymmetrical appearance. You’ll need surgery to reposition the implant.
Pec implant surgery also carries a risk of:
Allergic reaction
to anesthesia or the implant
Bleeding,
bruising
and
blood clots
Build-up of
scar
tissue around the implant
Infection
Muscle spasms
Nerve damage and
numbness
Skin discoloration, sensitivity and swelling
Recovery and Outlook
What is recovery like after a pectoral implant?
You should expect some pain and discomfort for about a week after the procedure. Your chest muscles may feel tight, sore and stiff. You can apply ice packs to your chest and take over-the-counter
pain relievers
to ease discomfort. The incision should heal in about two weeks.
You should be able to resume work and light activities within a week of getting pec implants. But you should avoid raising your arms above your head until your surgeon gives the OK. Follow your healthcare provider’s advice about performing more strenuous activities like strength training and lifting heavy items.
What results should I expect from a pectoral implant?
Most of the swelling will subside in six weeks. It can take three to six months for the swelling to subside completely. Then, you’ll be able to see the full results. While most people who get pec implants seem happy with the results, some aren’t. They may think that the implants look unnatural. Or they may feel that the implants give a more traditionally feminine — instead of masculine — appearance. You can discuss follow-up corrective options with your specialized surgeon.
Advertisement
How long do pec implants last?
Unless you take them out, pec implants are long-lasting. They may last 20 years. They tend to last longer when you choose a surgeon with experience in pectoral implantation.
If you’re not satisfied with the results or your implants shift, talk to your surgeon about possible solutions. One option is to remove the implants. You may choose to go without pec implants or try a different size or shape.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call the doctor?
You should call your healthcare provider if you experience:
Excessive bleeding, swelling or bruising
Muscle spasms
Nausea and vomiting
Severe pain
Signs of infection, such as pus from the incision site or
fever
.
Additional Details
Are pec implants obvious?
Pec implants shouldn’t be obvious when done correctly. The implant’s silicone material has the look and feel of muscle. When your armpit hair grows back, it will hide the scars.
To help ensure you get the results you want, you should meet with a few plastic surgeons. Ask to see before-and-after photographs of their pec implant procedures. Look for a surgeon who has experience performing pec implant surgery.
Are there alternatives to pec implants?
A
fat transfer
or fat grafting is a less invasive way to give the chest more volume and shape. The results should last a lifetime.
During this cosmetic procedure, your provider:
Uses liposuction to remove fat deposits from your buttocks, abdomen or other parts of your body
Removes impurities from the fat cells using a centrifuge device
Injects the purified fat cells into your pectoralis muscle area, including the muscles
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’re unhappy with the way your chest looks, pec implants may help. It’s important to go into any cosmetic procedure with realistic expectations. Be honest with your plastic surgeon about the results you hope to get. To help achieve your desired look, choose a plastic surgeon who has experience performing pec implants. For many males, pec implants improve chest appearance.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need cosmetic or reconstructive plastic surgery, you’ll need skilled, detailed and compassionate providers. At Cleveland Clinic, we’re here to help.
Plastic Surgery Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/06/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment