Hepatitis E: Symptoms, Transmission & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hepatitis E
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hepatitis E
Hepatitis E is a liver infection caused by a virus you can get from drinking or eating something contaminated. Most people recover within a few weeks without treatment. But if you’re pregnant, the risks are much more serious. Hepatitis E can lead to liver failure, miscarriage or stillbirth — so, getting care right away is critical.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hepatitis E?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Hepatitis E?
Hepatitis E is a virus that infects your liver. It can make you feel sick to your stomach, with symptoms like throwing up, belly pain and diarrhea.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most people get better in a few weeks without treatment. But if you’re
pregnant
, hepatitis E can be dangerous. It may lead to liver failure or pregnancy complications.
Let your pregnancy care provider know right away if you’re pregnant and think you could have hepatitis E.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of hepatitis E
Not everyone has symptoms of hepatitis E infection. If you do, early symptoms may include:
Belly pain
Fever
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
After a few days, you might notice other symptoms like:
Dark-colored pee and
clay-colored poop
Diarrhea
Itching
Joint pain
Rash
Yellow tinge to your skin or eyes (
jaundice
)
Hepatitis E causes
Hepatitis E
virus
(HEV) causes hepatitis E. Transmission occurs through:
Drinking dirty water
: This is the most common way. The water has tiny bits of poop that carry the virus.
Eating undercooked meat
: In places like the U.S., you can get it from eating raw or undercooked pork, deer, boar or shellfish.
During pregnancy
: A pregnant
female
can pass the virus to the fetus before birth.
Hepatitis E rarely spreads from person to person.
Risk factors
Hepatitis E is more common in parts of Asia, Africa and Central America. People who don’t have clean water or good bathrooms are more likely to get it. Individuals with weakened immune systems are also more at risk in every region.
Advertisement
Outbreaks can happen in areas experiencing crises or when large numbers of people are displaced, like during war. But there are also sporadic (individual) cases all over the world that don’t affect large numbers of people.
Complications of hepatitis E
Women who are pregnant have the highest risk of complications from hepatitis E, especially in the
third trimester
. Tell your healthcare provider if you’re pregnant and have symptoms.
Complications can include:
Liver failure
Miscarriage
Stillbirth
People with weak immune systems may develop chronic hepatitis E. Their bodies can’t clear the virus like most people do. When
hepatitis
lasts a long time, it can cause serious liver damage. This can put you at risk of acute liver failure.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose hepatitis E
Your healthcare provider can diagnose hepatitis E with a blood or poop test. A lab looks for signs of the virus, like its genetic material or
antibodies
. Because hepatitis E symptoms resemble many other diseases, your provider may test for other infections, too.
Management and Treatment
Is there a cure or treatment for hepatitis E?
There’s no specific treatment for hepatitis E. Most people get better in one to six weeks as their immune systems clear the virus. During that time, get plenty of rest and drink lots of fluids.
If you have a weak immune system and get chronic hepatitis E, your provider might give you
antiviral
medicine (like
ribavirin
) or a treatment that boosts your immune system (like
interferon
). These treatments aren’t safe if you’re pregnant.
If you’re pregnant
If you’re pregnant, especially in your third trimester, your healthcare provider will need to closely monitor you and the fetus. You may need to stay in the hospital or check in often. Let your provider know right away if your symptoms get worse or you notice anything new.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if your symptoms don’t get better.
Go to the
ER
if you have:
Confusion or altered mental state (
hepatic encephalopathy
)
Dark or very little pee
Severe or worsening
abdominal pain
Severe vomiting,
vomiting blood
or
vomit that looks like coffee grounds
Yellow eyes and skin (jaundice)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
Most people recover from hepatitis E in less than six weeks without any issues. If you’re pregnant or have a weak immune system, your provider will watch you more closely. You may need treatment in the hospital if you develop complications.
What’s the mortality rate for hepatitis E?
Hepatitis E is rarely deadly, except during pregnancy. If you get it in your third trimester, the risk of death
may be as high as 30%
. The risk is also higher for the fetus. About
33% may not survive the pregnancy
, and 8% may die shortly after birth.
Prevention
Can hepatitis E be prevented?
If you live in or travel to an area where hepatitis E is common, you can reduce your risk by:
Drinking only bottled or treated water
Using safe water to make ice
Peeling or washing produce with bottled or treated water
Washing your hands
often, especially before eating and after using the bathroom
Advertisement
Is there a vaccine for hepatitis E?
The HEV p239 (Hecolin
®
) vaccine for hepatitis E is available in China, but not yet in the U.S.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hepatitis E can cause unpleasant symptoms for several weeks. Fortunately, most people recover without complications. But it can be scary to find out you have hepatitis E if you’re pregnant. Be sure to let your provider know if you’re pregnant and have signs of infection, or if you’re thinking of traveling abroad.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Untreated hepatitis can cause liver damage or failure. Cleveland Clinic’s expert providers offer you the latest treatments and caring support.
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us