Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF): What It Is & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Familial Mediterranean Fever
Advertisement
Advertisement
Familial Mediterranean Fever
Familial Mediterranean fever is a hereditary inflammatory disease. It causes recurring episodes of fever and inflammation in your abdomen, chest and joints. Taking an oral medication called colchicine can effectively prevent or reduce these episodes. Most people with FMF have to take it daily for life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is familial Mediterranean Fever?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is familial Mediterranean Fever?
Familial Mediterranean fever is an autoinflammatory disease that affects certain membranes in your body. These membranes line your abdomen, chest, and joints.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a lifelong condition that causes recurring episodes of fever and inflammation throughout your body. It’s a
genetic disorder
that mainly affects people of Mediterranean origin. It’s one of the
recurrent fever syndromes
, which are autoinflammatory diseases. FMF triggers
inflammation
in your serous membranes (
serositis
) and your synovial membranes (
synovitis
). Episodes typically last a few days and can involve abdominal pain, chest pain, joint pain and other symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms of familial Mediterranean fever usually start to appear in childhood, before the age of 20. They’re often severe in the early years and become less frequent and less intense with age. Between episodes, you may be symptom-free for weeks, months or years. Early diagnosis and treatment can help reduce your symptoms and prevent potential long-term complications, like
amyloidosis
.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of familial Mediterranean fever
Familial Mediterranean fever symptoms can include:
Fever
of up to 105 degrees Fahrenheit (40.6 degrees Celsius), often with
chills
Headache
, often accompanied by
neck stiffness
Abdominal pain
and
distention
(swelling)
Rigid
abdominal muscles
, causing
constipation
Chest pain
that’s worse with breathing
Joint pain
and
swelling
(usually in one joint)
Scrotal swelling
and
testicle pain
Muscle pain
, often in your lower body
A red, raised
skin lesion
, often on your legs
Symptoms occur in episodes that develop over several hours. Not everyone has every symptom. Fever is the most common, and in childhood, it may be the only symptom. Episodes typically last a few days.
FMF episode warning signs
Some people report prodromal symptoms that occur in the days leading up to an episode and warn that an episode is coming. It’s similar to what some people experience before a
migraine
or
menstruation
.
Advertisement
Prodromal FMF symptoms can include:
Anxiety
Irritability
Headache
Nausea
Body aches
Malaise
FMF disease causes
Variations
in the
MEFV
gene cause FMF. Your
MEFV
gene is involved in creating an important protein called pyrin. Your innate immune system — the part of your immune system that reacts to random threats, like infections — relies on pyrin to function. When your
MEFV
gene fails to encode pyrin properly, the protein can’t do its job properly within your immune system. This causes dysfunction.
There are at least 30 variations known to cause FMF. The most common ones are
V726A
,
M680I
,
E148Q
,
M694V
and
M694I
. They’re most common in Mediterranean and Middle Eastern populations, including:
Arabs
Armenians
Greeks
Iranians
Italians
Jews
Kurds
Turks
Triggers for familial Mediterranean fever
While familial Mediterranean fever episodes often seem to occur randomly, some people find that physical or emotional stress can trigger an episode. Some of the triggers people have reported include:
Cold exposure
Exercise or exertion
Recent
infection
Recent
injury
or surgery
Severe life
stress
Menstruation
or
ovulation
Familial Mediterranean fever disease complications
Even though episodes of familial Mediterranean fever are temporary, they can take a toll on your body over time. This is why healthcare providers recommend continuous treatment. Going through this kind of inflammatory process over and over again can overstress your immune system and lead to secondary conditions. The most serious of these is
secondary amyloidosis
, which can lead to
kidney failure
.
Other complications of familial Mediterranean fever can include:
Splenomegaly
Infertility
Secondary
autoimmune disease
Diagnosis and Tests
How is familial Mediterranean fever diagnosed?
To diagnose familial Mediterranean fever, a healthcare provider will:
Review your symptoms, how often they occur and for how long
Review your family health history and genetic heritage
Examine you for signs of inflammation during an episode
Test your blood
for signs of inflammation during an episode
Recommend
genetic testing
for common variations of the
MEFV
gene
Observe your response to treatment for familial Mediterranean fever
Management and Treatment
Treatment for familial Mediterranean fever
The standard treatment for familial Mediterranean fever is an anti-inflammatory medication called
colchicine
. It works by inhibiting the activity of
white blood cells
called
neutrophils
, which play a role in inflammation. Colchicine can help prevent or reduce the frequency of FMF attacks and its complications. It works for more than 90% of people with FMF. Most of these people will need to take it daily for life.
A small number of people don’t respond to colchicine or can’t take it for health-related reasons. Alternative medications include:
Anakinra
Rilonacept
Canakinumab
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have familial Mediterranean fever?
While there’s no
cure
, medication can effectively manage familial Mediterranean fever. Many people stop having inflammatory episodes with medication. Others have fewer, milder ones. You’ll have to continue taking it regularly for it to work, even when you’re not having symptoms. Medication can’t stop an episode that’s already happening — it can only work to prevent them from happening.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can FMF be prevented?
Many people carry a gene variant that causes familial Mediterranean fever without realizing it. You need two copies of a variant — one from each parent — to develop FMF. If you have only one copy, you won’t have any symptoms of FMF. But you can still pass your copy on to your biological children. If your partner has a copy, too, your children can inherit FMF. Genetic testing can tell you if you’re a carrier.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Reports of recurrent fevers in certain populations date back to antiquity. It’s possible that familial Mediterranean fever is that old. Some researchers believe it may have developed to help fight widespread infections of the time, like
tuberculosis
. Inflammation has its benefits — but too much is harmful. Fortunately, medications can now manage it, and you can live a virtually normal life with FMF.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment