Persistent Sore Throat (Chronic Pharyngitis): Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Chronic Pharyngitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chronic Pharyngitis
Chronic pharyngitis is a sore throat that lasts longer than 10 days or keeps coming back. Infections, allergies and toxins in your environment can cause it. Treatments include medications and home remedies. You should tell your healthcare provider if you have a persistent sore throat. It could point to another condition that needs treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is chronic pharyngitis?
Chronic pharyngitis (pronounced “feh-ruhn-JAI-tuhs”) is a
sore throat
that doesn’t go away or goes away but comes back often. It can happen when your
throat
becomes red and swollen (inflamed). Your healthcare provider may also call this persistent sore throat.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You know that feeling — that scratchy, raw sensation that gets worse when you swallow. Most of the time, a sore throat (pharyngitis) goes away within 10 days. But chronic pharyngitis lasts longer — sometimes, for several weeks.
There are many reasons why your sore throat hangs on so long. It can be from things in your environment, like smoke or harsh chemicals. Or it might be a symptom of another, more serious health condition. Be sure to tell a healthcare provider if you have a sore throat that won’t go away.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of chronic pharyngitis?
Chronic pharyngitis symptoms include:
Difficulty swallowing
Feeling like something’s stuck in your throat
Hoarseness
Pain or scratchiness in your throat
Swollen lymph nodes in your neck
Tickling in your throat
Weak or tired voice
What causes chronic pharyngitis?
Causes of a persistent sore throat include:
Allergies
to things like pollen, mold and pet dander (
hay fever
)
Chronic
tonsillitis
, a condition in which your tonsils are infected and swollen
Exposure to toxins like smoke and chemicals
GERD (chronic acid reflux)
, when acid from your stomach goes into your
food pipe
and causes irritation
Laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR)
, when acid from your stomach goes into your throat and causes irritation
Very rarely, a serious illness like
throat cancer
can cause symptoms similar to chronic pharyngitis. This type of cancer starts in your
voice box
or the back of your throat. It can also cause
shortness of breath
, lumps on your neck or make your
nose
or
mouth
bleed.
Advertisement
Is chronic pharyngitis contagious?
It depends. If you have chronic pharyngitis because of a
germ
, then you can give it to someone else. This can happen if you share items like towels, toothbrushes, clothes or forks. That’s because some germs can survive on surfaces for a while.
If your sore throat is from a
virus
, you can spread it as long as you’re feeling sick. But if it’s from
bacteria
, taking
antibiotics
can help you stop spreading it sooner.
What are the complications of chronic pharyngitis?
If you have an infection, it can spread to other areas of your body unless you get treatment. These complications can lead to:
Infection of your sinuses (
sinusitis
)
Inflammation of your tissues and organs (
rheumatic fever
)
Toxins in your bloodstream (
toxic shock syndrome
)
Diagnosis and Tests
How is chronic pharyngitis diagnosed?
A healthcare provider starts with a
physical examination
. They’ll look at the back of your throat and feel your neck for
swollen lymph nodes
. They’ll also ask about your symptoms and review your medical history.
To determine the cause of your persistent sore throat, your healthcare provider may also do a:
Rapid antigen detection test
. Your healthcare provider might use this to see if you have
strep throat
.
Throat culture
. This helps your provider figure out if you have an infection and what kind it is (like a virus, bacteria or fungus).
These tests can help your healthcare provider determine which treatment will work best.
Management and Treatment
How is chronic pharyngitis treated?
Chronic pharyngitis treatment may include:
Corticosteroids
to help with
inflammation
Medications to fight infection like
antibiotics
,
antivirals
or
antifungals
Pain relievers
like
acetaminophen
(Tylenol
®
) or
ibuprofen
(Motrin
®
)
Tonsillectomy
(if tonsillitis causes chronic pharyngitis)
When you have a persistent sore throat, your healthcare provider needs to find out why. Once they know the reason, they can tell you the best way to get better.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for people with this condition?
With treatment, the outlook is usually good. But left untreated, chronic pharyngitis can last a long time. Unless you address the root cause, your sore throat could last several weeks or keep returning.
Rarely, a persistent sore throat can point to serious health conditions. Be sure to tell your healthcare provider if your throat always hurts.
Prevention
Can chronic pharyngitis be prevented?
You can’t always prevent chronic pharyngitis. But there are steps you can take to reduce your risk:
Avoid contact with people who are sick.
Don’t share food, beverages or eating utensils.
Quit smoking
.
Wash your hands
frequently.
Use antibacterial hand sanitizer when soap and water aren’t available.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Being at home with a sore throat is no fun. It’s important to prioritize yourself and take good care. The best thing to do is schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider. In the meantime, you might try
sore throat home remedies
to ease your symptoms.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Tell your healthcare provider if you notice red flags like:
A sore throat that doesn’t go away
Blood in your saliva or phlegm
Breathing issues
Fever
over 103 degrees Fahrenheit (39.4 degrees Celsius)
Joint pain
and swelling
Signs of
dehydration
like
dry mouth
,
muscle cramps
or
headaches
Skin rash
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Here are some questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider about chronic pharyngitis:
What do you think caused my prolonged sore throat?
Are there irritants or chemicals I should remove from my environment?
What are my treatment options?
What should I do if I develop new symptoms?
Is it safe for me to exercise?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having a sore throat can be really bothersome. It can make even simple actions that we aren’t even usually aware of — like swallowing your saliva — hurt so much. It’s normal to have a sore throat with a common virus from time to time. But if you have a sore throat that won’t go away, or that goes away but comes back again, talk to a healthcare provider. The sooner you get help, the faster you can get back to doing things you enjoy.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/26/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment