What Is a Stent?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Stent
Advertisement
Advertisement
Stent
A stent is a tiny, metal mesh tube that holds your artery open to improve blood flow. Stents often help people who have blockages in their coronary (heart) arteries. Stent-grafts, made of metal and fabric, treat aortic aneurysms. Most stents are permanent. You may need to take medicine to lower your risk of a blood clot after stent placement.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
What is a stent?
A stent is a tiny, expandable mesh tube that goes inside your
artery
to keep it open for blood to flow through. Providers commonly place stents during
angioplasty
procedures after moving
plaque
out of the way. A certain type of stent, called a stent-graft, can serve as a new lining for arteries with
weak walls
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Stents look like tiny fishing nets. Many stents are metal. Stent-grafts are made of metal and fabric.
Stent size can vary. Stents that go in your
coronary (heart) arteries
are 8 to 48 millimeters long. This is shorter than a golf tee. The opening is 2 to 5 millimeters wide. This is about as wide as the tip of a crayon. Stents for other arteries can be larger.
Types of stents
There are several different types of stents designed for certain arteries or issues. Examples include:
Drug-eluting stent
: This is a metal mesh stent coated with medicine that keeps your artery from getting narrow again. It’s the type providers use most often for heart arteries.
Bare metal stent
: This is made of nickel-titanium alloy, stainless steel or cobalt-chromium. There’s no medicine on it. Providers don’t often use this type today.
Biodegradable stent
: This type is newer and in limited use. It dissolves in your artery in a few months.
Polyester fabric and metal stent
: This is commonly called a stent-graft or simply a graft. Fabric covers a mesh metal frame. Providers use this type to reinforce weak spots in large arteries like your
aorta
.
This article focuses on stents that go in your arteries. But there are other types of stents, too. These include:
Advertisement
Ureteral stents
, which help pee flow from your kidneys to your bladder
Airway stents
, which help your
breathing passages
stay open
What does a stent treat?
Stents most commonly treat severe blockages in your arteries. These blockages come from
plaque buildup
. You can think of a stent like crowd control for your artery. After your provider moves plaque out of the way, the stent helps that space stay open so your blood can get through.
You might need stents if you have:
Carotid artery disease
: Stents in your carotid arteries, in your neck, help blood reach your brain. This can lower your risk of a
stroke
.
Coronary artery disease
: Stents in your coronary arteries let blood reach your heart. This can help you prevent or recover from a
heart attack
.
Peripheral artery disease
: Stents in arteries in your legs, pelvis or arms help blood flow better there.
Renal artery disease
: Stents in your renal arteries can improve blood flow to your kidneys.
Stents also commonly treat
aortic aneurysms
. This is a bulge in the largest artery in your body (aorta). The bulge forms at a spot where your artery walls are weak. A stent-graft serves as a new lining for that part of your aorta. This improves blood flow and lowers your risk of an aneurysm rupture.
How are stents placed?
The exact details depend on the condition the stent is treating. Common stent placement procedures include:
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
: You might know this as coronary angioplasty or getting heart stents. Your provider places stents in your coronary arteries, usually through a catheter in your wrist or your groin. It’s what most people think of when they hear “stents.”
Carotid artery stenting
: This procedure improves blood flow to your brain. It helps people who have a severe carotid artery blockage.
Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR)
:
This procedure repairs an aneurysm in the part of your aorta that runs through
your belly
. It involves placing a stent-graft in your aorta through a catheter in your groin or upper thigh.
Thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR)
: This is similar to EVAR. But it treats aneurysms in the part of your aorta that runs through
your chest
.
Your healthcare provider can tell you more about the stent procedure you need. They’ll explain details like whether you’ll be awake, how long you’ll need to stay in the hospital and what you can expect for recovery.
You may need to take
medicines
for a while — possibly for life — to lower the risk of a blood clot forming in your stent. Follow your provider’s guidance closely. Don’t stop taking your medicine unless your provider tells you to.
Advertisement
What are the advantages of stents?
Advantages of stents include:
They help blood flow better through the artery where your provider places them.
Along with angioplasty, they can stop a heart attack.
They improve symptoms of heart disease, like
chest pain
.
They may keep your artery from getting too narrow again.
People who have a heart stent recover faster than those who have
coronary artery bypass surgery
(CABG). This is because you can get a stent without a surgeon opening your chest.
What are the risks of placement?
Serious complications rarely happen during stent placement. People with
heart failure
, diabetes, kidney disease or a previous artery blockage have a higher risk of serious complications. Possible risks include:
A
blood clot
inside your stent, especially if you abruptly stop taking your
medicines
that protect the stent
An allergic reaction to the stent or its drug coating
Bleeding at the spot your provider used to access your blood vessel
Infection
A tear inside your artery
Abnormal heart rhythm
A stent
leaking
or moving out of place
Narrowing
of the artery again
Heart attack or
cardiac arrest
Stroke
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may feel a bit uneasy about a provider placing a manufactured part in your body. When you think of it that way, it sounds like something from a superhero comic book. But providers have been using stents for decades, and the companies that make stents improve them over time. Your provider can answer your questions and help put your mind at ease.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/26/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment