Ectodermal Dysplasia: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ectodermal Dysplasia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ectodermal Dysplasia
Ectodermal dysplasia describes a group of rare genetic disorders that can affect multiple parts of your body. Certain gene variations cause it. Ectodermal dysplasia is a congenital condition, meaning you’re born with it. Outlook is usually good with early detection and treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Ectodermal Dysplasia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
What Is Ectodermal Dysplasia?
Ectodermal dysplasias are a group of rare
genetic disorders
that affect your hair,
teeth
, nails or sweat glands. If you have one of these disorders, you might also have signs or symptoms that affect your eyes, ears, breasts or
central nervous system
. These are all parts of your body that grew from your ectoderm. Ectoderm is the outer germ layer that forms as an embryo develops.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You are born with ectodermal dysplasia (it’s congenital). But that doesn’t always mean people can tell you have it right away. Sometimes, parents and caregivers notice signs or symptoms in babies at — or shortly — after birth. And sometimes, they don’t appear for years.
Types of ectodermal dysplasia
Researchers have identified over
180
different ectodermal dysplasias, each with their own set of symptoms. Some examples include:
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immune deficiency (EDA-ID)
. This type involves severe
immune system
symptoms like low
antibodies
and chronic (long-term) infections.
Hay-Wells syndrome
. You might have symptoms like
hair loss
, scalp infections, brittle nails, missing teeth, fused eyelids or
cleft lip and/or palate
.
Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED2).
Also called Clouston syndrome, HED2 mainly affects your hair, skin and nail development.
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED)
. You have fewer sweat glands, so you don’t
sweat
as much as people without the condition. You may also have sparse hair, small or missing teeth, or chronic skin conditions like
eczema
. It’s the most common type.
Witkop syndrome
. This condition causes small, brittle nails and missing teeth (
hypodontia
). The teeth you do have might be cone-shaped and spaced far apart.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of ectodermal dysplasia?
Each type of ectodermal dysplasia has its own signs and symptoms. Usually, each type comes with at least one condition or abnormality that can affect your:
Eyes
. Includes
dry eyes
, small eyes or problems with the front of your eye like
recurrent corneal erosion
.
Growth rate
. Children with ectodermal dysplasia have a growth rate that’s slower than expected for their age.
Hair
. Includes thin, brittle or slow-growing hair.
Limbs
. You might have misshaped, missing or
webbed
fingers or toes.
Mouth
. Includes cleft lip and/or palate and tooth disorders, like small, missing or abnormally shaped teeth.
Nails
. Missing, thick, thin or grooved fingernails or toenails.
Skin
. You might get rashes easily.
Sweat glands
. You may have fewer sweat glands and sweat less than other people (hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, or HED). Sweating cools us off when we get too hot. So, if you sweat less or don’t sweat at all, you may overheat.
Urogenital system
. You’re more likely to have conditions that affect your genitals or urinary system like swollen kidneys because you can’t fully empty your bladder (
hydronephrosis
),
micropenis
or you may be born with testicles that haven’t yet dropped into your scrotum (
undescended testicles
). You may be missing one or both of your
kidneys
.
Having these signs and symptoms doesn’t necessarily mean you have ectodermal dysplasia. If you think you might have a form of this disorder, your healthcare provider can do genetic testing to find out for sure.
What causes ectodermal dysplasia?
Gene variations
cause ectodermal dysplasia. The type of ectodermal dysplasia you have depends on which genes have variations (and what kind of variations they have). Often, the condition runs in biological families. In rare cases, the genetic variation happens without any history of ectodermal dysplasia in your family.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is ectodermal dysplasia diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will begin with a
physical examination
. Specifically, they’ll look for abnormalities of your hair, nails, teeth and sweat glands. Depending on your symptoms, your provider might take imaging tests like
X-rays
or
CT scans
.
If your healthcare provider suspects ectodermal dysplasia, they’ll do
genetic testing
. These tests can identify variations in your genes, tell you whether you have ectodermal dysplasia and, if so, what type.
Management and Treatment
How is ectodermal dysplasia treated?
Treatment depends on severity and the type of ectodermal dysplasia you have. Ectodermal dysplasia treatments include:
Staying cool
. If you don’t sweat as much as other people, you have a harder time cooling off. Staying hydrated or wearing cooling vests can help avoid
heat stroke
.
Dental or
oral surgery
procedures
. You can replace missing teeth with
dental implants
, bridges or
dentures
. Or you might need
dental bonding
, veneers or
crowns
to fix small or misshaped teeth.
Hair loss treatment
.
Minoxidil
(Rogaine®) and other medications may encourage natural hair growth.
Skin moisturizers
. Regular application of ointments, creams and lotions can help reduce your risk of dry, scaly skin.
Advertisement
Because ectodermal dysplasia affects so many different parts of your body, you’ll likely have many different providers on your care team.
Babies born with severe abnormalities may require early treatment from a specialist. Your healthcare provider can tell you what to expect in your situation.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for ectodermal dysplasia?
The outlook is usually good with early detection and appropriate treatment. Most people with ectodermal dysplasia have normal lifespans.
While you can’t cure ectodermal dysplasia, treatment can help manage your symptoms.
What to expect if your child has ectodermal dysplasia
Depending on the symptoms and conditions your child has, they could need multiple treatments. The order and timing of these procedures depend on the type and severity of ectodermal dysplasia. Your healthcare provider will work with you to determine an appropriate treatment plan.
Prevention
Can ectodermal dysplasia be prevented?
You can’t prevent this condition because genetic changes beyond your control cause it. If you or your child has ectodermal dysplasia, it’s not because of something you did or didn’t do.
If you have it and plan to expand your family, you might consider
genetic counseling
. A genetic counselor can help you understand your chances of having a child with a genetic condition.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you or your child has symptoms that could point to ectodermal dysplasia, tell your healthcare provider. This includes (but isn’t limited to) small or missing teeth, webbed fingers, skin irritation and eye or ear abnormalities.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you have ectoderm dysplasia, here are some questions you might want to ask your healthcare provider:
What type of ectoderm dysplasia do I have?
What are my treatment options?
How will this affect my (or my child’s) life?
What are complications I should watch for?
How often will I need to come in for appointments?
Are there support groups available?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out you or your child has ectodermal dysplasia can be a big deal. It can mean testing and lots of appointments. But a diagnosis can also help you understand how symptoms are connected, how to manage them and what to expect.
Don’t worry, with the right treatment, you can manage ectodermal dysplasia. It just might take a bit of time and patience to figure out what works best. Remember, you’re not alone. Talking with others who are dealing with the same thing can really help. Ask your doctor about support groups and resources.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/01/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider