Oropouche Virus Disease: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Oropouche Virus Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Oropouche Virus Disease
Oropouche virus disease (or Oropouche fever) is a viral infection that spreads through midge or mosquito bites. It’s most common in Central and South America. Recently there’ve been outbreaks in Cuba. Oropouche virus causes flu-like symptoms, including fever and body aches. Most people don’t get severely ill. Rarely, it can cause brain swelling.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is Oropouche virus disease?
Oropouche virus disease is an illness that causes
flu-like symptoms
. Symptoms are usually mild. But they can sometimes come back days or weeks later or cause complications in pregnancy. It’s usually spread by midges (small flies, sometimes called “no-see-ums”).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Oropouche (or-oh-POO-chey) virus — sometimes called Oropouche fever — typically spreads in Central and South America, especially in countries around the Amazon. In 2024, outbreaks of Oropouche virus disease were reported in Cuba.
How common is Oropouche virus disease?
There’ve been about
500,000 known cases
of Oropouche virus infections since its discovery in 1955.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of Oropouche virus disease?
Symptoms of Oropouche virus disease include:
Fever
.
Chills
.
Severe
headache
.
Muscle
and
joint pain
.
Rash
.
Signs of severe illness include:
Dizziness
.
Sensitivity to light (
photophobia
) or
eye pain
.
Confusion
or altered mental state.
Nausea and vomiting
.
Stiff neck
.
Many people have no symptoms.
What causes Oropouche virus disease?
A
virus
— a small piece of
genetic material
(in this case, RNA) in a protective coating — causes Oropouche virus disease. Its scientific name is
Oropouche orthobunyavirus
, sometimes abbreviated OROV. Oropouche virus spreads through the bite of midges (
Culicoides paraensis)
and certain mosquitos.
Is Oropouche virus contagious?
No, Oropouche virus isn’t contagious (spread from person to person). But if you’re pregnant, it can spread to the fetus through your
placenta
, which might cause
birth defects
.
What are the complications of Oropouche virus disease?
Oropouche virus can sometimes lead to swelling of your brain (
encephalitis
) or its covering (
meningitis
). If you’re pregnant and get Oropouche virus disease, it might increase the risk of:
Advertisement
Miscarriage
.
Stillbirth
.
Microcephaly
or other congenital (present-at-birth) conditions.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Oropouche virus diagnosed?
Healthcare providers usually diagnose Oropouche virus disease based on your symptoms and whether you could’ve gotten bitten by a bug carrying the virus. They can also use
blood tests
or a
lumbar puncture
to look for signs of the virus if you have severe symptoms.
Management and Treatment
How is Oropouche virus disease treated?
There are no
antiviral medications
to treat Oropouche virus. Over-the-counter (OTC) medications like
acetaminophen
(Tylenol
®
) can help you manage the symptoms at home.
Don’t use
aspirin
or other
NSAIDS
(like ibuprofen) unless your provider says they’re safe to take. Many other illnesses can look like Oropouche virus disease. Aspirin and NSAIDS increase your risk of bleeding if you have a different type of infection, like
dengue
.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Oropouche virus disease?
Most people with Oropouche virus disease recover without serious illness in about a week. Some people may have their symptoms come back after feeling better. Most people are completely recovered in about a month.
What is the mortality rate of Oropouche virus disease?
Oropouche virus disease is rarely fatal. In 2024, the
first deaths from Oropouche virus
since its discovery in 1955 were reported.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you live in or have traveled to an area where Oropouche virus is found and you have symptoms, especially if you’re pregnant. They can let you know the best way to take care of yourself.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room if you experience symptoms of meningitis or encephalitis, including:
Sensitivity to light or eye pain.
Severe headache.
Severe vomiting.
Confusion or altered mental state.
Neck stiffness or inability to move your neck and head.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It might be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:
What medications are safe for me to take at home?
What serious symptoms should I look out for?
Prevention
Can Oropouche virus disease be prevented?
The best way to reduce your risk of Oropouche virus is to protect yourself from bug bites:
Use EPA-registered insect repellents that contain DEET or other ingredients known to help keep midges and mosquitos away.
Cover exposed skin outdoors, especially at night when biting insects are more likely to be around. Wear long pants, long-sleeved shirts and socks.
Remove standing water (buckets or barrels, bird baths, old tires that may hold rainwater) and fill low spots where water can pool.
Keep mosquitos out of your home by repairing holes in screens and keeping windows and doors closed if possible. Make sure window screens are made of a fine mesh, small enough that midges can’t get through.
Use netting made of fine mesh over your sleeping area at night in areas where Oropouche virus infections are common.
If you’re pregnant, avoid traveling to areas where Oropouche is common, if possible.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It might feel like there’s always a new virus to worry about. Oropouche virus has existed in parts of the Americas for decades. And most people don’t get seriously ill from it. But it might make for scary-sounding headlines when there are outbreaks, especially in parts of the world where it hasn’t been found before.
It’s always a good idea to take precautions to protect yourself from bug bites, especially if you’re pregnant or traveling to a new area. If you’ve been diagnosed with Oropouche virus disease, your healthcare provider can guide you through what to expect in your specific situation.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/22/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment