Hypermagnesemia: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hypermagnesemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hypermagnesemia
Hypermagnesemia is a rare electrolyte disorder. It means you have a high magnesium level in your blood. Many people with this disorder have kidney failure. Their kidneys can’t get rid of extra magnesium like healthy kidneys do. Medicines, and sometimes dialysis, treat hypermagnesemia. Prompt treatment is important because severe cases can be fatal.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hypermagnesemia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is Hypermagnesemia?
Hypermagnesemia is a rare condition where you have too much magnesium, an
electrolyte
, in your blood. Typically, you don’t have much magnesium (Mg) in your
blood
. Your body keeps most of the magnesium it absorbs and stores it in your
muscles
and
bones
. Everyone needs magnesium for a variety of functions, from using energy and repairing
DNA
to forming bones.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your
kidneys
filter most of the magnesium in your blood. A small amount of this mineral comes out in your
urine
(pee). When your kidneys work well, they can clear out a lot of magnesium. But people who have
kidney failure
and take medicines that contain magnesium can end up with this
electrolyte disorder
.
Because it’s not routine for healthcare providers to check magnesium levels, this disorder can be tricky to catch. Also, early symptoms can look like those of other conditions. But early diagnosis and treatment are best. Without prompt care, severe hypermagnesemia can be fatal.
Mild cases of Mg toxicity (high magnesium) typically don’t need treatment.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of hypermagnesemia
People with a mild case of this condition might not have symptoms. Low blood pressure (
hypotension
) that doesn’t respond to medicine may be one of the first symptoms. With a moderate or severe case, hypermagnesemia symptoms may include:
Dizziness
Nausea
Confusion
Weakness
Difficulty breathing
Hypermagnesemia causes
Kidney failure is the most common cause of hypermagnesemia. Other causes include:
Addison’s disease
Adrenal insufficiency (not producing enough cortisol)
Hemolysis
(red blood cell destruction)
Hypercalcemia
(high calcium levels)
Hypothyroidism
(underactive thyroid)
Inflammatory bowel disease
Injury from trauma, shock or
burns
Lithium
-based psychotropic drugs
Long-term use of
antacids
or
laxatives
with magnesium in them
Use of enemas with magnesium in them
Use of over-the-counter products with a lot of magnesium, like Epsom salts
Treatment for
eclampsia
during pregnancy
Advertisement
Risk factors
The main risk factors for high magnesium are having acute or chronic kidney disease and ingesting products that contain magnesium.
Complications of this condition
Signs of more severe magnesium toxicity (when your magnesium is too high) may include:
Drowsiness
Headache
Constipation
Paralyzed muscles or bladder
Coma
Arrhythmia
(abnormal heart rhythms) leading to
cardiac arrest
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose hypermagnesemia
Healthcare providers use
blood tests
to check for this condition. A high magnesium level is above 2.6 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL). A normal magnesium level is 1.7 to 2.3 mg/dL.
Levels of hypermagnesemia are:
Mild (less than 7 mg/dL)
Moderate (7 to 12 mg/dL)
Severe (more than 12 mg/dL)
Your provider may also order a blood test and
urinalysis
to check your
kidney function
and an
electrocardiogram (EKG)
to check for abnormal heart rhythms.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
If your kidneys work well and you don’t have symptoms, you probably don’t need treatment. You’ll just need to stop taking medicines that have magnesium in them. Talk to your healthcare provider about other medications you can take instead.
Providers treat hypermagnesemia with
IV fluids
and IV medicines like
diuretics
and
calcium gluconate
. Diuretics like
furosemide
help your kidneys get rid of magnesium. Calcium gluconate can help with your breathing. You may also need
dialysis
to help quickly remove magnesium from your body.
If your
heart
and
lungs
need support, you may receive care in an intensive care unit.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a provider if you’re having symptoms of hypermagnesemia. Be sure to tell them about any over-the-counter supplements or medicines you use.
You may want to ask your provider:
Am I at risk for a magnesium overdose?
Do I need treatment?
What should I use in the future instead of antacids or laxatives that contain magnesium?
Can I still eat foods that contain a lot of magnesium?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have hypermagnesemia?
The
prognosis
for this condition depends on the severity of your case. Mild hypermagnesemia is often a harmless condition. But a severe case can be fatal.
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
Yes,
pharmacists
and other providers can help you prevent hypermagnesemia. They can make sure that the medicines you’re taking don’t put you at risk for this condition. Knowing the signs of magnesium toxicity can help you alert a provider as soon as you start to have symptoms.
Additional Common Questions
What foods should I avoid with hypermagnesemia?
Many foods are rich in magnesium. Examples include:
Bananas
Black beans
Broccoli
Brown rice
Green vegetables
Meat and seafood
Nuts like almonds and cashews
Seeds
Whole grains
Talk to your provider about which foods are safe for you and which ones you should avoid.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hypermagnesemia falls into the category of “too much of a good thing.” Magnesium plays many roles in keeping your body running, but too much of it can cause problems. You may not realize that some over-the-counter medicines can push your level over the limit. Talk with a healthcare provider about which medicines are safe for you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your kidneys, you want experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work with you to craft a personalized treatment plan.
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment