Degenerative Disk Disease: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Degenerative Disk Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Degenerative Disk Disease
Degenerative disk disease occurs when the cushioning in your spine begins to wear away. After age 40, most people experience some spinal degeneration. But the condition doesn’t always cause symptoms. When it does, neck and back pain can be intense. The right treatment can lead to pain relief and increased mobility.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Back Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is degenerative disk disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What is degenerative disk disease?
Degenerative disk disease is a condition that occurs when your spinal disks begin to wear down.
Degenerative disk disease (sometimes spelled degenerative disc disease) isn’t actually a disease, but rather, it’s a condition that occurs when your spinal disks wear down. Spinal disks are rubbery cushions between your vertebrae (bones in your
spinal column
). They act as shock absorbers and help you move, bend and twist comfortably. Everyone’s spinal disks degenerate over time — it’s a natural part of aging.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When the cushions wear away, the bones can start to rub together. This contact can cause pain and other problems, like:
Adult scoliosis
,
where your spine curves
Herniated disk
,
also called a bulged, slipped or ruptured disk
Spinal stenosis
,
when the space in your spinal canal narrows
Spondylolisthesis
,
when vertebrae move in and out of place
Types of degenerative disk disease
Disk degeneration mostly affects your lower back (lumbar spine) or neck (cervical spine).
Lumbar degenerative disk disease.
Your lower back (
lumber spine
) has five vertebrae. These are the largest bones in your back. Healthcare providers call them L1 to L5. Disks in your spine (spinal disks) separate each of these vertebrae. Approximately 90% of degenerative disk disease occurs in the lowest portions of your lumbar spine.
Cervical degenerative disk disease.
This type of degenerative disk disease occurs in the seven vertebrae of your neck (
cervical spine
). These vertebrae are each separated by a spinal disk. Your cervical spine is responsible for all kinds of movements, including looking up and down and turning your head from side to side. Degenerative disk disease in this area can make those movements painful.
Multilevel degenerative disk disease.
Multilevel degenerative disk disease is when degenerative disk disease affects more than one disk or level of your spine. So, areas of your lumbar spine and your cervical spine could be affected.
Advertisement
How common is degenerative disk disease?
Almost everyone has some disk degeneration after age 40, even if they don’t develop symptoms. It can lead to back pain in about 5% of adults.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of degenerative disk disease
The most common degenerative disk disease (degenerative disc disease) symptoms are
neck pain
and
back pain
. You may experience pain that:
Comes and goes, lasting for weeks or months at a time
Radiates down your lower back and buttocks
Worsens with sitting, bending or lifting
What does degenerative disk pain feel like?
Degenerative disk pain:
Can happen in your neck or lower back
Can be mild, moderate or severe
Can be sharp, aching or stiff
May start and stop
Can get worse after certain activities, like bending, twisting or lifting
Can get worse over time
Degenerative disk disease causes
Spinal disks wear down as a natural part of aging. Especially after age 40, most people experience some disk degeneration. But not everyone experiences pain.
You might have pain if your spinal disks:
Dry out.
Your disks have a soft core that mostly contains water. As you get older, that core naturally loses some water. As a result, disks get thinner and don’t provide as much shock absorption as they used to.
Tear or crack.
Minor injuries can lead to small cracks in your spinal disks. These tears are often near
nerves
. Tears can initiate inflammation cascade, which involves nearby structures like nerves, which might be painful, even when they’re minor. If the outer wall of your spinal disk cracks open, your disk may bulge out of place, known as a herniated disk, which may compress a spinal nerve.
Risk factors for degenerative disk disease
Degenerative disk disease is most common in people age 40 and older. Some factors increase your risk of developing degenerative disk disease, including:
Acute injuries, like falls
Obesity
Sex
, with women being more likely to experience symptoms
Smoking
Working a physically demanding job
Does degenerative disk disease increase my risk for other conditions?
Degenerated disks can increase your risk of developing other spinal conditions. Common spine problems include:
Osteoarthritis
Scoliosis
Spinal stenosis
Spondylolisthesis
Radiculopathy
Spondylolysis
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose degenerative disk disease
To diagnose degenerative disk disease (degenerative disc disease), your healthcare provider may start by asking you about your symptoms. Questions may include:
When did the pain start?
Where do you feel pain?
What activities cause the most pain?
What activities decrease the pain?
Did you have an injury or accident that led to pain?
Do you have other symptoms, like tingling or numbness?
How far can you walk?
Your healthcare provider may use imaging scans, like
X-ray
,
CT
or
MRI
to help with the diagnosis of degenerative disk disease. These tests can show your healthcare provider the state and alignment of your disks. Your provider may also conduct a
physical exam
to check your:
Nerve function.
Your provider may use a reflex hammer to check your reactions. Little or no reaction could mean you have damaged or compressed nerves.
Pain levels.
Your provider may touch or press on specific areas of your back to measure your pain levels.
Strength.
Muscle weakness or shrinking (atrophy) could mean you have nerve damage or degenerated disks.
Advertisement
What are the stages of degenerative disk disease?
Healthcare providers use the following four stages when diagnosing degenerative disk disease:
Dysfunction.
Your spinal disks have started to degenerate, and you may be experiencing mild degenerative disk disease.
Dehydration.
Your spinal disks have started to dry out, causing them to lose some of their height and flexibility. Your neck and back pain may worsen at this stage.
Stabilization.
At this stage, your spine tries to stabilize itself, which can cause spinal stenosis and severe pain.
Collapse.
Your spinal disks continue shrinking and the bones in your spine rub together. The damaged disks press against your nerves, causing severe pain.
Management and Treatment
How do you treat degenerative disk disease?
Usually, your healthcare provider will recommend noninvasive degenerative disk disease treatment options first. Your treatment may include:
Physical therapy:
Participating in strengthening and stretching exercises with a trained
physical therapist
Medications:
Taking
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
,
acetaminophen
, neuromodulation medication or
steroids
Steroid injections
:
Injecting medicine near your spinal nerves, disks or joints to reduce inflammation and pain
Radiofrequency neurotomy
:
Using electric currents to burn sensory nerves and prevent pain signals from reaching your brain
Advertisement
Degenerative disk disease self-care
Some people find pain relief through at-home remedies. At-home treatments may decrease pain for a short time. But they’re not a long-term treatment for severely degenerated disks. You may try:
Physical activity.
Low-impact activity like walking or swimming can strengthen back muscles and relieve some pain.
Hot and cold therapy.
Alternating ice packs and heating pads every 10 to 15 minutes up to four times per day may reduce soreness and inflammation.
Stretching.
Gentle yoga and stretching throughout the day may improve
posture
and relieve tension.
Traction.
Traction may improve symptoms and relieve tension.
Degenerative disk disease surgery
Most people don’t need surgery for degenerative disk disease. But if you’ve tried multiple nonsurgical treatments and have persistent pain and/or weakness, surgery may be a good option.
Your surgeon may use one of a few types of
spinal decompression surgery
:
Diskectomy
:
Removing part of a spinal disk to relieve pressure on your nerves
Foraminotomy
:
Expanding the opening for your nerve roots by removing tissue and bone
Laminectomy
:
Taking out a small portion of bone from your lower spine (lamina)
Osteophyte removal:
Removing
bone spurs (osteophytes)
Spinal fusion
:
Connecting two or more vertebrae to improve stability
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Back Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can you fully recover from degenerative disk disease?
Most people who have surgery for degenerative disk disease experience long-term pain relief. But even after surgery, you need to continue exercising and stretching to keep your back strong and healthy.
Many people use nonsurgical and at-home treatments to manage pain long term. If you have mild to moderate back pain, you’ll need to continue treatment to keep the pain at bay.
Prevention
How can I prevent degenerative disk disease (degenerative disc disease) from getting worse?
You can prevent or slow the progression of spinal degeneration through lifestyle changes. Some of these include:
Achieving and maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you
Avoiding or
quitting smoking
Getting regular physical activity to increase strength and flexibility
Additional Common Questions
What should I avoid if I have degenerative disk disease?
Things to avoid with degenerative disk disease include:
Smoking.
Smoking can worsen your pain and make treatment less effective.
Lifting heavy objects.
Heavy lifting stresses and strains the disks in your back, especially when you do it often.
Drinking alcohol.
Drinking too many beverages containing alcohol increases your risk of back pain.
Staying seated for long periods.
If you spend too much time sitting on the couch or at your desk, your back pain will increase. So, make sure to get up and move around once in a while.
High-impact physical activity.
Sports and other physical activities that involve jumping, running and other high-impact movements can be hard on your back. Instead, try low-impact physical activities like walking and swimming.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What’s the most likely cause of my degenerative disk disease?
How can I slow the progression of the disease?
What nonsurgical treatments are most likely to relieve my pain?
What will happen if I choose not to have surgery?
How can I prevent pain from returning after surgery?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Degenerative disk disease (degenerative disc disease) occurs when your spinal disks break down. Unfortunately, it’s just a natural part of aging. When these disks wear out, you’ll typically experience back pain and stiffness. For some people, home remedies like hot and cold therapy can decrease pain. When the pain is severe, you may benefit from spinal injections or spine surgery. A spine specialist can help you determine which treatment is best for you.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Back pain can stop you in your tracks. But you don’t have to live like that. Cleveland Clinic is here to help you get moving again.
Back Pain Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment