Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE)
Temporal lobe epilepsy is a seizure-causing condition that starts in your temporal lobe. You have two temporal lobes, one on each side of your head. These seizures may start with an aura (an unusual feeling) before the seizure begins. A healthcare provider may recommend medications or surgery to manage seizures.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy and Seizures Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is temporal lobe epilepsy?
Temporal lobe
epilepsy
(TLE) is a type of epilepsy where seizures begin in the temporal lobe.
Seizures
are the result of abnormal electrical activity in your
brain
. You have two temporal lobes, one on each side of your brain. These are located behind your temple and extend from your eye to your ear.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your temporal lobe is the part of your brain that helps you to make sense of the world around you. It manages:
Memories
Sounds
Vision
Speech and language
It’s also involved in some unconscious or automatic responses, such as hunger, thirst, fight-or-flight response, emotions and sexual arousal.
Temporal lobe epilepsy is the most common type of
focal
epilepsy. Seizures are the main symptom of TLE. A healthcare provider can help you manage them and other issues that this condition can cause.
Left vs. right temporal lobe epilepsy
The left and right temporal lobes share many of the same functions, like memory, sounds, vision and speech. The location of where a seizure starts may affect these functions.
The left temporal lobe is usually the dominant lobe in most people, especially if you’re right-handed. People who have left temporal lobe epilepsy, over time, may have difficulty with naming objects, knowing what words to use and changing moods.
People with right temporal lobe epilepsy typically have fewer long-term memory changes, but they may still notice changes in their ability to memorize nonverbal information (particularly visual information), as well as changes in their mood.
What are the types of temporal lobe epilepsy?
There are two types of TLE:
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE)
. “Mesial” means middle. Seizures start in or near a structure called the
hippocampus
. You have a hippocampus in the middle of each temporal lobe. MTLE is the most common type.
Neocortical or lateral temporal lobe epilepsy
. Seizures start in the outer section of your temporal lobe.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of temporal lobe epilepsy?
Temporal lobe epilepsy symptoms can include an epileptic aura (an unusual sensation you feel before a seizure) and the seizure itself.
Symptoms of epileptic auras may include:
Déjà vu
(a feeling of familiarity), a memory or jamais vu (a feeling of unfamiliarity)
A sudden sense of fear, panic or anxiety; anger, sadness or joy
A rising sick feeling in your stomach (like the feeling you get in your gut when riding a roller coaster)
Stronger senses (hearing, sight, smell, taste or touch)
Not everyone experiences an aura. An aura is also described as a focal-aware seizure, meaning you’re awake and aware while the symptoms occur. They typically last from a few seconds to two minutes.
Other seizure symptoms can follow the aura. You may experience signs and symptoms including:
Loss of consciousness
A blank stare
Dilated pupils
Repetitive non-purposeful behaviors and movements (automatisms) of your hands (fidgeting, picking motions), eyes (excessive blinking) and mouth (lip-smacking, chewing, swallowing)
Confusion
Brief loss of ability to speak or understand language (
aphasia
)
Stiffening and jerking of your body
What causes temporal lobe epilepsy?
Neurons (
nerve
cells) miscommunicating in your temporal lobe cause temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurons send electrical signals to different parts of your brain. When a seizure happens, neurons uncontrollably fire off signals instead of directing them to where they need to go.
Some of the most common causes of temporal lobe epilepsy include:
Hippocampal sclerosis (neuron and glial cell loss in the hippocampus)
Focal cortical dysplasia (abnormal collection of neurons)
Brain tumors
Traumatic brain injury
Infections (
brain abscess
,
meningitis
,
encephalitis
)
Vascular conditions (
strokes
,
arteriovenous malformations
)
Genetic variants
Unknown causes
What are the risk factors for temporal lobe epilepsy?
TLE can affect anyone at any age. You may be more at risk of this condition if you:
Had a febrile seizure in childhood
Had a seizure that lasted longer than five minutes or back-to-back seizures without regaining awareness in between each one (
status epilepticus
)
Have a condition like a
birth defect
or a tumor
Had a traumatic brain injury or brain infection early in life
Have a family history of temporal lobe epilepsy
Two out of three people who have TLE experienced
febrile seizures
as an infant. Many of these were complex (prolonged seizures). However, it’s rare to develop TLE after having a febrile seizure.
What are the complications of temporal lobe epilepsy?
There’s a risk of irreversible neurocognitive decline with TLE. Neurocognitive decline means it becomes harder for you to learn, remember, make decisions or focus.
The more seizures you have and the longer you have them, the greater your risk of:
Advertisement
Depression
Anxiety
Memory loss
Sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP)
A healthcare provider can help you treat TLE to prevent complications.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is temporal lobe epilepsy diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will diagnose temporal lobe epilepsy after reviewing your symptoms, getting a seizure history, performing a neurological examination and ordering tests. Your provider will learn more about your seizure history and ask you questions about what happened before and after the seizure. Your provider will also review your medical history.
You may not remember what happens when you have a seizure. If you aren’t sure, ask someone who was with you when you had a seizure to come with you to your appointment. They can tell your provider what they noticed.
Testing helps your provider see what’s going on inside of your brain. Tests may include:
MRI
EEG
or video-EEG monitoring
SPECT
PET
MEG
Neuropsychological testing
Management and Treatment
How is temporal lobe epilepsy treated?
Treatment for temporal lobe epilepsy may include:
Antiseizure medications
Epilepsy surgery
Neurostimulation
Your provider may also recommend that you change some of the foods you eat to help you manage seizures in addition to other treatments. For example, they may recommend the
ketogenic diet
. This is a meal plan high in fat and low in carbohydrates.
Advertisement
Medications to treat temporal lobe epilepsy
Many
antiseizure medications
are available to treat temporal lobe seizures, including:
Brivaracetam
Cenobamate
Carbamazepine
Gabapentin
Lamotrigine
Lacosamide
Levetiracetam
Oxcarbazepine
Pregabalin
Rufinamide
Topiramate
Valproate
Zonisamide
Your healthcare provider might try one or more medications and different dosages to find what works best for you.
Some antiseizure medications may cause birth defects, so be sure to tell your provider if you’re pregnant or if you plan to become pregnant.
Temporal lobe epilepsy surgery
Your healthcare provider may consider surgery if antiseizure medications aren’t successful or if a tumor causes epilepsy symptoms.
A temporal lobectomy (removal of part of your temporal lobe) is the most common type of surgery. As your temporal lobe has a lot of responsibilities, your neurosurgeon will carefully plan the procedure to avoid complications that may affect brain function.
Two less invasive procedures are
stereotactic radiosurgery
and laser
ablation
. These techniques use lasers or radiation to destroy nerve cells or tissue in the section of your temporal lobe where seizures start.
Temporal lobe epilepsy neurostimulation
Neurostimulation devices may be an option if medications aren’t successful or surgery isn’t a safe option. Neurostimulation uses an implanted device to deliver an electrical impulse to your temporal lobe. This treatment gradually reduces seizures over time. Common types of devices for neuromodulation used in TLE may include:
Advertisement
Vagus nerve stimulation
Responsive neurostimulation
Deep brain stimulation
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy and Seizures Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for temporal lobe epilepsy?
Your outlook varies based on:
How many seizures you have
How long you’ve had seizures
Your general health
Whether irreversible complications started
Many people find success in managing seizures with medications. Some people report being seizure-free after surgery. Your healthcare provider can give you the most accurate information about what this looks like, as it’s very different for each person.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
If you’ve had a seizure or think you might’ve had a seizure, you should see a healthcare provider.
If you have a temporal lobe epilepsy diagnosis, call your provider if:
Your seizure lasts longer than five minutes.
A second seizure immediately follows the first.
The number and severity of your seizures increase.
You experience new symptoms or side effects.
Your recovery after your seizure is slower than usual or not complete.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you have TLE, you may want to ask your provider:
What type of treatment do you recommend?
Are there side effects of treatment?
Is this antiseizure medication safe if I want to start a family?
Am I a candidate for epilepsy surgery?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You might not realize how important your temporal lobes are until they’re not working at 100%. Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) may affect their functioning over time. But a healthcare provider can help you manage TLE seizures to prevent complications.
TLE treatment is unique to you. You may need to try different types of medications at different dosages until you find one that works best for your body. Sometimes, medications aren’t the right fit and surgery might be a better option.
It can be difficult to manage life around epilepsy. Extra help is available through support groups or speaking with a mental health professional. Your care team will be with you to answer any questions you might have along the way.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy and seizures can impact your life in challenging ways. Cleveland Clinic experts can help you manage them and find relief.
Epilepsy and Seizures Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment