What Is a Pediatric Gastroenterologist?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Pediatric Gastroenterologist
Advertisement
Advertisement
Pediatric Gastroenterologist
A pediatric gastroenterologist is a pediatrician with extra training in the digestive system. They diagnose and treat digestive issues affecting infants, children and teens. These specialists can help find the cause of your child’s stomach pain, vomiting, slow weight gain and many other concerns. They tailor treatment to your child’s needs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
What is a pediatric gastroenterologist?
A pediatric gastroenterologist is a doctor who manages conditions affecting your child’s
digestive system
. This means they’re trained to diagnose and treat issues with your child’s:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Mouth, esophagus, stomach, small intestine and large intestine (collectively known as the gastrointestinal or GI tract)
Pancreas, liver, gallbladder and bile ducts (
biliary tract
)
Some digestive issues (sometimes called pediatric gastrointestinal/GI disorders) are minor and temporary. Others are more serious and need lifesaving treatment. Some conditions will stick around for life. But with treatment and active partnerships with your pediatric GI team, they should become manageable and not interfere with your child’s daily routine. Ultimately, providers want your child to have a good quality of life.
There’s a lot going on in your child’s digestive tract. From swallowing to pooping, pediatric gastroenterologists understand many things can affect your child’s digestive health. They’ll run tests and provide treatments for your child’s unique needs. They’ll also help you learn about your child’s condition and what you might expect going forward.
What do pediatric gastroenterologists do?
Pediatric gastroenterologists do everything that
gastroenterologists
for adults do. The difference is they provide these services to babies, kids and teens. Specific day-to-day tasks might involve:
Meeting with families to learn about a child’s symptoms and medical history
Ordering imaging tests or doing procedures that help find a diagnosis
Doing procedures or offering other treatments to manage a condition
Researching pediatric gastrointestinal disorders
Teaching and mentoring future doctors
Advertisement
Procedures a pediatric gastroenterologist can do
Pediatric gastroenterologists can do many different procedures. For example, they’re specially trained in
endoscopy
. This involves placing a long, thin tube (endoscope) inside your child’s body to look for possible causes of their symptoms. The exact location depends on the symptoms and what providers need to check.
Your pediatric gastroenterologist might recommend these specific forms of endoscopy:
Upper endoscopy
, which examines your child’s esophagus, stomach and
duodenum
Colonoscopy
, which examines your child’s large intestine
Capsule endoscopy
, which provides images of your child’s small intestine
Endoscopies help diagnose conditions. They allow for an up-close look at your child’s digestive organs. They sometimes involve taking a small tissue sample (
biopsy
) for further testing. Providers can often use endoscopy to treat conditions, too.
Pediatric gastroenterologists can also:
Do a
liver biopsy
to learn what’s causing liver disease and see how much damage there is
Place a
feeding tube
or
IV catheter
to help your child get necessary nutrients
Perform special procedures that look at the way the smooth muscles and nerves within your child’s GI tract function (motility testing)
Why would a child be referred to a gastroenterologist?
Your child might need to see a pediatric gastroenterologist for tests or treatments. These experts can help with a wide range of issues that:
Cause your child to develop GI symptoms
Affect their ability to get and/or absorb the nutrients their body needs
Lead to complications, especially if things aren’t treated/managed effectively
Put their life at risk
If your child seems to have
bellyaches
all the time, you’re not alone. That’s the most common reason why
pediatricians
refer families to gastroenterologists. Frequent bellyaches (functional abdominal pain) can get in the way of your child’s learning and make them miss out on activities. Lots of things can cause this type of pain. Pediatric gastroenterologists can run tests to figure out what’s going on.
Examples of other conditions that pediatric gastroenterologists diagnose and treat include:
Celiac disease
Cyclic vomiting syndrome
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EOE)
Food
allergies
or
intolerances
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
GI bleeding
Growth faltering
Inflammatory bowel disease
(Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis)
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Liver disease
Motility issues of the GI tract
Pancreatic disease
Malnutrition
Overweight
and
obesity
Short bowel syndrome
Advertisement
What do pediatric gastroenterologists specialize in?
Pediatric gastroenterologists complete:
An undergraduate degree program (typically four years)
Medical school (typically four years)
A residency program in pediatrics (typically three years)
A fellowship in pediatric gastroenterology (typically three years)
Additional fellowship or advanced training (for example, in transplant hepatology, neurogastroenterology or obesity medicine)
They must pass exams to become board-certified in both:
General pediatrics
Pediatric gastroenterology
Some pediatric gastroenterologists choose to do more training in an area like:
Pediatric liver disease and liver transplantation
Inflammatory bowel disease
Nutrition
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You can think of pediatric gastroenterologists as pediatricians with added superpowers. Like pediatricians, they’re great at talking to kids and making them feel comfortable. Their superpower is that they’re experts in digestive issues. They can solve a range of issues like frequent bellyaches and unexplained bleeding.
These specialists are also prepared to be there for
you
. Digestive issues in your child can be scary, and you might feel unsure of what’ll happen next. They’ll teach you what’s happening inside your child, so you feel involved each step of the way.
Advertisement
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If your child has a gastroenterological condition, you’ll want the best care. At Cleveland Clinic Children’s we’ll treat them with a personalized plan.
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us