Auto-Brewery Syndrome: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Auto-Brewery Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Auto-Brewery Syndrome
Auto-brewery syndrome causes symptoms of intoxication in people who haven’t consumed any alcohol. In this rare phenomenon, yeasts that normally live in your gut become overgrown. When they feed on the sugars you eat, they produce alcohol through fermentation. Treatment involves antifungals and eating fewer carbohydrates.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is auto-brewery syndrome?
Auto-brewery syndrome (ABS) is a rare condition that causes alcohol intoxication in people who haven’t consumed any alcohol. It’s also known as gut fermentation syndrome (GFS). It happens when microbes in your intestines ferment the sugars that you eat to produce ethanol — just like a brewery in your gut.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
We all have microbes living in our guts, usually harmlessly. Alcohol-producing bacteria and fungi like
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(brewer’s yeast) are part of a normal
gut microbiome
. They also produce small amounts of ethanol in all of us. A normal
metabolism
usually clears it before it reaches our bloodstream.
In auto-brewery syndrome, these microbes produce ethanol at a rate that exceeds your body’s capacity to clear it. The excess alcohol in your bloodstream causes your blood alcohol content (BAC) to rise to
intoxication
levels. Yeast overgrowth, high blood sugar and impaired metabolism can all contribute.
How rare is auto-brewery syndrome?
There are fewer than a hundred documented cases of auto-brewery syndrome, but most researchers suspect it’s more common than we know. Low awareness of the condition makes it hard for people and their healthcare providers to recognize it. It can also be difficult to diagnose when they do suspect it.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of autobrewery syndrome resemble intoxication.
Symptoms of auto-brewery syndrome
Auto-brewery syndrome causes alcohol intoxication, just like drinking alcohol does. If you’ve ever experienced this or witnessed it, you might recognize the symptoms. The symptoms are subtler at lower levels. But as
blood alcohol content (BAC)
rises, they’ll more closely resemble what we know as “drunkenness.”
Advertisement
Milder symptoms might include:
Brain fog
Clumsiness
Delayed reaction time
Drowsiness
Impaired judgment
Memory issues
Reduced inhibitions
More advanced symptoms can include:
Agitation
Balance issues
Blurred vision
Dilated pupils
Flushed face
Mood swings
Vomiting
Slurred speech
When you’re not intoxicated, you might have other symptoms, like:
Abdominal pain
Blackouts
Bloating and gas
Fatigue
Food sensitivities
Hangover
Poop changes
Runny nose
or
cough
Symptoms of intoxication tend to follow meals and drinks high in
carbohydrates
, like pasta, potatoes and fruit juice. The process can take up to 24 hours. If you’re not aware of how this works, symptoms will seem to occur randomly. They can interfere with important social events and activities like driving.
Auto-brewery syndrome causes
Auto-brewery syndrome happens when microbes living in your gut ferment the carbohydrates passing through it and produce ethanol — so much that it intoxicates your bloodstream, making you “drunk.” For this to occur, one or several things in your
digestive system
are out of balance or not working right:
There are too many ethanol-producing microbes in your gut
A healthy gut microbiome supports many different types of microorganisms — most of which are harmless, and many of which are helpful to us. The variety of microbes in your gut helps prevent any one type from overgrowing. But certain conditions can throw this balance off. This is called
dysbiosis
.
In auto-brewery syndrome, an overgrowth of
gram-negative bacteria
or yeasts like
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
or
Candida albicans
causes an excess of fermentation in your gut. Many different factors can contribute to gut dysbiosis, but the most significant ones are medications and medical conditions.
Contributing factors may include:
Frequent or long-term use of
antibiotics
Gastrointestinal diseases
that slow down the movement (motility) of your GI tract
Higher blood sugar
than average, providing more fuel for these microbes to ferment
Weakened immune system
due to medical conditions or medications
You aren’t metabolizing ethanol effectively
Even normal, healthy guts produce small amounts of fermentation and alcohol (endogenous ethanol). But not much of it will ever reach your bloodstream. That’s because your
liver
takes the first pass at metabolizing the alcohol in your gut before the leftovers begin to accumulate in your blood.
But certain conditions can affect this first-pass metabolism. Some people have a
genetic variation
that impairs one of the
enzymes
you need to metabolize alcohol in your liver.
Advanced liver disease
can also impair your liver’s ability to metabolize alcohol. These conditions can sometimes contribute to ABS.
Advertisement
Risk factors
You might be more likely to develop auto-brewery syndrome if you have or have had:
A diet high in carbohydrates
Alcohol intolerance
Candidiasis
Cirrhosis of the liver
Diabetes
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease
(MASLD)
Metabolic syndrome
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO)
What are the downstream complications of auto-brewery syndrome?
Auto-brewery syndrome affects your body, brain and life just the way frequent alcohol use would. The potential complications are the same as those for
alcohol use disorder
. Besides interfering with your relationships and job performance, frequent intoxication will affect your mental and physical health.
Complications can include:
Accidents and injuries
Blackouts, assaults and DUIs
Brain damage
Depression
and
suicidal
thoughts
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Liver disease
Can auto-brewery syndrome be fatal?
Alcohol intoxication can be life-threatening at higher levels, when it becomes
alcohol poisoning
. This usually occurs at BAC levels over 0.30. Auto-brewery syndrome can cause these levels of intoxication, though it’s unlikely. Alcohol poisoning is more of a risk for children and people with lower tolerance.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is auto-brewery syndrome diagnosed?
A healthcare provider might suspect auto-brewery syndrome if you:
Have symptoms consistent with alcohol intoxication
Have an elevated blood alcohol content
Haven’t consumed alcohol
Advertisement
They’ll confirm these things through observation, discussion and testing. They’ll ask about your eating and drinking habits, then observe your symptoms and test them repeatedly over a period of time.
Tests might include:
Physical exam
and other routine diagnostics
Blood tests
or breathalyzer tests for blood alcohol content (BAC)
Oral glucose tolerance test to observe your response to carbohydrates
Hydrogen breath test
to identify bacterial overgrowth
Stool test
and culture to identify fungal overgrowth
Endoscopy
to take a fluid sample from your GI tract
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment to fix auto-brewery syndrome?
First-line treatment for auto-brewery syndrome focuses on restoring balance to your gut microbiome. Your healthcare provider will prescribe antibiotics or antifungals to target the overgrowth. Then, they’ll review your diet, reduce carbohydrates and sometimes make other personalized recommendations.
This approach works for most people. But some people with severe dysbiosis might have a harder time rebooting their gut microbiomes. They might need a little extra support, like a personalized nutrition plan, targeted
probiotics
or treatment for other conditions contributing to auto-brewery syndrome.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is auto-brewery syndrome curable?
The treatment approach to auto-brewery syndrome is simple and straightforward, and it’s usually successful. But some people do have a harder time fixing it than others. Treatment also won’t necessarily cure ABS forever. If the conditions that caused it become active again, ABS could return.
Advertisement
Prevention
How can I lower my risk of auto-brewery syndrome?
If you have one or more of the risk factors — conditions that raise your risk of developing auto-brewery syndrome — you might want to
take extra care of your gut health
to help prevent dysbiosis. This begins with eating a good variety of plants and other whole foods, and reducing sweets and starches.
You can also make a point of adding
probiotic and prebiotic foods
to your diet to boost your gut flora, or ask your healthcare provider to
recommend a good probiotic
supplement. This is especially important if you’ve recently taken antibiotics or other medications that may have depleted your gut microbiome.
What foods should you avoid with auto-brewery syndrome?
While living with and recovering from auto-brewery syndrome, your healthcare provider will advise you to cut back on carbohydrates (sugars and starches). These are the foods that feed the yeasts in your gut and provide fuel for fermentation. Reducing them will reduce fermentation and your yeast population.
Foods to avoid include:
White bread
White rice
Potatoes
Pasta
Crackers and chips
Fruit juice
Milk
Anything with added sugar
Can you drive with auto-brewery syndrome?
If you don’t know when symptoms of intoxication are going to pop up, you probably shouldn’t drive. But if you’re aware of your condition and how your eating habits affect it, you might be able to predict the cycle and schedule your driving around it. Hopefully, treatment will eventually make this unnecessary.
Additional Common Questions
What is urinary auto-brewery syndrome (urinary ABS)?
This lesser-known variation of auto-brewery syndrome occurs in your
bladder
instead of in your gut. It’s also called bladder fermentation syndrome. In urinary ABS, fungal overgrowth in your
urinary system
feeds on excess sugars in your urine, producing alcohol in your pee that passes to your bloodstream.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Auto-brewery syndrome is rare, but gut dysbiosis isn’t. Between our highly processed, highly sweetened Standard American Diet and the continuing rise of metabolic diseases, not all of us have a thriving gut microbiome to start with. A simple event, like an illness, might be enough to tip the scales to dysbiosis.
This happens gradually, but you’re likely to notice symptoms along the way. If your digestive system starts to complain on a regular basis, take notice. Our guts can be sensitive, but they’re also resilient. Simple lifestyle adjustments are often enough to restore health and variety to your gut microbiome.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us