Broken Nose: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Broken Nose
Advertisement
Advertisement
Broken Nose
A broken nose is a common facial injury. It happens when you break or crack the bones and cartilage in your nose. A broken nose is an injury that requires immediate medical attention. Without treatment, a broken nose can lead to complications. Treatment ranges from using ice for swelling to surgery to repair your nose.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Facial Trauma Reconstruction Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Broken Nose?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
What Is a Broken Nose?
You may have a broken nose if an injury changes your nose’s appearance, like making it look crooked.
A broken nose (nasal fracture) is when you break or crack bones or damage
cartilage
in your
nose
. It’s a common
facial fracture
. You should get medical care right away if you think you have a broken nose. Prompt treatment may help you avoid permanent damage to your nose.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a broken nose
Broken nose symptoms may include:
Bruising
around your eyes and nose
Crackling or crunching sound when you touch your nose
Crooked nose
Difficulty breathing through your nose
Drainage from your nose
Pain and tenderness
Nasal obstruction (feeling as though something is stuck in your nose)
Nosebleeds
Swelling around your nose
Broken nose causes
A broken nose is a type of blunt force trauma. This is an injury that happens if you’re hit hard by something or someone, or injured in a fall. You may break your nose if you’re:
In a motor vehicle accident
Hit during a physical fight
Hurt while playing sports
Complications of a broken nose
A broken nose may cause a septal
hematoma
. A septal hematoma is blood pooling in your septum. Your septum is the cartilage and bone that separates your nostrils. A septal hematoma can lead to serious issues like:
A hole (perforation) in your septum
Saddle nose
, which happens if the bridge of your nose collapses
Tissue in your nose starting to die (
necrosis
)
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose a broken nose
A healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
. They’ll gently press around the bridge of your nose. They’ll examine the inside of your nose for signs of an obstruction. A provider may do imaging tests like
X-rays
or
CT scans
if they think you may have other facial injuries.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is a broken nose treated?
Treatments range from putting ice on your broken nose to having surgery to repair it. The treatment that’s right for you depends on the severity of your injuries.
Ice or pain relievers
Taking over-the-counter
pain relievers
(like
acetaminophen
or
ibuprofen
) can help with pain. Applying ice packs can help ease swelling and other broken nose symptoms.
Draining a septal hematoma
A healthcare provider may decide to drain your septum within 24 hours after your injury. Draining it reduces the risk of serious complications.
Manual realignment
An injury can knock your nasal bones and cartilage out of place (alignment). Your healthcare provider will gently push your bones and cartilage back into place. They may wait a few days to do a manual alignment procedure. The procedure involves the following steps:
Your provider will numb your nose with local
anesthesia
. In some cases, you may receive general anesthesia if you have severe injuries.
They’ll move your bones and cartilage back where they belong.
They may place gauze packing inside your nose and a dressing on the outside of your nose.
They’ll place a temporary
splint
on your nose.
Your provider may give you
antibiotics
to prevent infection.
You’ll be able to remove the packing and dressing in about two weeks.
Surgery
You may need surgery if you have a severely broken nose, or you can’t breathe through your nose. Surgeries to fix your broken nose include:
Septoplasty
. This procedure reshapes your septum. During septoplasty, a surgeon may remove parts of your bone and cartilage, then reshape and reposition the underlying structures. This repairs any holes or perforations and improves breathing.
Rhinoplasty
. During this procedure, a surgeon creates a new nose shape and removes obstructions. They’ll reduce or rearrange the underlying bone and cartilage.
How long does it take to heal a broken nose?
That depends on your situation. In general, a broken nose heals within six to eight weeks. Your healthcare provider or surgeon will explain how long it’ll take you to recover.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Facial Trauma Reconstruction Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a broken nose?
You may not need anything other than ice and painkillers to treat a broken nose. But you could need treatment or surgery if you have a severe fracture, or your nose is broken in more than one place. That said, you should seek medical care if you think you have a broken nose. Getting treatment right away can reduce your risk of complications.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you have a broken nose, you may want to ask your healthcare provider questions like:
What are my injuries?
What are my treatment options?
When will my swelling go down?
How long will it take for my nose to heal?
What activities should I avoid while my nose heals?
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should contact your provider if:
Your nose still hurts and/or is swollen several weeks after treatment
You can’t breathe through your nose
You should go to the emergency room if:
Your nose starts to bleed or keeps on bleeding after your follow-up treatment
Your nose starts to drain clear, watery fluid that’s not mucus
You develop a severe headache
Prevention
Can a broken nose be prevented?
No, but you can reduce your risk of breaking your nose by:
Being aware of your surroundings to lower your risk of falls
Wearing protective headgear if you play contact sports
Additional Common Questions
How do I sleep with a broken nose?
Swelling from a broken nose can interrupt a good night’s sleep. You can reduce swelling and get more rest by propping your head and shoulders on a stack of pillows. Taking a
decongestant
may help.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may think a broken nose is no big deal. It’s true that a broken nose usually isn’t a medical emergency. But you should visit a healthcare provider right away if you think you may have a broken nose. A provider can check your nose and recommend treatment. Getting treatment early on reduces the risk of complications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Facial injuries can change your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our providers are there to support you through every step of facial trauma reconstruction.
Get Facial Trauma Reconstruction Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment