Medical Assistant: What Do They Do?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Medical Assistant
Advertisement
Advertisement
Medical Assistant
Medical assistants work alongside doctors and behind the scenes to support your medical care. They perform a wide range of tasks like taking your medical history, checking your vital signs and updating your medical records. They receive training through medical assistant programs and often get certified.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is a medical assistant?
A medical assistant is a healthcare professional who works with physicians (doctors) to provide care. Medical assistants typically work in outpatient settings like doctors’ offices and clinics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
You’ve probably interacted with medical assistants at various medical appointments. You can often find them right next to your
primary care physician
(PCP), helping with various tasks. They may also be the first ones to greet you and talk to you about your medical history. Medical assistants often explain procedures and tests to you to help you feel more comfortable with what’s about to happen. They also help maintain your medical records, and they keep your information confidential.
Medical assistants are part of larger healthcare teams that work together to tailor care to your needs.
Medical assistant duties
Medical assistants perform a wide range of clinical and/or administrative duties. The specific duties they do may vary by state because different states have their own laws and regulations.
Clinical duties are those you can see a medical assistant do during your appointment. Administrative duties are often behind the scenes. So, you might not see a medical assistant doing some of these tasks, but all the work they do is vital to the care you receive.
Clinical duties
Examples of clinical duties a medical assistant might do include:
Talking to you about your medical history.
Explaining what your treatments or procedures involve.
Teaching you about
medications
or special diets.
Drawing blood and collecting other samples for lab testing.
Checking your
vital signs
.
Giving you medications or
vaccines
, as your physician directs them to do.
Setting up and performing an
electrocardiogram (EKG)
to check your heart.
Caring for wounds and changing bandages.
Helping your physician as needed during your appointment.
Advertisement
Administrative duties
Examples of administrative duties include:
Welcoming you to the office or clinic.
Updating your medical records.
Answering the phone when you call with questions.
Helping you schedule appointments with your physician.
Arranging for other care you might need, like a lab test or hospital stay.
Doing paperwork related to insurance and billing and helping you understand your coverage.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Additional Common Questions
How do I become a medical assistant?
This is the path most people follow to become a medical assistant:
Earn a high school diploma or equivalent.
Complete a medical assistant program to earn a certificate, diploma, or associate’s degree.
Earn a medical assistant certification by taking an exam.
Recertify every five years by taking an exam or completing continuing education activities.
Some medical assistants complete high school and then gain on-the-job training instead of completing a medical assistant program.
Depending on where you live, you may need a medical assistant license. You can call your state’s licensing agency to learn more about requirements.
Medical assistant programs
A medical assistant program gives you a rigorous education in preparation for a medical assistant career. You can find such programs at many different types of schools, including community colleges and vocational schools.
You’ll learn about many different topics, including:
Human anatomy and physiology.
Pharmacology.
Medical terminology.
First aid.
Medical law and ethics.
Recordkeeping.
Accounting.
You also need to complete a practicum. This is supervised work experience in a healthcare setting. Your practicum gives you on-the-job training that complements your classroom learning.
Accredited medical assistant programs
Accredited medical assistant programs offer a rigorous, high-quality education that employers recognize as official. Two professional organizations in the U.S. evaluate medical assistant programs. They give an accredited status to the programs that meet certain standards. These organizations are:
Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP).
Accrediting Bureau of Health Education Schools (ABHES).
You must graduate from an accredited program to be eligible to take the medical assistant certification exam.
Before you sign up for a medical assistant program, it’s a good idea to check if it’s accredited. The American Association of Medical Assistants offers a list of accredited programs in the U.S.
How long is medical assistant school?
Most medical assistant programs take about one to two years to complete. The exact length varies by program. One-year programs usually lead to a certificate or diploma. Two-year programs usually lead to an associate’s degree.
Advertisement
What is a medical assistant certification?
A medical assistant certification is a professional credential that shows you’re qualified to work in this role. Earning your medical assistant certification makes you a desirable candidate when you’re on the job market. Many jobs prefer or require certification.
How do I become a certified medical assistant?
To become certified, you first need to complete an accredited medical assistant program. Then, you’ll be eligible to take the American Association of Medical Assistants (AAMA) certification exam. Passing this exam earns you the Certified Medical Assistant (AAMA)® credential. Professionals often abbreviate this credential to CMA (AAMA)®.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Have you ever wondered, what does a medical assistant do? Maybe you struck up a conversation with a medical assistant at your last appointment and are curious about what their role involves. Or maybe you’re exploring your own career options. Either way, learning more about this role can help you learn about healthcare more broadly.
Like other healthcare providers, medical assistants work in teams to give you the best possible care. They’re often among the familiar faces you see when you enter your doctor’s office. And there’s a good chance a medical assistant will be by your side during some routine testing, as well as challenging conversations. Don’t hesitate to share your questions or concerns with your medical assistant. They’ll help you get the information you need.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/24/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider