Infantile Spasms: Causes, Symptoms & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Infantile Spasms
Advertisement
Advertisement
Infantile Spasms
Infantile spasms are a form of epilepsy that affects babies under 12 months old. They look like brief tensing or jerking spells that involve your baby’s abdomen (belly), head, neck, arms and/or legs. If you think your baby is having spasms, it’s important to talk to their pediatrician as soon as possible.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy in Children Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Infantile Spasms?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Are Infantile Spasms?
Infantile spasms are
seizures
that look like quick jerks or tensing in your baby’s body. They’re a rare kind of
epilepsy
that usually starts between 3 and 12 months old.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
They may look like a
startle reflex
. Each spasm lasts one to two seconds. They usually repeat every five to 10 seconds. They often happen when your baby wakes up.
When spasms happen along with a specific brain wave pattern on an EEG (called hypsarrhythmia) and
developmental delay
or loss of skills (regression), it’s called West syndrome. Not all babies with spasms have West syndrome, but the two are closely related.
If your baby is experiencing spasms, it’s important to see their healthcare provider as soon as possible.
These seizures aren’t common. There are fewer than
1 case per 1,000
live births in the U.S. each year.
Symptoms and Causes
Infantile spasms signs and symptoms
Infantile spasms might look like:
Sudden stiffening or body tensing
Arching of their back
Bending arms, legs or head forward
Grimacing face
Nodding head (repeatedly)
Pulling their head to one side
Rolling their eyes upward
Twitching chin
These movements often happen in groups or clusters. There are short pauses of five to 10 seconds between each spasm. Sometimes, it only affects one side of your baby’s body. Infantile spasms usually happen just after your baby wakes up. They rarely occur during
sleep
.
After spasms, you might notice:
Crying (not always)
Less social interaction or smiling
Increased fussiness or unusual quietness
Advertisement
Some babies have just a few spasms a day, while others may have up to 100. If you notice even one or two spasms, talk to your child’s doctor right away. If spasms continue for several days or a few weeks, you might notice loss of developmental milestones (like rolling over, sitting, crawling and babbling).
Causes of infantile spasms
An infantile spasm can happen if part of your child’s brain isn’t working as expected, or if there are problems affecting their whole brain. These could include:
An issue with how their body uses energy (metabolic disorders, like
inborn errors of metabolism
and vitamin B6 deficiency)
An
abnormality in genes
, which may be inherited or happen randomly (
genetic conditions
, like Down syndrome,
Aicardi syndrome
,
tuberous sclerosis
,
neurofibromatosis
)
Brain malformations (like
cortical dysplasia
,
lissencephaly
), or abnormal blood vessels (like hemangiomas,
arteriovenous malformations
)
A head injury or lack of blood or oxygen supply to their brain (like
perinatal stroke
or
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
)
A brain infection (like
meningitis
, or infection due to
syphilis
,
Zika virus
,
cytomegalovirus
)
Sometimes, the cause is unknown.
Risk factors for infantile spasms
These factors may increase the chances of your baby developing infantile spasms around the time of birth:
A low birth weight
Birth complications that cause a lack of oxygen to their brain
Very low blood sugar (neonatal
hypoglycemia
)
These may affect your baby after they’re born:
A serious head injury (from an accident or trauma)
Brain infections
Brain tumors
Near drowning (when their brain goes without oxygen for too long)
Complications of infantile spasms
Infantile spasms are a medical emergency. Even a few days or weeks of untreated spasms can rapidly lead to poor growth and development of your child’s brain. It could cause more seizures later in life. This may lead to problems with:
Hearing
Speech
Vision
Writing
Learning and thinking (
intellectual disability
)
Small movements (like using their fingers to grab something)
Large movements (like crawling or walking)
Some cases of infantile spasms are life-threatening.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose infantile spasms
Your child’s provider will ask detailed questions about their symptoms and medical history. They’ll also do a physical exam and offer tests. Sometimes, your child may need to see a specialist, like a pediatric neurologist.
If you can, try to take videos of your child’s symptoms. This can be very helpful and can be sent to your provider even before your appointment. It helps them plan for appropriate testing in a timely manner.
Advertisement
What tests diagnose infantile spasms?
Your child’s provider will order an
electroencephalogram
(EEG) to confirm a diagnosis. An EEG measures your child’s brain’s electrical activity.
They may also order other tests to find the cause. These are usually
blood
, pee or imaging tests that could include:
Genetic tests
Metabolic tests
MRI
At what age do infantile spasms start?
Most cases are diagnosed in children younger than 12 months. The average age is between 4 and 7 months.
When symptoms appear after 12 months, doctors usually call them epileptic spasms. This is just another name for the same condition.
Management and Treatment
Infantile spasms treatment
Treatment may include:
Hormone therapy
: The
adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) is a hormone that helps your body respond to
stress
. Your child will get a synthetic form of ACTH by injection. Another option is
prednisolone
, which is given by mouth.
Antiseizure medication
: Vigabatrin is a medicine taken by mouth (liquid or pill). It helps reduce seizures by affecting their brain’s chemical messaging system. Vigabatrin can affect your child’s vision. Their provider will do regular
eye exams
to check for side effects.
Ketogenic diet
: This high-fat, low-carbohydrate meal plan may help reduce symptoms by changing how your child’s brain uses energy. A doctor and
dietitian
will guide this treatment safely.
Surgery
(rare)
: If brain scans show a specific area of their brain is causing the spasms, surgery may be the treatment of choice if other treatments don’t work. Timely (early) and safe surgery in the hands of an experienced surgical team can make a big difference in the seizure outcome and overall development of your child.
Advertisement
When should I see my child’s healthcare provider?
If you think your baby may be having infantile spasms, talk to their provider right away. It’s important to remember that infantile spasms are a medical emergency.
If your baby has already been diagnosed, they’ll need regular visits to check that the treatment is working. They’ll also need to see their pediatrician for their
wellness visits
, in addition to their specialist visits for therapy and supportive services.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Epilepsy in Children Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Infantile spasms prognosis
Your child’s provider will be able to give you the most accurate outlook. It can vary based on:
The underlying cause
Whether the cause can be treated
How early the spasms were diagnosed and treated
If your baby was meeting developmental milestones before the spasms began
About 6 out of 10 children
with infantile spasms continue to have seizures or developmental challenges as they grow.
The earlier treatment starts, the better the chance for a more positive outcome.
Do children grow out of infantile spasms?
Children need treatment for infantile spasms. It’s not something that goes away on its own. With the right treatment plan, spasms may stop. But the condition can still cause long-term effects.
Getting an early diagnosis and starting treatment quickly can lower the risk of these long-term problems. However, every child’s situation is different, and outcomes can vary.
Advertisement
Infantile spasms life expectancy
Life expectancy can vary. Some children have a normal
lifespan
, especially if treatment begins early. But if a child has serious brain conditions or developmental delays before the spasms start, it may shorten their lifespan.
Again, every child is different, and outcomes don’t always match the statistics. Talk to your child’s provider for guidance specific to your situation.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Caring for a baby with infantile spasms can feel scary, especially when the signs show up suddenly and don’t look like typical seizures.
What matters most is acting quickly. These spasms may seem small, but they’re important signs to see your child’s provider promptly. The sooner your baby gets diagnosed and starts treatment, the better their chances for a favorable outcome.
You know your baby best. If something doesn’t feel right, trust your instincts. Your baby’s care team is here to listen, support you and guide you every step of the way.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Getting help for your child with epilepsy is your top priority. Cleveland Clinic Children’s experts create custom treatment plans to match your child’s needs.
Epilepsy in Children Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/28/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment