Dengue Fever: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Dengue Fever
Advertisement
Advertisement
Dengue Fever
Dengue fever is an illness spread by the bite of mosquitos infected with one of the dengue viruses. Symptoms are usually flu-like but can worsen to severe dengue (dengue hemorrhagic fever), a life-threatening condition. Getting infected a second time increases your risk of serious symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
If you live in or are visiting an area where dengue is common, seek medical attention immediately if you have warning signs of severe dengue. This includes abdominal pain, blood in your vomit or poop, bleeding gums or nose, frequent vomiting or extreme tiredness or restlessness.
What is dengue fever?
Dengue fever is an illness you can get from the bite of a mosquito carrying one of four types of dengue virus (DENV). The virus is most commonly found in tropical and subtropical regions, including Central and South America, Africa, parts of Asia and the Pacific Islands.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Dengue isn’t contagious from person to person except when passed from a pregnant
woman
to their child. Symptoms are usually mild with your first infection, but if you get another infection with a different version of DENV, your risk of severe complications goes up.
Who does dengue fever affect?
Dengue is most commonly found in Central and South America, Africa, parts of Asia and the Pacific Islands. A few parts of the U.S. also have dengue. Those living in or traveling to these regions — more than half the people in the world — are most at risk. Children and those who are elderly are at higher risk for serious illness.
How common is dengue fever?
Research estimates that nearly 400 million people get infected with dengue each year, but most (about 80%) have no symptoms.
Can you be immune to dengue fever?
Yes, you can get immunity to a version of dengue virus once you’ve been infected with it. Because there are at least four versions (strains) of the virus (DENV), this is pretty complicated.
Your immune system has tools it can use to recognize infections and get better at fighting them off. As your body fights a virus, it looks through its toolbox to find out which tool (antibody) it has that can destroy that specific threat.
Antibodies are specific to each harmful invader to your body, fitting to them like a key to a lock. Antibodies grab onto their specific target and your immune system destroys it. Once your body knows how to fight that specific virus, you are unlikely to get sick with it again.
Advertisement
After getting one of the four strains of DENV, you shouldn’t be able to get that one again. But the antibodies for that strain don’t fit other versions quite perfectly. So if you get infected by a different version of DENV later on, it can actually use this imperfect fit to trick your immune system (antibody-dependent enhancement).
The different strain can get caught by the antibody from the first strain you had and get pulled into your cells, but — for reasons not fully understood — it’s not destroyed. It’s then inside your cells without your cells knowing it's harmful. This makes it easier for the virus to infect you and cause more serious illness.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of dengue fever?
Most dengue infections don’t cause symptoms. If you do have symptoms, high fever (104°F/40°C) is typical, along with:
Rash.
Intense pain behind your eyes.
Nausea
or
vomiting
.
Muscle
,
bone
and
joint pain
.
Dengue fever symptoms start to appear four to 10 days after a mosquito bite and can last three to seven days. About 1 in 20 people sick with dengue will develop severe dengue after their initial symptoms begin to fade.
Severe dengue (dengue hemorrhagic fever)
Severe dengue is a life-threatening worsening of dengue symptoms. Warning signs of severe dengue are usually seen 24 to 48 hours after your fever goes away.
Severe dengue is a medical emergency that can be fatal.
If you have dengue or live in an area where dengue is common, go to the nearest ER immediately if you experience any of these symptoms:
Stomach/abdominal pain
.
Frequent vomiting.
Throwing up blood
or blood in your poop (stool).
Nose bleeds
or bleeding gums.
Extreme tiredness, restlessness or irritability.
What causes dengue fever?
Dengue fever is caused by one of four dengue viruses. When a mosquito infected with the dengue virus bites you, the virus can enter your blood and make copies of itself. The virus itself and your immune system’s response can make you feel sick.
The virus can destroy parts of your blood that form clots and give structure to your blood vessels. This, along with certain chemicals that your immune system creates, can make your blood leak out of your vessels and cause internal bleeding. This leads to the life-threatening symptoms of severe dengue.
How does dengue fever spread?
Dengue is spread by Aedes mosquitos, which also carry viruses like Zika and chikungunya. The mosquitos bites someone with dengue fever and then bites someone else, causing them to become infected.
Is dengue fever contagious?
Dengue fever isn’t contagious directly from one person to another like the flu. The only way to get dengue from another person is if a pregnant woman becomes infected. If you’re pregnant and get dengue, you can pass it to your baby during pregnancy or childbirth.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is dengue fever diagnosed?
Dengue fever is diagnosed with a blood test. Your healthcare provider will take a sample of blood through a vein and send it to a lab to look for signs of dengue virus. This may also identify which of the four versions you have. Your provider can use a blood test to look for other viruses that cause similar symptoms.
Management and Treatment
How is dengue fever treated?
There’s no medicine that treats dengue fever. Your healthcare provider will give you recommendations on how to manage your symptoms and if and when you should go to the ER.
How do I manage the symptoms of dengue fever?
Managing your symptoms is the only way to treat dengue fever. Follow your healthcare provider’s recommendations, which may include:
Keeping yourself hydrated by drinking plenty of water and fluids.
Getting as much rest as possible.
Treating pain with
acetaminophen
(like Tylenol®) only.
Do not
take
ibuprofen
(like Advil®) or
aspirin
. This can increase your risk of life-threatening internal bleeding.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have dengue fever?
Most cases of dengue fever don’t have symptoms or the symptoms are mild, but sometimes you can have a more serious case that requires immediate medical attention.
How long does dengue fever last?
Initial symptoms of dengue last three to seven days. Most people begin to feel better after this, but some have life-threatening severe dengue that requires treatment in a medical facility.
Advertisement
Can you survive dengue fever?
Most people recover from dengue fever without any lasting complications. If you have symptoms of dengue fever, you have about a 1 in 20 chance of it worsening to severe dengue. If you have severe dengue and are treated immediately at a hospital or medical facility, you have a greater than 99% chance of recovering.
Complications of dengue fever in pregnancy
If you’re pregnant and have dengue fever, it can cause miscarriage, low birth weight or premature birth. It’s important to take steps to prevent getting dengue during pregnancy to protect yourself and the developing fetus.
Can you get dengue fever multiple times?
Yes. Because there are at least four versions (strains) of the dengue virus, you can get dengue more than once.
You’ll usually become immune to the first strain you get sick with and can’t get it again. But you can get sick with one of the other three strains after that. In fact, you’re more likely to get severely sick if you get dengue more than once.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk of dengue fever?
The best way to reduce your risk of dengue fever is to protect yourself from mosquito bites. Steps include:
Use EPA-registered insect repellents that contain 20% to 30% DEET or other ingredients known to help keep Aedes mosquitos away.
Cover exposed skin outdoors, especially at night when mosquitos are more likely to be around.
Remove standing water (buckets or barrels, bird baths, old tires that may hold rainwater) and fill low spots where water can pool.
Keep mosquitos outside of your home by repairing holes in screens and keeping windows and doors closed if possible.
Use mosquito netting at night in areas where dengue is common.
If you’re pregnant, avoid traveling to areas where dengue is common if possible.
When traveling, be sure to check with the CDC to understand if there are any outbreaks of illness in your destination before you leave.
Advertisement
Two vaccines are available (only one is available in the U.S.). They're recommended for kids living in areas where dengue is common. But adults at higher risk for dengue are sometimes eligible too.
Living With
How do I take care of myself if I’ve had dengue?
If you’ve had dengue before, you’re more likely to become seriously ill if you get a different version of the virus in the future. Talk to your provider about vaccination and take additional precautions to protect yourself from mosquito bites, especially if you live where dengue is common.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you live in or have recently visited an area where dengue is common, contact your healthcare provider if you have any symptoms of dengue. They will give you recommendations on how to take care of yourself and when to seek additional treatment.
When should I go to the ER?
If you have any warning signs of severe dengue, even if your initial symptoms have gotten better, go to the nearest emergency room immediately. Severe dengue can become life-threatening very quickly.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Is the dengue vaccine available to me?
What medicines can I take for my symptoms?
What symptoms should I go to the ER for?
Additional Common Questions
Is dengue deadlier than malaria?
No. While only a small percentage of those infected with either disease die from them, malaria is deadlier than dengue worldwide.
Of an estimated 400 million people worldwide who get dengue every year, about 40,000 die from it (about 0.01%). Of an estimated 271 million people worldwide who get malaria every year, about 627,000 die from it (around 0.3%).
It’s important to remember that any disease can be deadlier in some parts of the world than in others. Children in Africa are disproportionately at risk of dying of malaria, whereas people living in Asia are the most affected by dengue.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Hundreds of millions of people get dengue every year. Even if most cases are mild or even symptomless, the thought of severe dengue can be scary. The word “dengue” may have even come from a word for an evil spirit thought to cause the disease.
Fortunately, you can take steps to reduce your risk of mosquito bites and keep an eye out for the warning signs of severe dengue. If you get sick while traveling, make sure you know where to get emergency medical care. If you get seriously ill with dengue, you’ll most likely recover as long as you get immediate medical treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/06/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment