Retroperitoneal Fibrosis: Ormond’s Disease, Low Urine Output
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Retroperitoneal Fibrosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Retroperitoneal Fibrosis
Retroperitoneal fibrosis (Ormond’s disease) occurs when scar-like tissue develops in the back of your abdomen. The condition can affect your urinary system, kidneys and more. It can cause life-threatening complications. Most people make a full recovery with early diagnosis and treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Retroperitoneal Fibrosis (Ormond’s Disease)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Retroperitoneal Fibrosis (Ormond’s Disease)?
Retroperitoneal fibrosis is a rare disease that causes scar-like tissue. This fibrosis happens on organs in the space behind your abdominal (belly) cavity (retroperitoneum). Inflammation also affects these organs, which include your:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Urinary system
Aorta
Vena cava
Adrenal glands
As fibrosis gets worse, it can surround and squeeze these organs. The most common organs involved in retroperitoneal fibrosis are your two ureters. These take urine from your kidneys to your bladder.
Symptoms like pain and peeing out less urine worsen over time. Your kidneys may also swell.
Symptoms and Causes
Signs and symptoms of retroperitoneal fibrosis
Symptoms vary based on where you have abdominal fibrosis and how bad it is. In the early stages, you may feel pain in your belly, lower back or sides. It may be hard to pinpoint the precise location of the pain. If you have testicles, it’s common to feel pain there, as well.
Other symptoms include:
Difficulty moving your legs
Swelling in your scrotum
Leg swelling, pain or color change
Fatigue
Low urine output
Some people don’t have symptoms.
Retroperitoneal fibrosis causes
Most cases of Ormond’s disease have an unknown cause. This is called idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis. Other times, it comes from:
Medications
Cancer, including Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Fibroinflammatory disorder
Infections like tuberculosis
Radiation therapy
Tissue damage from trauma or surgery
Medications that can cause this condition
Drugs that can cause retroperitoneal fibrosis include:
Beta-blockers
for heart disease, like propranolol, metoprolol and atenolol
Dopamine antagonists
, which treat mental health disorders and nausea
Hydralazine tablets
for high blood pressure
Migraine medications, like
ergotamine tablets
Pain medications (analgesics)
Advertisement
Risk factors
Ormond’s disease often occurs in
males
between 40 and 60 years old. But it can happen in people of all ages and in females.
Other factors that increase your risk include asbestos exposure and tobacco product use. Having both of these can increase your risk even more. Even avoiding one of them can reduce your risk.
Complications of this condition
Advanced fibrosis in your abdomen can lead to:
Kidney failure
Low red blood cell count (anemia)
Inability to pee (anuria)
High blood pressure
Jaundice
Nausea and vomiting
Nervous system issues
Tissue death in your intestines
Unplanned weight loss
Blood clots
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose retroperitoneal fibrosis
Healthcare providers often diagnose this condition using blood tests and imaging studies. Your provider may use these tests:
Physical exam, including pressing on your belly to check for abnormal masses
Blood tests to detect early signs of kidney disease or issues like anemia
Kidney ultrasound
to assess fibrosis, blockage and other issues if symptoms suggest kidney disease
CT scan
, MRI or
nuclear medicine imaging
to measure fibrosis severity and show how well your kidneys are working. Healthcare providers typically prefer CT scan and MRI.
Pyelogram
, a special X-ray of your urinary system, to show a blockage. Providers use this more often during management of a blockage they identify.
You may need a
biopsy
if treatments don’t work or if your provider has concerns about cancer.
Management and Treatment
How is retroperitoneal fibrosis treated?
Treatment includes medicines and surgery. The best care for you depends on the location and extent of the abdominal fibrosis. If your healthcare provider can identify the condition causing this (like cancer), they’ll focus treatment on that condition.
In the early stages of Ormond’s disease, your care may include:
Corticosteroids
: These medicines quickly lower inflammation. This stops the scarring from getting worse.
Immunomodulators
: These drugs change immune system activity. They also lower the risk of future fibrosis episodes. These include medications like methotrexate and rituximab.
Medication management
: If fibrosis is due to medications, your healthcare provider may change the drug or dose.
Other treatments for advanced fibrosis are:
Surgery
: You may need this to remove scar tissue and repair damage to nearby tissue.
Stents
: If you have a blockage in one of your ureters, you may need a provider to put in a small, hollow device (ureteral stent) to keep it open.
Angioplasty
or
stent
placement
: This can treat a blood vessel blockage to improve blood flow.
Recovery time
You may feel better after a few days of corticosteroids. Your kidney function should get better within two weeks of starting the medicine. Recovery from other treatments will take longer. Your provider can tell you more based on your case.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of retroperitoneal fibrosis, like belly pain. People with mild cases need ongoing visits to check for signs that it’s come back. You may get blood tests and imaging tests every three to six months during the first year. Checkups happen less often over time.
You may want to ask your provider:
What’s the best treatment for me?
What can I do to enhance my treatment?
Do you think my condition will return?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
In general, the prognosis (outlook) for retroperitoneal fibrosis is very good with treatment. Many people make a full recovery. Early detection can give you the best chance of successful treatment. But fibrosis can come back months or years after treatment. If steroids helped you the first time, they’re likely to help you again if your condition comes back.
If cancer causes this condition, the prognosis is typically significantly worse.
Prevention
Can retroperitoneal fibrosis be prevented?
Because the condition often happens for no known reason, it’s hard to prevent. But it’s a known complication of certain medicines, especially if you’re taking them long-term. If you’re on these drugs, your healthcare provider will keep a careful watch for fibrosis symptoms.
Can treatment lower my risk of a relapse?
If you need surgery, the procedure may include wrapping a layer of fat around the ureter. This makes it harder for fibrosis in your abdomen to come back.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It can be frustrating to have pain and other symptoms of retroperitoneal fibrosis (Ormond’s disease). On the bright side, treatments work for many people with this condition. Talk to your provider about any questions or concerns you have. They’re there to help you. If you need surgery, it may give you peace of mind to choose a healthcare center that performs a lot of the procedures you need.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your kidneys, you want experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work with you to craft a personalized treatment plan.
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/04/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment