Abdominoperineal Resection (APR): Procedure & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Abdominoperineal Resection (APR Surgery)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Abdominoperineal Resection (APR Surgery)
An abdominoperineal resection (APR) is surgery that removes your sigmoid colon, rectum and anus. Surgeons do this in cases where a tumor is in your lower rectum. The surgery changes how you poop, so you’ll receive a colostomy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Colorectal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Recovery and Outlook
Overview
You may have an abdominal perineal resection (APR) if you have a cancerous tumor in your rectum that’s close to your anus.
What is an abdominoperineal resection?
An abdominoperineal resection (APR) is a type of surgery that your surgeon may do to treat
rectal cancer
. In an APR, your surgeon may remove your anus (butthole), rectum and part of your colon. They’ll also do a permanent
colostomy
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Procedure Details
How should I prepare for an abdominoperineal resection?
An APR is a major surgery. There’s a lot that goes into getting ready for it. Your care team will let you know if you need tests or other appointments before your surgery. Tests may include
blood tests
and imaging tests, like CT scans or MRI scans.
You may have other appointments to meet with your anesthesia team and other healthcare providers. They’ll help make sure you’re ready for surgery. You may meet with other surgeons who may participate in your surgery.
You’ll also meet your ostomy nurse. They’ll explain what an
ostomy
is and how to care for it. They’ll discuss places on your belly where an ostomy may go and pick the spot that’s best for it.
Your care team will explain what you need to do to get ready for surgery. For example, they’ll:
Ask if you smoke, and if you do, they’ll ask you to try
to stop smoking
several weeks before your surgery
Recommend you avoid drinking beverages that contain alcohol
Ask you about the medications you take regularly, including over-the-counter medications and herbal supplements
Ask if you have obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
Having OSA increases your risk of anesthesia complications. If you use a
CPAP
device, they’ll ask you to bring it with you the day of your surgery.
Advertisement
They’ll tell you to start a
clear liquid diet
the day before your surgery and do
bowel prep
the morning of your surgery.
What happens during an abdominoperineal resection?
You’ll receive general
anesthesia
so you’re asleep during surgery. The surgery involves several steps. Your surgeon will:
Make incisions in your belly (small incisions if laparoscopic or robotic surgery, otherwise a single large incision)
Remove part of your
colon
, your
rectum
and your
anus
— these organs share blood vessels, which is why your surgeon will remove all of them at the same time
Remove all lymph nodes that go to your rectum
Close the skin below your rectum, which means you won’t have an opening there
Do a permanent colostomy at the spot chosen before surgery
Your surgery will take several hours.
What are the potential complications of an abdominoperineal resection?
An APR is major surgery with significant potential risks, including death. The risks of the operation can include:
Bleeding
Blood clots in your legs that can travel to your lungs
Damage to nearby tissues
Pneumonia
Infection
Heart attack
Stroke
You may need more surgery to manage complications. You may also have long-term complications, including an infection in your pelvis. You may develop a hernia around the ostomy or in the area where your anus and rectum were located. This is a
perineal hernia
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Colorectal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after an abdominoperineal resection?
You’ll remain in the hospital for several days after your surgery. You’ll have a catheter to drain pee from your bladder. Your care team will remove the catheter after a few days so you can pee on your own. You’ll also have a drainage tube in your belly that your care team will eventually remove. Your team will give you pain medications.
You’ll be able to drink fluids after your surgery. You’ll be able to eat soft foods the day after your surgery. You’ll also be able to get out of bed and walk.
You’ll have one-on-one teaching sessions with your ostomy nurses. They’ll explain
how to care for your new ostomy
. They’ll also give you the supplies you’ll need to take care of it.
You’ll be able to go home once you:
Can eat soft foods
Poop
Manage pain with medication that you can take at home
Feel comfortable caring for your ostomy
You may have a home health nurse who will come to your home to help you with your ostomy.
Your team will understand that you’re receiving a lot of information soon after surgery. You may want to ask a family member or friend to sit in on these information sessions. Don’t hesitate to ask questions or ask your team to repeat any of the steps they’ve shown you.
What is the recovery time?
It takes time to recover from abdominoperineal resection. You’ll continue to eat soft food for several weeks. If you work, it may be a few weeks before you can return. But your return to work depends on how well your surgical wounds heal and the type of work that you do.
Advertisement
You’ll have to avoid some activities during your recovery, including:
Soaking in water, like taking a bath, using a hot tub or swimming — but you’ll be able to shower
Lifting heavy objects for six to eight weeks after your surgery, which reduces the chance you’ll develop a hernia
Driving, at least until you stop taking narcotic pain medications
You should make sure you feel confident that you can drive safely. This includes being able to quickly hit the brakes.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your surgeon if you have the following issues:
Severe belly pain even after you take pain medication
Fever of 101.5 degrees Fahrenheit (38.6 degrees Celsius) or higher
Nausea and vomiting
Constipation or diarrhea
Redness, swelling or pain at the incision sites
Difficulty with your ostomy
A note from Cleveland Clinic
An APR is a major surgery. It leads to major life changes. Take your time to understand what this surgery means for you. Your surgeon will understand that you want to be comfortable with your decision. They and your care team members will take time to explain procedure details and how an APR may affect you. Don’t hesitate to ask for more information about what you can expect.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Some conditions like rectal and colon cancer, Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis may require colorectal surgery. Cleveland Clinic has the expert care you need.
Schedule Colorectal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us