Heart Disease in Women: Risk Factors, Symptoms & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Cardiovascular Disease in Women
Advertisement
Advertisement
Cardiovascular Disease in Women
Cardiovascular disease can be deadly for anyone. But females face unique risks, largely due to differences in anatomy and hormones. They’re more likely to have other heart attack symptoms along with chest pain, and they have a higher chance of developing symptoms from heart failure. Heart-healthy lifestyle changes can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
What is cardiovascular disease (CVD) in women?
Cardiovascular disease
(CVD) affects
women
in unique ways. Sex-specific differences like anatomy,
red blood cell
count and hormones seem to impact a person’s risk factors, symptoms and other aspects of their cardiovascular health.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
CVD is the leading cause of death in the U.S. and around the world. In 2019, CVD caused 1 in 3 global deaths. That’s almost 18 million people who died from CVD that year alone. CVD includes
coronary artery disease
(which most people simply call “heart disease”) and other issues affecting your
heart
or
blood vessels
.
Many people don’t know that
heart disease
is the leading cause of death for females. Yet, research shows it’s a silent killer. One study showed that only 50% of females under age 55 who had a heart attack thought they were at risk prior to the heart attack (even though they had many risk factors). That’s why learning your risk and taking action to reduce it is vital.
How is the cardiovascular system different in women vs. men?
Researchers have found many sex-specific differences in the
cardiovascular system
. These complex differences, often at a microscopic level, can affect how females experience heart disease compared to males. A few examples include:
Anatomy
. Females have smaller blood vessels and
heart chambers
. The walls of their ventricles (pumping chambers) are also thinner.
Blood count
. Females have fewer
red blood cells
. As a result, they can’t take in or carry as much oxygen at any given time.
Cardiovascular adaptations
. Changes in altitude or body position (like quickly standing up after lying down) are more likely to affect females. These changes can lead to
sudden drops in blood pressure
.
Hormones
.
Estrogen
and
progesterone
levels are typically higher in females, while
testosterone
is higher in males. These hormones can impact many aspects of your heart health and overall health.
Advertisement
How does a woman know she has heart disease?
Females usually develop symptoms of cardiovascular disease about 10 years later than males. Many causes and symptoms are the same regardless of your sex. But there are some important sex-based differences you should know about, specifically in relation to
heart attacks
and
heart failure
.
Symptoms of a heart attack in women
Chest pain
or discomfort is the most common symptom for everyone. But females are more likely to have some other type of symptom, in addition to chest pain (or instead of it). Also, they’re at a higher risk of having a
silent heart attack
. This is a heart attack that goes unrecognized as being a heart attack. Females over age 65 are more likely to die from a silent heart attack than males over age 65.
Women have reported many different kinds of symptoms during a heart attack. They may feel pain or discomfort in their
:
Chest (most common)
Left breast
Back or between their shoulder blades
Neck or throat
Jaw or teeth
Arms (one or both)
Shoulders
Legs (one or both)
Women may also have other symptoms like:
Unusual
fatigue
(most common)
Shortness of breath
Feeling dizzy or faint
Feeling hot or flushed
Indigestion
Fast heart rate
Numbness
in their hands or fingers
Nausea
or
vomiting
Loss of appetite
New vision problems
Headache
Coughing
Choking sensation
If you experience any of these symptoms without another known cause — and especially if you have more than one symptom —
call 911 or your local emergency number right
away.
A heart attack damages your heart muscle. Each minute that passes causes more damage. So, don’t wait to make the call.
Early warning signs of a heart attack in women
Many women have early warning signs before a heart attack. These are called prodromal symptoms, and they can happen hours, weeks or even many months before a heart attack. The most common early warning sign of a heart attack is unusual fatigue. If you feel fatigue that isn’t normal for you, or you can’t identify any other reasonable cause for it, call 911.
In addition to fatigue, other early warning signs of a heart attack include:
Feeling anxious
Frequent indigestion
Fast heart rate
Change in thinking or remembering (feeling “off” or foggy)
Loss of appetite
Trouble breathing at night
Trouble sleeping
Tingling in your hands or arms
Numbness or burning in your hands or fingers
Cough
More frequent or more intense headaches
Pain or discomfort in your chest
Discomfort in your jaw or teeth
Weakness or heaviness in your arms
These prodromal symptoms happen off and on, and they may go away on their own. Many people wait to call for help until the symptoms persist or someone notices something is wrong. But don’t delay. Get help as soon as you notice any unusual symptoms.
Advertisement
Heart failure in women
Heart failure is a chronic condition in which your heart can’t pump blood as efficiently as it should. This condition causes fluid buildup in your body (sometimes leading to symptoms like swelling and weight gain) and usually gets worse over time. Heart failure affects both sexes at similar rates. But causes, symptoms and other aspects of a person’s experience may differ based on their sex. Here’s what researchers know:
Diastolic heart failure
(heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction
) is more common among females.
Causes of heart failure in females include
high blood pressure (hypertension)
,
heart valve disease
, diabetes and coronary artery disease. Hypertension and valve disease cause heart failure more often in females. Coronary artery disease is the most common cause among males.
Stress cardiomyopathy (
broken heart syndrome
) as a cause of heart failure is more common among women.
Females face a higher risk of developing symptomatic heart failure following a heart attack.
Compared to males, females with heart failure are more likely to report lower quality of life and
depressive
symptoms.
Symptoms of heart failure in women
Signs and symptoms of heart failure are generally the same for everyone. But research shows females have a higher chance of experiencing:
Advertisement
Shortness of breath with physical activity
Trouble exercising
Swelling (
edema
)
Females usually develop symptoms at an older age and more commonly develop
left bundle branch block
(an irregular heart rhythm that can result from heart failure).
What are the risk factors for heart disease in women?
Traditional risk factors for heart disease, like high cholesterol and high blood pressure (BP), affect everyone, no matter their sex. But research has found that these risk factors have some sex-based differences. Plus, there are some risk factors and diagnoses unique to females.
High cholesterol:
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
is a risk factor for heart disease that applies to everyone. A low level of
HDL cholesterol
(“good” cholesterol) may be more dangerous for females than for males aged 65 and older.
Diabetes mellitus:
Women with
diabetes
are two to four times more likely to develop cardiovascular disease than men with diabetes.
High blood pressure (hypertension):
Women over age 60 are more likely than men to have hypertension but less likely to have it managed. That’s partly due to differences in:
Responses to treatment:
Women are more likely to have adverse drug reactions. Such reactions can make it harder to find and stay with a suitable treatment plan.
Sodium sensitivity
. After menopause, your body is more sensitive to sodium. This means you need to restrict sodium in your diet even more than before to prevent your BP from going up.
Advertisement
Menopause:
Estrogen helps reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease. But natural
menopause
or surgical
removal of your ovaries
causes your estrogen levels to drop. So, you face a higher risk of
blood clots
,
atherosclerosis
and high cholesterol.
Obesity:
You have a higher risk of
obesity
(a
body mass index
, or BMI, greater than 30) when you go through menopause. You’re also more likely to gain abdominal (belly) fat, which research links to a higher risk for heart disease. In the U.S., 2 in 3 women have obesity. Obesity is more dangerous for females than males (64% vs. 46% increased risk of coronary artery disease). Obesity nearly triples the risk for a heart attack among females.
Lack of exercise:
Exercise
seems to help reduce heart disease risk among women more than among men. But 1 in 4 women in the U.S. don’t exercise at all, and only 1 in 4 exercises enough to get the benefits.
Smoking:
Women who
smoke
are more likely to develop cardiovascular disease than men who smoke. They’re also three times more likely to have a heart attack.
Autoimmune diseases:
Women make up about 80% of people diagnosed with
autoimmune diseases
(like
rheumatoid arthritis
and
lupus
) in the U.S. That number rises each year. Autoimmune diseases greatly increase a person’s risk for heart attack,
heart failure
and other cardiovascular problems.
Preeclampsia and pregnancy-associated hypertension:
Preeclampsia
greatly raises your risk of developing hypertension and/or diabetes later in life. It also raises your risk of a stroke. A preeclampsia diagnosis makes a person 75% more likely to die of cardiovascular disease down the road.
Gestational diabetes:
A
gestational diabetes
diagnosis raises your overall lifetime risk of developing diabetes. Gestational diabetes also raises your risk of cardiovascular disease throughout life.
Peripartum (postpartum or pregnancy-associated) cardiomyopathy:
Peripartum cardiomyopathy
is a weakening of your heart that can lead to heart failure. This condition can cause serious complications and death.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS):
PCOS
raises your cardiovascular disease risk. People with PCOS often develop individual risk factors like diabetes, high blood pressure, high cholesterol and
sleep apnea
. Estimates show that up to 5 million people of reproductive age in the U.S. have PCOS.
Oral contraceptive therapy (“the pill”):
Use of “
the pill
” may raise your risk for cardiovascular disease if you have other risk factors like obesity or smoking.
How are testing and treatment for heart disease different for women?
Tests and treatments have some sex-based differences. For example:
Sometimes rather than having a large piece of
plaque
(obstructive coronary artery disease), an artery contains a smooth layer of plaque. This happens more often in females. A
coronary angiogram
can’t always catch this type of plaque. So, if you have symptoms and get tested, the results may come back fine. In this case, you need more tests to identify the cause of your symptoms.
Females are more likely to have
ACE inhibitor
intolerance.
Statins
reduce cholesterol levels for everyone, but females may be more likely to develop side effects. However, true side effects due to statins remain very rare, including in females.
It’s important to talk with your provider about your risks, symptoms, test results and responses to medication. Sex-based differences are sometimes less important than individual differences due to our unique medical histories and social environments.
How can women prevent heart disease?
In general, the most important thing you can do is learn your risk factors so you can work on changing them. The more risk factors you have, the more likely you are to develop heart disease.
You can compare risk factors for heart disease to the risk of getting a flat tire. If you run over one nail, you might get a flat tire after driving for a while. But you can probably make it to the repair shop before the tire is flat. If you drive over three or four nails, you won’t make it to the shop and will need to call for help.
Similarly, if you have one risk factor for heart disease, you might be OK for a while. But the more you have, the higher your odds of running into serious problems sooner rather than later.
To prevent a flat tire, you can drive around sharp objects when you see them. When it comes to heart disease, research shows that 4 out of 5 heart disease cases are preventable. That’s why it’s important to know what puts you at risk and work with your healthcare provider to dodge as many dangers as possible.
Here are some specific things you can do:
Visit your provider for yearly
physical exams
.
Work with your provider to manage your blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar. This may involve taking medications.
Make an exercise plan that works for you. Slowly work up to 150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity exercise (like walking).
Avoid tobacco products and limit
alcohol
.
Follow a
heart-healthy eating plan
.
When it comes to heart-healthy eating, remember these simple steps:
Plan
. Write down your dietary goals and get advice from a healthcare provider or dietitian. Write down all the foods you want to eat more often and those you want to reduce or eliminate.
Pick
. Choose recipes you like and map out your meals for the week. Make a list to take to the store and stick to that list. If you prefer takeout, make your own personal menu of heart-healthy options and only choose from those.
Portion
. Even healthier foods can become unhealthy in large quantities. Keep an eye on your portions.
Enjoy!
Eating a heart-healthy diet can and should be enjoyable. If the recipes you’re using aren’t tasty to you, find new ones. Ask friends for recommendations. And remember that finding a healthy balance is more effective than strict rules or restrictions in the long run. Talk to your provider about ways to enjoy any favorite foods that may not be on the “heart-healthy” list in moderation.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have risk factors for heart disease or a history of heart problems, you’re not alone. More than 18 million adults in the U.S. live with coronary artery disease. And every 40 seconds, someone has a heart attack. These numbers can be startling, but this knowledge also gives you the power to make changes. Research shows that 4 out of 5 heart disease cases can be prevented.
It’s not just up to you, though. Each person lives as part of neighborhoods and communities that influence what they eat, how they exercise and their
stress
level. Individual choices are never the full story. But choices can make a huge difference, especially when supported with the right resources. Talk with your healthcare provider about what you can do to help your heart health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your heart needs some help, the cardiology experts at Cleveland Clinic are here for you. We diagnose and treat the full spectrum of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiology Care
Cardiology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/03/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment