Jaw Cancer: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Jaw Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Jaw Cancer
Jaw cancer includes various tumors that form from the tissue involved in tooth formation (odontogenic tissue). Most types are carcinomas, the most common type of oral (mouth) cancer. Your prognosis (outcome) depends on the type of tumor and how soon you receive treatment. The most common treatments are surgery and radiation therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Head and Neck Cancer
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is jaw cancer?
Jaw cancer is an extremely rare form of
oral (mouth) cancer
. If your healthcare provider finds cancer in your jaw, it likely spread there after starting in a different part of your mouth, like your
tongue
,
salivary glands
, or your
hard
or
soft palate
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Rarely, cancerous (
malignant
) tumors form within your jawbone or from the tissue that’s involved in forming your
teeth
. This tissue is called odontogenic tissue. Unlike benign (noncancerous)
jaw cysts and tumors
, malignant tumors can potentially
spread
to parts of your body outside of your mouth.
This is why it’s important to see a healthcare provider as soon as possible if you’re experiencing symptoms of jaw cancer. Some types of tumors are curable if you catch them early and your provider removes them with surgery.
Types of jaw cancer
Jaw cancer includes various types of
carcinomas
(most common),
sarcomas
and carcinosarcomas. These labels describe the type of tissue where malignant cells start. Most oral cancers (including those that affect your jaw) are
squamous cell carcinomas (SCC)
. SCC starts in the tissue that covers body surfaces (including your mouth) and is responsible for over 90% of oral cancer diagnoses.
The most common jaw cancer types include:
Ameloblastic carcinoma
: A tumor that forms from the tissue that eventually becomes your
tooth enamel
. They’re most common in your lower jaw near your back teeth (molars). They can appear on their own or (less commonly) when a benign ameloblastoma turns malignant.
Clear cell odontogenic carcinoma
: A tumor that usually forms in your lower jaw. It gets its name from the way its cells look under a microscope.
Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma
: An extremely rare tumor, with only 50 cases ever reported in medical research. They can occur on their own or when a jaw cyst calcifies (hardens) and turns malignant.
Osteosarcoma
: A tumor that forms from actual bone. Usually, osteosarcomas form in your long
bones
, like your hip bone. They rarely start in your jawbone.
Primary intraosseous carcinoma
: A tumor that usually forms in the back of your lower jaw. They can form on their own or when a benign cyst turns malignant. Although they form in your jawbone, they arise from the type of cells associated with carcinoma.
Sclerosing odontogenic carcinoma
: An extremely rare tumor, with only 15 cases ever reported in medical research.
Advertisement
How common is jaw cancer?
Jaw cancer is rare. Only 4.5% of SCCs worldwide are
head and neck cancers
, and they rarely start in your jaw. It’s more likely that the cyst or tumor you’re noticing in your jaw or around your teeth is
benign
.
Your provider should check any new growths so you know for sure.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of jaw cancer?
Symptoms aren’t usually noticeable in the early stages. But you may notice changes as the
tumor
grows. Most tumors form on your lower jaw (mandible), but they can appear in your upper jaw (maxilla), too.
Signs and symptoms of jaw cancer include:
A lump or swelling in your jaw (may or may not be painless).
Mouth sores
that hurt, don’t heal or bleed easily.
Red or white patches in your mouth that don’t go away.
Difficulty swallowing (
dysphagia
).
Trouble opening your mouth.
Changes in how your face looks.
Displaced or
loose teeth
.
Misaligned bite
.
Fever
.
What causes jaw cancer?
DNA changes (
genetic mutations
) can cause problems with how cells grow and divide. DNA contains the genetic instructions, or code, that tells cells when to stop growing. Problems with this code can cause cell malfunctions that lead to tumors. Scientists continue to research the specific DNA changes that give rise to the different tumor types associated with jaw cancer.
Sometimes, jaw cancer happens when a benign jaw cyst or tumor turns malignant. More often, though, benign growths in your jaw remain noncancerous.
Your healthcare provider can monitor benign cysts and tumors that may put you at risk of jaw cancer.
Risk factors
You may be more at risk of developing jaw cancer based on your:
Age
: People 55 and over are most likely to get jaw cancer.
Sex
:
Males
have a higher risk.
Tobacco use
: Tobacco use is the biggest risk factor for jaw cancer. Tobacco contains over 60 potentially toxic chemicals that can lead to carcinoma. Exposure to
secondhand smoke
also increases your risk.
Alcohol use
: Drinking
excess amounts of alcohol
is a major risk factor for head and neck cancers. Tobacco use and excess alcohol consumption together make you 30 times more likely to develop oral cancer. This is why it’s essential to quit
smoking
if you do and limit your alcohol intake.
HPV infection
: Cancer-causing strains of
human papillomavirus (HPV)
, especially HPV-16, increase your risk. HPV-related oral cancers are on the rise.
Betel nut chewing
: Betel (areca) nuts contain cancer-causing substances (
carcinogens
). Betel nut chewing is a cultural tradition in some parts of Asia.
A family history of oral cancer
: Having a first-degree biological relative (like a parent, child or sibling) with oral cancer may increase your risk.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is jaw cancer diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will perform a
physical exam
to check for new lumps, swelling or other signs of a tumor. They’ll review your medical history and ask about your symptoms. You may also need
blood tests
to check for tumor-related substances in your blood (
tumor markers
).
Imaging tests allow your provider to see tumors inside your body. These include:
X-rays
.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
.
Computed tomography (CT) scan
.
You’ll also need a
biopsy
. For this test, your provider will remove a tissue sample from the tumor and send it to a lab to test for cancer cells. A biopsy can also help your provider determine how aggressive (fast-growing) jaw cancer is.
Management and Treatment
How is jaw cancer treated?
Most people with jaw cancer need surgery to remove the tumor. You may also need surgery to remove affected tissue from or around your jaw. Surgeries that treat jaw cancer include:
Mandibulectomy
: Removes part of your lower jawbone. A partial mandibulectomy removes a small portion of your jaw. A segmental mandibulectomy removes a bigger portion.
Maxillectomy
: Removes all or part of your upper jawbone.
Your provider will take care to remove enough tissue to get rid of all the
cancer
while sparing healthy tissue. But in some cases, surgery may change your appearance. Here, too, there are treatments that can help. Your provider may recommend
reconstructive surgery
to rebuild your jaw or
dental implants
to replace any teeth removed during surgery.
Advertisement
Depending on the type of jaw cancer, you may need additional
cancer treatments
, including:
Radiation therapy
: Uses a machine that directs high beams of radiation to shrink tumors. You may need radiation therapy as a primary treatment if you’re not healthy enough for surgery. Or you may need radiation after surgery to destroy any remaining cancer cells.
Chemotherapy
: Uses
drugs
to destroy cancer cells. Chemotherapy isn’t a common jaw cancer treatment, but you may need it alongside radiation after surgery.
Palliative care
: Helps manage symptoms and the side effects of cancer treatments. Palliative care can help people with a good prognosis (outlook) and people who are receiving hospice (end-of-life) care. Ask your healthcare provider if they think you’d benefit from palliative care resources.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Head and Neck Cancer
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have jaw cancer?
Currently, the five-year
survival rate
for all oral cancers, including jaw cancer, is 68%. But your outlook depends on the type of jaw tumor. Some malignant tumors that start in your jawbone, like osteosarcoma and primary intraosseous carcinoma, tend to be aggressive. But other types grow more slowly. Early diagnosis and treatment can
cure
them before they have a chance to spread.
Many malignant jaw tumors return after treatment (
recur
). Your healthcare provider will work with you to schedule follow-up appointments to help you stay in
remission
(no signs of cancer). Treating tumors at the first sign of a recurrence can keep jaw cancer at bay.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See your healthcare provider if you notice changes in your
mouth
— like new lumps, sores that won’t heal, or rough spots — that don’t improve within two weeks. New growths are usually signs of a benign condition, but you’ll need to see your provider to be sure.
Regular
dentist
visits can increase your chances of finding a tumor in the early stages (before it causes symptoms). Often, tumors show up on routine
dental X-rays
. Catching it before it spreads or causes issues increases your chance of getting treatments that can get rid of jaw cancer or slow its spread.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask include:
What type of jaw cancer do I have?
What tests will I need to see if it’s spread?
What treatments will I need?
How likely is it that the tumor will return after surgery?
How can I care for myself while I’m recovering from surgery?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
See your healthcare provider immediately if you notice a new lump on your jaw or if you’re experiencing other symptoms of jaw cancer. Most people with mouth tumors — both benign and malignant — need surgery to remove them. With jaw cancer, you may need additional treatments like radiation to keep tumors from returning. Your healthcare provider can explain what treatments will work best based on the type of tumor.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get compassionate head and neck cancer treatment at Cleveland Clinic. Our providers use the latest tools and research to give you the best possible outcome.
Head and Neck Cancer
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/13/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials