Kidney Transplant: Surgery, Purpose, Procedure & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Kidney Transplant
Advertisement
Advertisement
Kidney Transplant
A kidney transplant is a procedure where a new donor kidney is placed in your body. This is typically done to treat kidney failure or chronic kidney disease. Once attached, your new kidney will start to do the job of the failing kidney. The transplanted kidney is usually placed on either the lower right or left side of your abdomen.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Kidney Transplant Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Additional Common Questions
Overview
During a kidney transplant, a donor kidney is placed in your lower abdomen. Your own kidneys aren’t removed unless they’re causing problems.
What is a kidney transplant?
A kidney transplant is a surgery that involves taking a healthy
kidney
from a donor and placing it into a person whose kidney(s) are no longer working properly.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
What’s the difference between a living donor transplant and a deceased donor transplant?
Kidneys for
transplantation
can come from living donors or deceased organ donors.
Living donor transplant
A living donor means your kidney comes from someone who is still alive with healthy kidneys. Common living donors are immediate family members, spouses, partners or friends, but living donors can be almost anyone. Living donor kidney transplants are more successful, with more advantages and with a lower rate of rejection. But, living donors are harder to find, which makes them more rare. A living donor must be older than 18, healthy (with no major medical issues) and pass a medical and psychosocial evaluation.
Deceased donor transplant
A deceased donor kidney comes from someone who has just died of causes that don’t affect the function of their kidney. People who want to be organ donors elect to do so while they’re still alive. In some countries, you “opt-out” of being an organ donor while you’re alive. Permission for donation can also be given by the deceased person’s family after their death. Deceased donor transplants occur more frequently.
Potential
kidney donors
are carefully screened to make sure they’re a match. This helps prevent complications.
Why are kidney transplants done?
Kidney transplants are done to help people with
chronic kidney disease
or end-stage
kidney failure
. When your kidneys can no longer filter waste properly, you’ll need either
dialysis
(which uses a machine to remove waste from your bloodstream) or a kidney transplant.
Advertisement
How common is a kidney transplant?
The number of kidney transplants each year in the U.S. is rising. Surgeons performed more than 25,000 kidney transplants in 2022, which was 3.4% more than 2021.
Treatment Details
What are the kidney transplant requirements?
Each hospital has its own criteria for accepting people as kidney transplant recipients. But in general, candidates for kidney transplant should have:
End-stage renal failure and be on dialysis
Chronic kidney disease with a
glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
less than or equal to 20 mL/min
A full understanding of postoperative instructions and care
Be in good overall physical and mental health with strong social support
Is there an age limit to be evaluated for a kidney transplant?
While there really is no age limit, most facilities accept people who are 17 and older. Kidney transplant evaluation has more to do with meeting the criteria (both as a donor or a recipient) than age.
How many kidney transplants can a person have?
In some cases, people can have two, three or more kidney transplants in their lifetimes. Every person is different. Your healthcare provider can tell you if this is an option for you.
What disqualifies you from getting a kidney transplant?
Kidney transplants are approved on a case-by-case basis. But there are some general factors that could make a person ineligible for a kidney transplant, such as:
A serious health condition
Certain infections
Cancer
or history of cancer
Certain
mental health conditions
Poor social support
A short life expectancy
History of noncompliance with medications and treatment
No matter what your situation, your healthcare provider can determine whether a kidney transplant is a safe treatment option.
What happens during a kidney transplant procedure?
Kidney transplantation involves placing a healthy kidney into your body, where it can perform all of the functions that a failing kidney can’t.
Your new kidney is placed on the lower right or left side of your abdomen where it’s surgically connected to nearby blood vessels. Placing the kidney in this position allows it to be easily connected to blood vessels and your bladder. The vein and artery of your new kidney are attached to your vein and artery. The new kidney’s ureter is attached to your
bladder
to allow urine to pass out of your body.
What happens to my old kidneys?
In most cases, your surgeon will leave your damaged kidneys inside your body. Rarely, people with a history of
polycystic kidney disease
will have their damaged kidneys removed.
How long is kidney transplant surgery?
On average, kidney transplant surgery takes four to six hours to complete.
What happens after a kidney transplant?
Most people spend about three days in the hospital after a kidney transplant. This way, your medical team can keep a close eye on you and make sure you’re recovering well.
Your new transplanted kidney may start working immediately. Or you may need dialysis temporarily until it starts working. This might take several days or weeks.
Advertisement
You’ll also need to start taking
immunosuppressive
medications to keep your immune system from rejecting your new transplanted kidney.
What will my kidney transplant scar look like?
Your scar will be about 2 to 5 inches long, on the right or left side of your lower abdomen.
How long does a kidney transplant last?
How long a kidney transplant lasts can vary from person to person and be based on your overall health. In general, kidneys donated by a living person last longer than kidneys donated by a deceased person. On average, however, transplanted kidneys last approximately 10 years.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Kidney Transplant Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of a kidney transplant?
A successful kidney transplant gives you increased strength, stamina and energy. After transplantation, you should be able to return to a more typical lifestyle and have more control over your daily living. You can have unrestricted food and fluid intake.
If you were dependent on dialysis before the transplant, you’ll have more freedom because you won’t be bound to your dialysis schedules.
Anemia
, a common problem with kidney failure, might be corrected after transplantation. If you have
high blood pressure
, you could be on fewer blood pressure medications after transplantation.
What are the risks of kidney transplants?
The risks of kidney transplantation include those of any surgery. There’s a risk of bleeding, infection or other surgical complications. You also might experience some side effects from the medications, and you could be more prone to infections and certain cancers since the medicine you’ll take after transplantation lowers your body’s
immune system
.
Advertisement
Kidney transplant rejection
Since your body recognizes the new kidney as a foreign object, it’ll try to get rid of it or “reject” it. But you’ll be given medicine to prevent
rejection.
Because of years of experience, research and improved medicines that prevent rejection, kidney transplants are very successful, with few complications after transplantation.
Is a kidney transplant better than dialysis?
While both options have pros and cons, kidney transplant is often the preferred treatment for chronic kidney disease in people who are eligible. This is because lifelong dialysis can be very taxing, and comes with its own risks and side effects. Kidney transplant offers a better quality of life for most people, and studies show that those who have a successful kidney transplant live longer on average compared to those who receive dialysis.
Recovery and Outlook
What is the recovery time after a kidney transplant?
On average, kidney transplant recovery time is about six weeks. This timeline is different for everyone, though. It depends on your overall health and other factors.
What are some things I can do to take care of myself during recovery?
It’s important to closely follow any instructions given by your healthcare provider. Restrictions vary from person to person. Here are some general guidelines:
Avoid lifting heavy objects
for at least eight weeks or longer after surgery. Ask your surgeon about physical limitations during your recovery, including what types of activities are safe for you and when.
Avoid driving for at least six weeks following surgery.
Plan ahead so a friend or family member can help out during this time.
Avoid contact sports.
They might cause injury to your transplanted kidney. If you have doubts about any activity, talk to your healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Are there foods that I should avoid after my kidney transplant?
When it comes to the food and drinks you consume, there are a few tips you should follow:
Stay hydrated
. One of the keys to a successful recovery is staying well-hydrated. You should drink plenty of water — typically 2 liters (about 68 ounces) — per day. It’s also a good idea to limit caffeine. It’s a weak diuretic and contributes to
dehydration
.
Don’t eat raw or undercooked foods
. With your weakened immune system, eating raw or undercooked foods — especially undercooked meat or undercooked eggs — at any time after a transplant puts you at risk of severe illness.
Get plenty of protein
.
Protein is especially helpful because it helps you build muscle and recover lost weight. Your provider or a dietitian can help you figure out how much protein you need.
Avoid grapefruit and grapefruit juice
. These fruits can cause a strong reaction with medications that suppress your immune system.
Don’t take
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS)
. Some very common over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, including
ibuprofen
and
naproxen
, can cause kidney issues. You may also want to avoid taking
antihistamines
and antacids. These medications, and other OTC drugs, can sometimes affect other drugs or change absorption. Talk to your healthcare provider about the safety of these medications and possible alternatives you could try.
Avoid certain vitamins and herbal supplements
.
St. John’s wort
, schisandra, and some herbal teas and other natural supplements interact with transplant medications. You should always discuss any supplements with your provider before using them to make sure they’re safe to use.
Your healthcare provider may recommend other restrictions based on your situation.
How long can a person live with a kidney transplant?
People can live for many years after receiving a transplanted kidney. On average, a kidney from a living donor lasts about 12 to 20 years, while a kidney from a deceased donor lasts about eight to 12 years. Some people receive more than one kidney transplant in their lifetimes.
Can you live a normal life with a kidney transplant?
Yes. Many people lead healthy, fulfilling lives after their kidney transplant. Currently, the one-year kidney transplant survival rate is 95%. The average three- to five-year survival rate is 90%. This means that 9 in 10 people who receive a transplanted kidney will still be alive five years after their surgery.
Survival rates are estimates. They can’t tell you how you’ll respond to treatment or how long you’ll live. To learn more about kidney transplant survival rates, talk to your healthcare provider.
When can I go back to work after my kidney transplant?
Most people return to work within a few months of surgery. But several aspects of the recovery process and the type of job you have can affect when you return.
You’ll need to discuss returning to your job with your surgeon. When the time approaches, your provider will give you a “return to work” letter. This will let your employer know when you may begin working and what limitations you have (if any).
When To Call the Doctor
When should I contact my healthcare provider?
Following your kidney transplant, you’ll see your medical team for regular follow-ups. However, if you experience any of the following symptoms, you should contact your healthcare provider immediately:
A
fever
of 100 degrees Fahrenheit (or 37 degrees Celsius) or higher
New pain or tenderness around your kidney
Swelling (
edema
)
Flu-like symptoms including
chills
,
headaches
,
dizziness
or
nausea
and
vomiting
A noticeable decrease in the amount of pee you produce
Any changes in your health like new or unusual symptoms
Additional Common Questions
What is a preemptive kidney transplant?
A preemptive kidney transplant is when you get a kidney transplant before kidney disease advances to the point you need dialysis. Most transplants occur after a person is already on dialysis, which means their kidneys are already failing. People who have a preemptive kidney transplant get a new kidney while their health is still good, which leads to a better quality of (and potentially longer) life. Plus, you avoid dialysis, which has its own disadvantages.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you have chronic kidney disease or end-stage renal failure, a kidney transplant can eliminate the need for dialysis and give you a fresh beginning. It may feel scary knowing you’re having a life-changing surgery. Try to take comfort in the fact that kidney transplantation is usually successful. Rely on your healthcare team and trust that you’re in great hands.
Before deciding on treatment, be sure to discuss all your options with your healthcare provider. You may also want to explore additional resources provided by organizations like the American Kidney Fund or the National Kidney Foundation. Staying knowledgeable can empower you and help you make well-informed decisions about your health.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your kidney disease has become unmanageable, a kidney transplant could be the life-saving treatment you need. Cleveland Clinic can help make that happen.
Kidney Transplant Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/18/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment