Chagas Disease: Symptoms and Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Chagas Disease (American Trypanosomiasis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chagas Disease (American Trypanosomiasis)
Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis) is a parasitic infection spread by triatomine bugs (“kissing bugs”). Few people have symptoms at first. But over time, parasites can move to your tissues and cause chronic infections, leading to heart and digestive tract damage. Antiparasitics can treat it, but they’re more effective in early stages.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Chagas disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Chagas disease?
Many people have no symptoms of Chagas. Months or years later, it can cause heart or digestive complications.
Chagas disease (also called American trypanosomiasis or “kissing bug disease”) is an illness you get from an infection with the
Trypanosoma cruzi
parasite
. Triatomine bugs (“kissing bugs”) can carry this parasite and spread it through their poop. If a kissing bug bites you, it may poop near the break in your skin, letting the parasite enter your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Chagas disease affects people throughout North, Central and South America.
It’s now endemic
in the United States. This means you can expect to see new cases diagnosed in the U.S. on a regular basis.
The thing about Chagas is that most people don’t know they’re infected. Many people don’t have any symptoms in the initial (acute) phase. But without treatment, most people enter a long-term (chronic) infection phase. Years or even decades later, you can develop severe complications that can affect your
heart
and
digestive system
.
Experts
estimate that about 8 million people worldwide have Chagas disease — and many don’t know they have it. About 280,000 people in the U.S. have the infection.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Chagas disease
Most people don’t have symptoms of the initial infection (acute phase). When they do, the symptoms are often mild. You may have:
Fever
Body aches
Fatigue
Headache
Diarrhea
Vomiting
Redness or
rash
in the bite area, sometimes turning into an ulcer (chagoma)
Severely swollen eyelid (Romañas sign)
Chronic Chagas infection
Without treatment, most people go on to have a chronic infection.
About 30% to 40% of people with Chagas
develop serious complications. Symptoms of complications include:
Chest pain
Heart palpitations
Shortness of breath
Dizziness
Fainting
Fatigue
Difficulty swallowing
Constipation
Heartburn
Bloating
Advertisement
Chagas disease causes
The parasite
Trypanosoma cruzi
(
T. cruzi
) causes Chagas. Kissing bugs carry this parasite in their poop. These bugs tend to live in straw and mud. They feed off the blood of mammals, including humans, often at night when you’re sleeping. Here’s how a kissing bug bite can lead to Chagas:
The bug bites you and starts feeding.
When it feeds, it poops.
The poop (carrying the parasite) can get into the bite wound or your eyes, nose or mouth.
From there, the parasite can get into your bloodstream.
Once you have the infection, the parasites can reproduce and move from your blood to your tissues.
In addition to kissing bug bites, Chagas can spread through:
Vertical transmission
(a fetus or baby may get the infection through the placenta, at birth or through breastfeeding)
Contaminated food
Blood transfusion
or organ transplant (though blood and organ donors are now screened for Chagas)
What are the risk factors?
You might be at higher risk for Chagas disease if you:
Live in or used to live in a home with mud walls, a thatched (straw) roof or limited window screening in rural South America, Central America or Mexico
Live in an area where kissing bug bites are more common
Received a blood transfusion before universal blood screening for American trypanosomiasis began (between 1990 and 2007 for most countries)
Were born to someone who has or once had Chagas disease
Complications of kissing bug disease
Acute Chagas disease can sometimes cause
myocarditis
(heart muscle inflammation) or
meningoencephalitis
(brain inflammation).
These can be life-threatening and require immediate medical attention.
These issues are more common in children or people with compromised immune systems.
Chronic Chagas disease may cause serious or life-threatening complications that affect your heart, brain and digestive tract. You may have to manage these issues for the rest of your life. Chronic Chagas complications include:
Arrhythmia
Cardiac arrest
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Heart failure
Enlarged esophagus
Enlarged colon
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Chagas disease
Healthcare providers diagnose a Chagas infection with a blood test. This looks for antibodies (protective proteins from your immune system) to the parasite. If you have symptoms of heart or digestive issues, you may also need additional tests, including:
Echocardiogram
Electrocardiogram
(EKG/ECG)
X-ray or
CT scan
Heart biopsy
Upper endoscopy
Colonoscopy
Management and Treatment
How is Chagas disease treated?
Providers use
antiparasitic medications
to treat Chagas, including
benznidazole
and
nifurtimox
. These are most effective when used in the acute phase or early in the chronic phase.
If you have complications of chronic Chagas, you might need additional treatments. These could include surgery,
anticoagulants
or
antiarrhythmic medications
.
Advertisement
Side effects of treatment
Benznidazole and nifurtimox can have unpleasant side effects that can keep people from taking them as long as they need to. These include:
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Headaches
Dizziness
Anxiety and depression
Insomnia
Muscle pain
If you have these side effects, tell your provider. It’s important to take your medicine exactly as prescribed to treat this condition.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Talk to your provider if you’ve lived in or visited an area where Chagas is common and:
You have heart or digestive conditions
You want to be screened (including before or during pregnancy)
It might help to ask your provider:
What are my treatment options?
How do I take this medication?
How long will I need to take this medication?
What symptoms should I look out for?
When should I follow up with you?
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of severe illness, including:
Severe headache
Stiff neck
Chest pain
Severe diarrhea or vomiting
Confusion or altered mental state
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have kissing bug disease?
If you treat Chagas early, you have a better chance of getting rid of the parasites before they can cause serious complications. You’ll need to take medications for a month or more.
Antiparasitics may be less effective at curing chronic infections, but they might reduce your risk of severe complications. If you have a chronic infection, you and your provider will need to monitor your health closely to treat any complications as soon as possible. You may need to manage certain health issues for the rest of your life.
Advertisement
What’s the outlook for this condition?
Chagas disease can lead to many different outcomes. A small number of people die from acute Chagas disease. On the other hand, a small number clear the infection without symptoms or treatment.
But most people who aren’t treated develop a chronic infection. Many can live for decades with a chronic infection without having complications. Some end up with life-threatening or long-lasting complications.
Prevention
Can Chagas disease be prevented?
If you live in or visit areas where Chagas disease is common, you can reduce your risk by:
Using insecticide spray around houses and other structures
Making sure buildings and sleeping areas are well-sealed against bugs
Using netting to protect yourself from kissing bugs
Not drinking unpasteurized juices or eating food that could be contaminated with
T. cruzi
or triatomine poop
Consider being screened for Chagas if you’re pregnant or plan to become pregnant and you’ve been in an area where Chagas spreads.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Public health efforts — like screening donated blood, sealing living spaces and using insecticide — have reduced cases of Chagas disease. But many people might still have long-lasting illnesses and be at risk for serious complications.
If you think you could be at risk, talk to a healthcare provider about screening for Chagas disease. It can bring you peace of mind to know one way or another. If need be, a healthcare provider can help you find treatment options and look out for complications.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/28/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment