Osteomalacia: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Osteomalacia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Osteomalacia
Osteomalacia means “soft bones.” A vitamin D deficiency most often leads to this condition. It causes your bones to soften and weaken. In addition to bone pain, you may notice muscle weakness and stiffness. Treatment for osteomalacia usually includes the use of supplements.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Osteoporosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Osteoporosis Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Osteomalacia is a condition in which your bones soften and weaken, causing them to break more easily.
What is osteomalacia?
Osteomalacia is a condition in which your
bones
soften and weaken, causing them to break more easily.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It most often affects adults due to a lack of
vitamin D
. Your body needs vitamin D to absorb
calcium
and
phosphorous
. These minerals help your bones maintain their strength and hardness. Without enough vitamin D, your bones don’t mineralize as they usually would. This leads to bone fragility.
In children, inadequate concentrations of vitamin D may cause a similar condition called
rickets
.
You may not notice osteomalacia at first. But over time, it can cause
bone pain
, usually in the lower half of your body. Eventually, you may feel pain all over your body. Simple movements may hurt. Know that you don’t have to live with this pain. Reach out to a healthcare provider. They can help find the cause and offer treatment options.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of osteomalacia?
The main symptom of osteomalacia is bone pain. It most commonly affects your hips,
pelvis
and legs.
Other osteomalacia symptoms may include:
Bones that break
more easily
Muscle pain
, stiffness and weakness, especially after being active
Difficulty walking or a change in your
gait
Muscle spasms
or cramps, especially in your hands and feet
“Pins-and-needles” feeling (
paresthesia
) in your arms and legs
More frequent
falls
What is the main cause of osteomalacia?
Osteomalacia develops most commonly due to a
vitamin D deficiency
. This is often from not getting enough sunlight. But it may also be from not getting enough
vitamin D from the foods you eat
. Vitamin D is essential for calcium absorption and for maintaining bone health.
Advertisement
Other osteomalacia causes may include:
A digestive condition that leads to
malabsorption
Kidney failure
Liver disease
Antiseizure medications
Certain rare
genetic conditions
What are the risk factors for osteomalacia?
When you’re in sunlight, your
skin
naturally produces vitamin D. Your skin may not produce enough vitamin D if you:
Live in a cold, dark climate
Work inside all day
Wear clothing that covers most of your skin
Have darker skin pigmentation
You may not be getting enough vitamin D from the foods you eat if you:
Don’t consume any
milk products
Follow a
vegetarian
or
vegan diet
Have a condition that causes malabsorption, like
Crohn’s disease
or
celiac disease
Have recently had bariatric surgery, like
gastric bypass surgery
Other people who have a higher risk of osteomalacia include those who:
Have
obesity
Are age 65 and older
Are
pregnant
or
breastfeeding
Diagnosis and Tests
How is osteomalacia diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
and ask about your family and medical history. They’ll also ask questions about your nutrition and activity level.
Your provider will recommend
blood test
s to check your levels of vitamin D,
calcium
and phosphorous. The most significant sign of osteomalacia is low levels of vitamin D. But low calcium or phosphorous levels may also point to osteomalacia.
To confirm a diagnosis, your provider may also check your levels of:
Creatinine
Electrolytes
Alkaline phosphatase
Parathyroid hormone
Other tests may include:
24-hour urine test
to check the amount of calcium in your urine
X-rays
to look for any signs of bone weakening or fractures
Bone mineral density scan
to assess your bone density and monitor for bone loss
Bone
biopsy
to see if you have bone softening
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for osteomalacia?
Osteomalacia treatment includes the use of vitamin D, calcium and/or phosphorus supplements. Your healthcare provider will tell you how much of each of these you need to take. If you have malabsorption issues or recently had bariatric surgery, you may need to take larger doses of vitamin D and calcium.
While supplements should help treat osteomalacia, your symptoms may take several months to improve. Depending on the severity of osteomalacia, you may need to continue taking vitamin D for a long time. If you stop taking it, osteomalacia may return.
People with conditions like liver or kidney failure will need additional treatment and support. Your provider will want to monitor your blood levels regularly. You may need a special form of vitamin D.
Other treatments to relieve or correct osteomalacia symptoms may include:
Advertisement
Getting enough sunlight exposure
Eating more foods with vitamin D and calcium
Wearing braces to reduce or prevent bone irregularities
Surgery to correct bone deformities (in severe cases)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Osteoporosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Osteoporosis Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis (outlook) for someone with osteomalacia?
With early diagnosis and treatment (dietary supplements), most people will start to recover from osteomalacia within a few weeks. But it can still take up to six months for your bones to heal and strengthen again.
Prevention
Can I prevent osteomalacia?
Yes, you can usually prevent osteomalacia by:
Getting enough sunlight
Getting enough vitamin D and calcium from the foods you eat
Depending on where you live and the time of year, you may be able to get enough vitamin D from sunlight alone. People with lighter skin typically need to expose themselves to 10 to 15 minutes of sunshine two to three times per week. People with darker skin usually need more time in the sun. This must be direct sunlight — not through windows or clothing.
Be careful not to spend too much time in the sun without
sunscreen
. Too much sun exposure can increase your risk for
skin cancer
. Ask your healthcare provider about how much time you should spend in the sun.
You won’t be able to get all the vitamin D you need through food alone, but it can help. Some foods naturally contain vitamin D. These include:
Advertisement
Fatty fish like tuna, salmon, sardines and mackerel
Rainbow trout
Red meat
Beef liver
Mushrooms
Egg yolks
Cod liver oil
Other foods are fortified with vitamin D. Talk to your healthcare provider about which sources are best for you. As with anything, you have to weigh the pros and cons of various foods.
If you’re still not getting enough vitamin D through sunlight and food, your provider may recommend a supplement.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
As we age, taking care of our bones becomes even more important. To help maintain your bone health:
Eat an adequate amount of food containing vitamin D and calcium.
Expose yourself to an adequate amount of sunlight.
Maintain a healthy weight for you.
Get
regular physical activity
.
Don’t
smoke
.
If you drink beverages containing
alcohol
, do so in moderation.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have bone pain or any of the other osteomalacia symptoms, reach out to a healthcare provider. They can test your blood levels and determine if this condition is affecting you.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
It may be helpful to ask the following questions:
Are dietary supplements alone enough to treat osteomalacia?
What other treatments do you recommend?
What activities should I avoid while I’m healing?
What types of exercise can help treat or prevent this condition?
What else can I do to prevent osteomalacia from affecting me in the future?
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’ve been experiencing bone pain, especially in the lower part of your body, you may have osteomalacia. You can prevent this condition by making sure you get enough vitamin D, whether through sunlight or from the foods you eat. If your symptoms persist, talk to a healthcare provider. They can determine if a vitamin D deficiency is causing your bone pain. And they can help you get on your way to healthier bones.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
You might have brittle bones, but an osteoporosis diagnosis doesn’t mean you can’t keep having fun in life. Cleveland Clinic is here to help.
Osteoporosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Osteoporosis Treatment for Children
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment