Acne Keloidalis Nuchae: What It Is, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Acne Keloidalis Nuchae
Advertisement
Advertisement
Acne Keloidalis Nuchae
Acne keloidalis nuchae (AKN) is a skin disorder involving inflammation of the hair follicles on your neck and back of your scalp. It causes red patches on your skin, which can develop into papules, plaques, pustules, infections, scarring and hair loss. AKN is most common among men with curly hair.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
Acne keloidalis nuchae starts as red, itchy bumps that may start to look pimple-like after scratching.
What is acne keloidalis nuchae?
Acne keloidalis nuchae (AKN) is a type of folliculitis, which is inflammation of your
hair follicles
. The chronic disorder affects the follicles on the back of your neck and back of your scalp, the skin covering your head where hair grows.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
AKN can cause progressively worsening skin problems in the area, which may lead to scarring and hair loss.
The condition is also called:
Acne keloidalis.
Dermatitis papillaris capillitia.
Folliculitis keloidalis.
Folliculitis keloidalis nuchae.
Folliculitis nuchae.
Keloidal folliculitis.
Sycosis framboesiformis.
Who might get folliculitis keloidalis?
Anyone can develop this type of
folliculitis
. But it’s much more common in men with curly hair. It usually starts after adolescence.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes acne keloidalis nuchae?
Scientists aren’t sure what causes AKN, but some believe it might be due to:
Skin injury from irritation (like a helmet or tight collar) or certain hair-cutting methods, like very close shaves.
Immune reactions in the cells of hair follicles.
Extra androgen hormones or sensitivity to androgen.
How does acne keloidalis nuchae start?
The condition usually begins with red, itchy bumps (papules) or patches of skin. The papules tend to get infected because of scratching, leading to pustules (pockets of pus, almost like
pimples
).
What are the later symptoms of acne keloidalis nuchae?
Over time, AKN progresses to inflamed, thickened and scarred areas of skin (fibrosis,
hypertrophic scars
and keloids). Episodes of inflammation can range from mild to severe.
Symptoms may include:
Crusty feeling on your skin.
Itchiness.
Pain.
Plaques (scaly patches).
Thickening and scarring of your skin and hair follicles.
Tufts of
hair loss
.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How is acne keloidalis nuchae diagnosed?
There aren’t perfect tests to diagnose acne keloidalis nuchae. A healthcare provider can diagnose the condition based on a physical exam of the neck and scalp. The healthcare provider will also ask about:
Symptoms.
When they started.
Whether they’ve changed over time.
What seems to irritate your skin.
Treatments you’ve already tried.
If the diagnosis isn’t clear, your healthcare provider may recommend a
biopsy
. The test takes a small sample of your skin so an expert can look at the cells under a microscope to help diagnose and treat the condition.
If the skin lesions seem to be infected, then your healthcare provider might order a culture. That’s a test to determine the type of infection. A culture can help decide what treatment can clear the infection.
Management and Treatment
How do you get rid of acne keloidalis nuchae?
There isn’t a cure for the condition, so treatment usually involves medications to ease symptoms, such as:
Topical or oral
antibiotics
to treat or prevent bacterial infection.
Retinoids (which come from vitamin A) to improve symptoms.
Steroids
(in creams, pills or injections) to help calm inflammation.
Are there any other acne keloidalis nuchae treatments?
If acne keloidalis nuchae becomes severe, your healthcare provider may suggest surgical excision and
skin grafting
. This involves cutting away damaged portions of skin and replacing them with healthy patches of skin from somewhere else on your body.
Researchers are testing other ways of treating the condition, including laser therapy, phototherapy,
laser hair removal
and radiotherapy (only for cases that are resistant to all other treatments).
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for a person with acne keloidalis nuchae?
AKN is a chronic condition without a cure, so it often lasts a lifetime. The goal of treatment is to manage symptoms, prevent infection and slow the progression of AKN.
Prevention
Can you prevent AKN?
Because scientists don’t yet understand what causes AKN, there aren’t any proven ways to prevent it. Certain measures, like avoiding irritation and close shaving, may reduce symptoms and help prevent AKN development.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Certain strategies may help ease symptoms and prevent infections:
Apply diluted apple cider vinegar or tea tree oil to your skin to prevent infection (mix one part vinegar or tea tree oil with three parts water).
Avoid clothing, hats or haircuts that may irritate your skin.
Clean your skin with antimicrobial cleansers to prevent infection.
Rub aloe on your skin to soothe and cool it.
When should I seek medical attention for acne keloidalis nuchae?
You should talk to your healthcare provider anytime skin problems are bothering you or interfering with your life.
With AKN, your skin is at risk for infection. Seek medical attention if you have any signs, such as:
Fever.
Pus draining from the area.
Swelling or pain that worsens over several days.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Acne keloidalis nuchae (AKN) is a type of folliculitis, or inflammation of your hair follicles. It causes lesions on the skin of your neck and back of your scalp. AKN can worsen over time, leading to scarring and hair loss. Although there isn’t a cure, your healthcare provider can help ease symptoms and prevent infection and progression.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Every day, people see your skin, hair and nails. At Cleveland Clinic, our expert and caring dermatology team will make sure they’re healthy and strong.
Get Dermatology Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/02/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment