Ankle Replacement Surgery: What It Is & Recovery
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Ankle Replacement Surgery
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ankle Replacement Surgery
Ankle replacement surgery (ankle arthroplasty) treats ankle arthritis by replacing damaged parts of your ankle joint with an artificial implant. Your healthcare provider may recommend this procedure if you’ve tried nonsurgical methods and they haven’t relieved your pain and other symptoms. Ankle replacement recovery may take up to a year.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Ankle Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Procedure Details
Recovery and Outlook
Overview
Ankle replacement surgery (ankle arthroplasty) replaces damaged bones and cartilage in your ankle joint with a prosthetic implant.
Ankle replacement surgery (ankle arthroplasty) is a procedure that replaces damaged bones and cartilage in your
ankle joint
with a prosthetic implant. The plastic or metal parts of the artificial implant work together and move like your natural joint. The goal of total ankle replacement is to relieve pain and restore function in people with
ankle arthritis
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most people find relief from
ankle pain
and other symptoms of ankle arthritis with nonsurgical treatments, like medication, physical therapy,
corticosteroid
injections, and braces or
orthotics
. But when the pain doesn’t go away and you aren’t able to use your ankle despite these treatments, your healthcare provider may recommend ankle replacement surgery.
Procedure Details
How do I prepare for ankle arthroplasty?
It’s important to go into surgery and rehabilitation (recovery) with realistic expectations. Talk to members of your care team about how to get ready for the procedure. Knowing what to expect can help you prepare for challenges and plan for recovery. Before surgery, your team may recommend that you:
Quit smoking.
Achieve a healthy weight.
Start physical therapy.
Stop taking certain medications.
Discuss what recovery might look like with your family and friends. Following surgery, you won’t be able to put any weight on your ankle — typically for four to six weeks. During that time, you may have to use a
walker
,
crutches
or a knee scooter. Make a plan for accomplishing daily tasks before your surgery. You may need help grocery shopping, getting up and down stairs, or caring for a pet.
What happens during total ankle replacement?
On the day of your surgery, an
anesthesiologist
will give you general
anesthesia
and a
nerve block
so you don’t feel pain. Another healthcare provider will wrap a tourniquet around your leg to stop the blood flow to your ankle. This helps your
orthopaedic surgeon
see the surgical area clearly. Then, your surgeon will:
Advertisement
Make a cut (incision) in the front or side of your ankle to expose the
joint
.
Remove the degenerative (worn-down) bone and cartilage.
Prepare your joint surface for the new prosthetic pieces.
Insert the implant.
Check the range of motion in your joint.
Close the wound using stitches (sutures) and apply a
cast
or
splint
.
The procedure takes about two to three hours to complete.
Ankle replacement benefits
An ankle replacement surgery helps you regain strength and stability in your ankle. The treatment also preserves your range of motion. The replacement parts articulate, or move together, like your natural joint. This flexibility can allow you to walk normally, with less pain, and return to a more active lifestyle.
Often, providers prefer ankle replacement over another type of
ankle surgery
— an
ankle fusion
(arthrodesis). Fusion surgery permanently joins your ankle bones together, limiting your range of motion. This loss of flexibility can affect the way you walk or cause arthritis to develop in other joints. Talk to your provider about which procedure — ankle replacement surgery or ankle fusion — best fits your unique needs.
Ankle replacement risks
Although rare, ankle arthroplasty can lead to complications. Possible risks of total ankle replacement include:
Blood clots
Infection
Loosening of replacement parts, requiring a procedure to repair
Nerve or blood vessel damage
Problems healing the incision
Wearing down of metal and plastic replacement parts over time
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Ankle Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after ankle replacement surgery?
Ankle replacement is typically an inpatient procedure. That means you’ll stay in the hospital overnight for observation. But for ankle replacement surgery, you’ll usually only spend one night there. Some people may have outpatient surgery, meaning you can go home the same day.
How long is recovery after ankle arthroplasty?
For the first two weeks, you’ll wear a cast or splint to keep your ankle immobilized (unmoving) to help with healing. You’ll need to keep your leg elevated most of the time. You can use crutches or a walker to go short distances. You can also use a knee scooter.
Typically, a healthcare provider will remove your stitches two weeks after surgery. Then, you’ll start to wear a removable boot. At four to six weeks after surgery, you’ll be able to start putting a little weight on your foot. You’ll start physical therapy at this time to help guide your rehabilitation.
At three months, you can start wearing normal shoes and start light activity. You’ll continue physical therapy. Complete ankle replacement recovery can take anywhere from six to 12 months.
Advertisement
Physical therapy after surgery can help you regain mobility in your ankle. Rehabilitation may include:
Gait training to help you stand and walk
Massage to decrease swelling
Strengthening exercises
Stretches for range of motion and flexibility
Weight-bearing activities that get harder over time
Your healthcare provider will have you come in for scans and follow-up visits during your recovery. This extra care can ensure your ankle heals properly.
When should I call my healthcare provider after a total ankle replacement?
Contact your provider if you experience any of the following complications after surgery:
Ankle or foot swelling
Fever
Pus or a lot of blood draining from the incision
Signs of infection
You can reduce your risk of complications after surgery by eating nutritiously and not smoking. Also, make sure to follow all medical instructions. Some people face an increased risk of developing problems after ankle replacement surgery. This group includes people who smoke or have a health condition like diabetes or an autoimmune disorder.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’ve been dealing with ankle pain due to arthritis for a while, you’re likely getting frustrated. You’ve iced it, taken medication and even tried physical therapy, but nothing seems to work. This is when ankle replacement surgery may come into play. Only your healthcare provider can decide if ankle replacement or another surgery is right for you. Make an appointment to talk to them about your options for finding relief.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you need ankle surgery, you want experts by your side to help you through it. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll be with you from start to finish.
Schedule Ankle Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment