Getting a Good Breastfeeding Latch & What To Know About Latch
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Breastfeeding Latch
Advertisement
Advertisement
Breastfeeding Latch
A good breastfeeding latch means your baby’s mouth is wide open and covers most of the bottom part of your areola. Some of the top part of your areola should be visible above your baby’s upper lip. Their chin should rest against your lower breast. A bad, or shallow, latch means your baby is only suckling on your nipple. This causes nipple pain.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Your baby isn’t latched on well if their mouth only covers your nipple. Their mouth should be wide open and cover most of your areola.
What is a breastfeeding latch?
A breastfeeding latch is how your baby’s mouth attaches to your nipple and areola when
breastfeeding
. For a good latch, your baby’s mouth should cover not just your nipple, but also about 1 to 2 inches of your areola asymmetrically. This means your baby takes more of the lower part of your areola into their mouth than the top.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A bad latch typically means that your baby is attaching their mouth only to your nipple. This is also called a shallow latch, and it can make your nipples hurt. Your baby needs to latch onto your breast more deeply, covering your nipple
plus
most of your areola.
Getting a proper breastfeeding latch is important. It allows your baby to remove enough milk to support healthy weight gain. But don’t pressure yourself to have a “perfect latch.” There’s no such thing. What matters is that your baby is removing milk and you’re both comfortable.
How can I get a proper breastfeeding latch?
Follow these steps to get a good latch:
Find a comfortable
breastfeeding position
.
Bring your baby close to you with their ear, shoulder and hip in a straight line.
Make sure your baby is well-supported so you can easily bring them to your breast (and not bring your breast to baby). Try using a breastfeeding pillow. It can also help to put a small stool under your feet so your baby can be closer to your breast without you leaning over.
Grasp your breast just behind the areola with a c-shape hold, almost like you’re holding a sandwich for your baby to eat.
Guide your baby’s mouth toward your nipple. Your nipple should point toward your baby’s nose. Your baby’s chin should rest against the lower part of your breast.
Let your nipple gently tickle your baby’s upper and bottom lip. This will help your baby open their mouth widely. It should look like they’re yawning. When their mouth is wide open, it’s easier for them to get a deeper latch.
Place your breast into your baby’s mouth. Your nipple should aim for the roof of their mouth. This encourages them to latch on to your areola (not just your nipple).
Once your baby latches on, don’t let go of your breast yet. Hold it with your fingers for around 20 seconds. This gives your baby time to begin suckling on their own. Then, let go.
Advertisement
Holding your baby
and
grasping your breast may require some help. This is where your partner or a loved one can step in and (literally) lend a hand. Getting a good latch takes practice. It can feel awkward at first. This is normal. But what may seem like a complex dance will get easier the more you do it.
Signs of a good latch
Your baby is latched on properly for nursing if:
Their mouth is wide open.
Their mouth covers most of the bottom part of your areola. You can see some of your areola above your baby’s upper lip.
Their chin rests against your lower breast.
You don’t feel nipple pain.
Signs of a bad latch
Your baby isn’t latched on properly if:
Their mouth is open just a little.
Their mouth only covers your nipple. You can see most of your areola.
Their chin doesn’t rest against your breast.
You have nipple pain (but there are other possible causes of this, too).
Why is my baby having trouble latching?
Your baby may have a hard time latching on to your breast if:
They were
born early
and don’t yet have the developmental skills to breastfeed
They have a condition like
tongue-tie
or
cleft lip/cleft palate
that affects how they use their tongue or mouth
They have
reflux
They’re overly sleepy
You have
flat or inverted nipples
You have
engorged breasts
and/or an
oversupply of milk
Clearly, lots of the things that affect latch are out of your control. So, be kind and patient with yourself and your baby. If your baby doesn’t latch on right away, it’s OK. Latch difficulties are very common, and they’re not a failure on your part.
A lactation specialist can help you identify what’s affecting your baby’s latch and how to adjust.
Pumping
and bottle feeding your baby is another option, and your lactation specialist can help with this, too.
Should I use a nipple shield to help with latching?
In most cases, the answer is no. A
nipple shield
is a silicone device you wear over your nipple to help your baby latch on. It’s a temporary solution that helps in select situations.
For example, if your baby was using only bottles and never latched to your breast before, a nipple shield can help them transition to direct breastfeeding. Another example is if you have inverted nipples.
If you’re using a nipple shield, you should work closely with a lactation specialist. They’ll make a plan for you to stop using the shield as soon as possible. This is because providers have linked shield use with decreased transfer of milk and
decreased supply
with continued use.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
If you’re having difficulties with getting your baby to latch, don’t give up. And don’t wait to reach out for help. Call a breastfeeding medicine specialist or
lactation consultant
if:
Advertisement
You have pain associated with breastfeeding
Your baby won’t stay latched on, making it difficult or impossible to give them enough milk
Your baby pushes away when trying to latch
You have any questions or concerns about breastfeeding
Your provider will help you work through any issues you’re facing. Breastfeeding has
many benefits
for you and your baby. So, don’t get discouraged if your baby isn’t latching on or nursing as easily as you’d hoped. These are common roadblocks that most people can overcome with a little extra support.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When you want so much for something to work, and it just won’t, you might feel hopeless or defeated. But getting a good latch often takes time and lots of practice. Usually, a few small adjustments to your nursing technique can make a big difference. Lactation specialists are prepared to help you each step of the way.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breastfeeding is natural and rewarding, but it’s not without challenges. Get the support you need at Cleveland Clinic.
Get Breastfeeding Support
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/15/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider