Posterior Urethral Valves (PUV): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Posterior Urethral Valves
Advertisement
Advertisement
Posterior Urethral Valves
A posterior urethral valve is a condition you’re born with where tissue blocks your urethra. This prevents pee from leaving your bladder as it should. The pee can back up and cause damage to your kidneys. Symptoms include difficulty peeing, urinary tract infections and painful urination. Treatment usually removes or destroys the tissue.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
What are posterior urethral valves?
A posterior urethral valve (PUV) is a
birth defect
(congenital disorder) where tissue blocks the tube that pee (urine) travels through to leave your body (
urethra
). This means your
bladder
can’t empty properly, and pee can back up and cause damage to your bladder and
kidneys
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
PUV is a congenital condition, meaning you’re born with it. A healthcare provider might diagnose PUV during pregnancy, shortly after birth or during childhood. It only affects
males
. It’s also called congenital obstructive posterior urethral membrane (COPUM).
Are posterior urethral valves rare?
About 500 babies
born each year have posterior urethral valves. It’s the most common cause of urinary tract blockages in boys.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of posterior urethral valves?
Symptoms of posterior urethral valves can include:
Weak or dribbling stream of pee
Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
Poor weight gain in infants
Painful urination
(dysuria)
Difficulty peeing
Low amniotic fluid (
oligohydramnios
)
Kidney dilation (
hydronephrosis
), seen on
prenatal ultrasound
What causes posterior urethral valves?
Extra tissue in your urethra near your bladder causes posterior urethral valves. It narrows your urethra so pee doesn’t flow through as easily as it should. This happens early in the development of a fetus. But providers aren’t sure what causes the extra tissue to form.
What are the complications of posterior urethral valves?
PUV can lead to:
Pee backing up towards your kidneys (
vesicoureteral reflux/VUR
)
Inability to empty your bladder completely (
urinary retention
)
Kidney swelling
Kidney failure
Diagnosis and Tests
How are posterior urethral valves diagnosed?
Sometimes, a provider diagnoses posterior urethral valves with an ultrasound during pregnancy. At or after birth, a provider might use one or more of these tests to diagnose PUV:
Advertisement
Kidney ultrasound
. An ultrasound can help your provider see any blockages or differences in how your child’s kidneys, bladder and urinary tract look.
Voiding cystourethrogram
. This lets your provider see how well your child’s bladder fills and empties. This will also show the urethra and any areas of narrowing.
Cystoscopy
. Your provider uses a small, flexible tube with a light and a camera at the end to look inside your child’s urinary tract.
Kidney function tests
.
Blood or urine (pee) tests can help to determine how well your child’s kidneys are working.
Management and Treatment
How are posterior urethral valves treated?
Treatment for posterior urethral valves is usually a procedure to remove or destroy the blockage. A provider often does this with
fulguration
— using electricity to destroy the tissue with heat.
Depending on any other issues, a provider may also treat your child with:
Catheterization
to empty their bladder
Urethral dilation
to widen their urethra
Vesicostomy
to treat VUR
Antibiotics
to treat infections
Dialysis
or
kidney transplant
for kidney failure
Bladder relaxants (
antispasmodics
) to make peeing easier
In some rare cases, a specialist may perform surgery on the fetus while you’re still pregnant.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the prognosis (outlook) for posterior urethral valves?
If your child has posterior urethral valves, they’ll probably need blood tests and ultrasounds to monitor their kidney function throughout their lifetime. They may have issues with leaking pee (
urinary incontinence
) either as a child or an adult.
Studies suggest
that about 15% of kids with posterior urethral valves progress to kidney failure.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider right away if your child has symptoms of posterior urethral valves. Left untreated, the condition can cause severe health issues.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
It might be helpful to ask a healthcare provider:
What are the treatment options?
How does this treatment work?
What can I expect during recovery?
How do I care for my child during recovery?
When should we follow up with you?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out your baby has a health condition can be scary. It’s important to remember that there’s nothing you could have done to prevent the condition. And your child’s healthcare providers are there to help you navigate it every step of the way. They can help you know what to expect and what your child’s treatment options are. Make sure to keep all follow-up appointments and don’t hesitate to ask any questions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment