Graves' Disease: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Graves’ Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Graves’ Disease
Graves’ disease is an autoimmune disease that affects your thyroid gland. The gland produces too much thyroid hormone, a condition known as hyperthyroidism. An overactive thyroid causes problems with your heart and bones. Treatments can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Graves’ Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Graves’ Disease?
Graves’ disease is a lifelong (chronic)
autoimmune disease
that causes your
thyroid
to make too much
thyroid hormone
. It happens because your body makes
antibodies
to your thyroid gland.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It’s one of the most common causes of
hyperthyroidism
(overactive thyroid), especially if you have a family history of thyroid problems. Graves’ disease mainly affects your thyroid. But it can also affect your
eyes
and
skin
.
Graves’ disease speeds up your
metabolism
. This can affect several aspects of your health. You may not feel like yourself or even feel out of control of your body. It’s important to get medical treatment if you develop signs of this condition.
Symptoms and Causes
The onset of Graves’ disease symptoms can be gradual or sudden.
Symptoms of Graves’ disease
Symptoms of Graves’ disease (and hyperthyroidism) include:
Heat intolerance
and
excessive sweating
Rapid heartbeat (
tachycardia
)
Shortness of breath (
dyspnea
)
Tremor
(shakiness)
Anxiety
or nervousness
Diarrhea
and/or pooping more frequently
Enlarged thyroid gland (
goiter
)
Hair loss
Insomnia
Light menstrual bleeding or fewer or
absent periods
Thin, warm and moist skin
Weight loss
The onset of Graves’ disease symptoms is usually gradual. It often takes several weeks or months to develop. But sometimes, it develops suddenly over a few days. You may experience some of these symptoms or many at the same time.
See your healthcare provider if you have symptoms. Graves’ disease needs to be treated.
Other symptoms related to Graves’ disease
Graves’ disease can also cause eye issues, like:
Advertisement
Bulging eyes
Double vision
Gritty, irritated eyes
Light sensitivity (
photophobia
)
Pressure or
pain in your eyes
This is called Graves’ orbitopathy or
thyroid eye disease
. About 1 in 3 people with Graves’ disease develop it.
Up to 4% of people with Graves’ disease develop
pretibial myxedema
(Graves’ dermopathy). It causes a lumpy, discolored thickening of your skin — usually on your legs.
About 1% of people with Graves’ disease have thyroid acropachy. This causes
clubbing of your fingers
and toes.
Graves’ disease cause
Graves’ disease happens when something triggers your
immune system
to overproduce an antibody called thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI). TSI attaches to healthy thyroid cells, causing your thyroid to overproduce thyroid hormones.
In
one study
, researchers estimated that your
genes
contribute to 79% of your risk of developing Graves’ disease. This means that Graves’ disease is partially hereditary. The remaining percentage of risk (21%) is due to environmental factors.
Scientists don’t know exactly why your immune system attacks your thyroid. But they think the trigger may happen due to environmental factors, like:
Stress
Pregnancy
and the
postpartum
period
Viruses
and infections
Risk factors
Risk factors for Graves’ disease include:
A biological family history of Graves’ disease
Having another autoimmune condition, like
Type 1 diabetes
or
pernicious anemia
Having
estrogen
as your main sex hormone
Selenium and
vitamin D deficiencies
Smoking
Complications of Graves’ disease
Untreated or undermanaged Graves’ disease increases your risk of the following complications:
Heart problems
. Graves’ disease can cause
atrial fibrillation (Afib)
. This increases your risk of
heart failure
and
stroke
.
Osteoporosis
. This condition makes your bones thinner and less dense. It can lead to repeated
bone fractures
.
Thyroid storm
. This happens when your thyroid releases a bunch of thyroid hormone in a short amount of time. It’s a rare complication that’s life-threatening.
Graves’ disease may also increase your risk of
thyroid cancer
.
Untreated Graves’ disease during pregnancy can be harmful to you and the fetus. It can increase the risk of:
Congestive heart failure
in the
mother
Miscarriage
Preeclampsia
Premature labor
Low birth weight
Infant hyperthyroidism
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose Graves’ disease
Your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. This includes your family history of
thyroid disease
. They’ll also do a
physical exam
.
Advertisement
They may also recommend the following tests to confirm a Graves’ disease diagnosis:
Thyroid blood tests
. These tests check the level of thyroid hormone and
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
in your blood.
Thyroid antibody blood tests
. These tests check for the antibodies linked with Graves’ disease.
Thyroid uptake and scan
. In this test, you swallow a small amount of radioactive iodine. If your thyroid absorbs a lot of the iodine, it can be a sign of Graves’ disease.
Doppler ultrasound
. This test checks for increased blood flow in your thyroid due to Graves’ disease. You may need this test if radioactive iodine uptake isn’t safe due to pregnancy or
breastfeeding
.
Management and Treatment
How is Graves’ disease treated?
Graves’ disease is a lifelong (chronic) condition. But treatments can keep your thyroid hormone levels in check. Medical care may even make the disease temporarily go away (remission).
Treatments for Graves’ disease include:
Beta-blockers
: Beta-blockers, like
propranolol
and
atenolol
, are often the first line of treatment for Graves’ disease. These medications regulate your heart rate until other hyperthyroidism treatments take effect.
Antithyroid medications:
Antithyroid medications, like
methimazole
and
propylthiouracil
, block thyroid hormone production.
Radioiodine therapy
: This therapy slowly destroys thyroid gland cells. As your thyroid gland shrinks, hormone levels return to normal. But you’ll likely eventually develop hypothyroidism.
Surgery:
A
thyroidectomy
involves surgically removing all or part of your thyroid gland.
Advertisement
Radioiodine therapy and thyroidectomy usually lead to
hypothyroidism
(underactive thyroid). If you develop this condition, you’ll need to take thyroid replacement hormone medications for the rest of your life. But hypothyroidism is easier to treat than hyperthyroidism. It causes fewer long-term health problems.
All the Graves’ disease treatment options have benefits and risks. And there’s no agreement in the medical community on which treatment is the best. It’s important to discuss all the options in detail with your provider to make the best choice for you.
Researchers are currently studying
antigen
-specific
immunotherapy
as a treatment for Graves’ disease. Ask your healthcare provider if a
clinical trial
is an option.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll need to see your healthcare provider regularly throughout your life. They’ll make sure your thyroid levels are in check and your treatment plan is working. If you develop any new symptoms, talk to your provider.
If you’re experiencing symptoms of thyroid storm, call 911 (or your local emergency service number) or get to the nearest emergency room (ER) as soon as possible. Thyroid storm is life-threatening.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
If Graves’ disease is properly treated, the
prognosis
(outlook) is generally good. Without treatment, Graves’ disease can cause complications that can affect your overall health or life expectancy.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Getting a new diagnosis can be stressful. The good news is that Graves’ disease is a manageable and treatable condition. If you have symptoms or certain risk factors, like a family history of thyroid disease, contact your healthcare provider. They can recommend some simple tests to see if your thyroid is making too much thyroid hormone.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s experienced healthcare providers treat all kinds of thyroid disorders, including issues that cause hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes