Homocysteine: Function, Levels & Health Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Homocysteine
Advertisement
Advertisement
Homocysteine
Homocysteine is an amino acid. Vitamins B12, B6 and folate break down homocysteine to create other chemicals your body needs. High homocysteine levels may mean you have a vitamin deficiency. Without treatment, elevated homocysteine increases your risks for blood clots, heart disease and stroke.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Function
Conditions and Disorders
Care
Overview
With a high homocysteine level, you could have symptoms of low vitamin B levels.
What is homocysteine?
Homocysteine (Hcy) is an
amino acid
. It’s a chemical in your
blood
that helps create proteins. Vitamin B12, vitamin B6 and vitamin B9 (folate) break down homocysteine to generate other chemicals your body needs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A high level of homocysteine is harmful to the lining in your
artery
walls. It also may cause blockages in your blood vessels that lead to problems like a heart attack or stroke.
Without a healthy amount of homocysteine, you may feel some adverse effects. A
homocysteine test
can tell you how much of this amino acid you have in your blood. It should be five to 15 micromoles per liter (mcmol/L).
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Function
What does homocysteine do?
When it interacts with the
B vitamins
, homocysteine converts to two substances:
Methionine
,
an amino acid and antioxidant that creates proteins
Cysteine
,
an amino acid made from methionine —
cysteine
reduces inflammation, increases communication between immune cells and increases liver health
What causes high homocysteine levels?
High homocysteine levels could mean you have a medical condition. But other factors can affect your homocysteine (Hcy) blood levels, including:
Getting older
Being
male
or reaching
menopause
if you’re female
Using tobacco products
What happens if I have too much homocysteine?
If you have more than 50 mcmol/L, the excess homocysteine (Hcy) may damage the lining of your arteries (blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich blood throughout your body).
Homocysteine can make it easier for
atherosclerosis
(fat and cholesterol buildup) to start. It can also make it worse. High homocysteine levels can also lead to
blood clots
or blood vessel blockages. Artery damage, atherosclerosis and blood clots raise your risk of:
Advertisement
Heart attack
Stroke
Atrial fibrillation
(a type of abnormal heart rhythm)
In a healthy person, homocysteine levels are around five to 15 mcmol/L. Nearly all that homocysteine converts to other proteins. Some people have mild (15 to 30 mcmol/L) or moderate (30 to 100 mcmol/L) levels of homocysteine. More than 100 mcmol/L is a severe level.
Conditions and Disorders
What are the common conditions and disorders that affect homocysteine?
Typically, homocysteine (Hcy) breaks down into other substances, and only small amounts of homocysteine remain in your blood. Some conditions interfere with this process and leave you with high homocysteine levels.
You may have too much homocysteine in your blood if you have:
Chronic kidney disease
Deficiencies (not enough) in vitamins B12, B6 or folate
Dementia
Heart disease
Homocystinuria
(when your body can’t process methionine)
Hypothyroidism
(underactive thyroid)
Osteoporosis
Psoriasis
What are the signs I may need a homocysteine test?
You may need a homocysteine blood test if you have symptoms of a vitamin B deficiency. Common symptoms of vitamin B deficiencies include:
Dizziness
Fatigue
Heart palpitations
Muscle weakness
Skin color changes
Tingling in your feet, arms or hands
Tongue or
mouth sores
Care
How do I lower my homocysteine levels?
If you have high homocysteine levels, your healthcare provider may recommend taking supplements of:
Vitamin B6
Vitamin B12
Folic acid
(the human-made form of folate)
You may also get more of these nutrients by eating foods that contain them. But increasing your vitamin intake alone doesn’t reduce your risk of heart disease. You can lower your risk of heart disease by:
Avoiding tobacco products
Eating foods
low in salt
Being
physically active
at least 150 minutes a week
Managing your
blood pressure
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Homocysteine is an amino acid your body uses. Usually, very little homocysteine stays in your blood. You may be concerned if you have high homocysteine levels, but you can change that. Based on the results of your homocysteine test, your healthcare provider may recommend supplements. They may also suggest that you make changes to your daily habits for better heart and blood vessel health.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/31/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment