Ludwig’s Angina: Symptoms, Signs & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ludwig’s Angina
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ludwig’s Angina
Ludwig angina is a bacterial infection that starts in your mouth. This rare type of cellulitis can spread quickly and make it hard to breathe. Other symptoms include fever, drooling and neck pain. Treatments include antibiotics and surgery to drain the infection. Ludwig angina is a life-threatening emergency that needs immediate medical attention.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is Ludwig’s angina?
Ludwig’s angina (Ludwig angina) is a fast-growing
cellulitis
infection that affects the floor of your
mouth
. Swelling can spread quickly to your
tongue
and
throat
, making it hard for you to breathe.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This type of
bacterial infection
can occur after a mouth injury, but it usually happens because of an
abscessed (infected) tooth
.
Ludwig angina is a medical emergency and requires immediate medical care. Without treatment, it can be fatal.
But early detection and quick medical care can get rid of the infection.
The condition gets its name from German physician Wilhelm Friedrich von Ludwig, who first described it in 1836. “
Angina
” describes any condition that causes severe pain in a specific area of your body.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of Ludwig’s angina?
Ludwig’s angina symptoms can come on suddenly and may include:
Difficulty breathing
Difficulty swallowing
Drooling
Fever
or
chills
Jaw pain
or swelling
Neck pain
, swelling or discoloration
Protruding or swollen tongue
Slurred speech
Tongue tenderness or pain under your tongue
Toothache
Symptoms can get worse quickly. Prompt medical care is key.
Ludwig angina isn’t contagious. If you have it, you can’t pass it to someone else.
What causes Ludwig’s angina?
The most common cause of Ludwig angina is an abscessed lower molar
tooth
. Over
90%
of cases start this way.
Other causes include:
Injury inside your mouth, especially around the back of your lower jaw
Oral surgery
complications
Pericoronitis
(gum inflammation around a
wisdom tooth
)
Advertisement
Bacteria species that commonly cause Ludwig angina are
Streptococcus
,
Staphylococcus
and
Bacteroides
.
Risk factors
You have a higher risk of developing Ludwig angina if you have:
A compromised
immune system
Alcohol use disorder
Cavities
Diabetes
Malnutrition
Oral cancer
Poor
oral hygiene
What are the complications of Ludwig’s angina?
The longer you go without treatment, the more likely it is that you’ll develop complications. They include:
Asphyxiation
(lack of oxygen)
Aspiration pneumonia
(lung infection)
Blocked
airway
Mediastinitis
(infection in your chest)
Sepsis
(life-threatening reaction to an infection)
Septic shock
(last stage of sepsis that involves dangerously low blood pressure)
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Ludwig’s angina diagnosed?
Healthcare providers usually diagnose Ludwig angina during a
physical exam
. They’ll look for swelling around the front of your neck and underneath your jaw. They’ll also check for an
enlarged tongue
and swelling on the floor of your mouth.
Your healthcare provider may run additional tests like:
Bacteria culture test
. This can tell your provider whether the infection has spread to your bloodstream. They’ll need a small sample of your
blood
to run this test.
CT scan
. This imaging test can show your provider the severity of the infection. It can also help them detect abscesses. They’ll only do this test after they’ve treated any breathing issues.
Ultrasound
. This test can help your provider detect
blood clots
and pockets of infection. It can also determine whether the
infection has spread to your bone
.
Management and Treatment
How is Ludwig’s angina treated?
Ludwig angina treatments include:
Opening your airway
. The main goal is to open your airway and give you
oxygen
so you can breathe normally again. Healthcare providers can usually do this by placing a thin, flexible tube (
nasal cannula
) into your
nose
and down your throat.
Medications
. Once your airway is open, your provider will likely give you
antibiotics
through an
IV line
. They may also give you
corticosteroids
to reduce swelling.
Surgery
. In severe cases, healthcare providers may surgically drain the infection. If an infected tooth caused Ludwig angina, you may need to
remove it
.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for people with Ludwig’s angina?
Most people survive Ludwig’s angina today, thanks to the invention of antibiotics. But early detection and treatment are essential. The sooner you get treatment, the better your outlook.
Fatalities from Ludwig angina are rare, but they can happen. About
8%
of people who develop the infection die from the swelling and lack of oxygen.
Prevention
Can Ludwig’s angina be prevented?
You can’t always prevent Ludwig angina. But you can reduce your risk by practicing good oral hygiene and seeing your
dentist
for regular
checkups and cleanings
. It’s important to treat dental infections promptly since they’re the most common cause of Ludwig angina.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Call 911 or go to your local emergency room if you have:
Difficulty breathing or swallowing
Severe pain that’s getting worse
Swelling around your neck or under your jaw
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you’ve received treatment for Ludwig’s angina, here are some questions you might want to ask your healthcare provider:
Why did I get Ludwig’s angina?
How can I lower my risk of infection?
How often should I get dental checkups?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Few things are scarier than feeling like you can’t breathe. Ludwig angina can come on suddenly and spread rapidly. If you start to develop symptoms like neck pain, drooling and fever, tell your healthcare provider right away. With prompt treatment, you can get rid of the infection and make a full recovery.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s oral and maxillofacial surgery experts can help repair problems with your mouth, teeth and jaw with personalized treatment.
Schedule Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/26/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment