Aortoiliac Occlusive Disease (AIOD)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Aortoiliac Occlusive Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Aortoiliac Occlusive Disease
Aortoiliac occlusive disease occurs when plaque builds up in your aorta and iliac arteries. This reduces blood flow to your butt, thighs and calves. You may feel pain in your lower body that starts when you’re active and stops when you rest. Lifestyle changes, medicines, procedures and surgeries can treat the condition and help avoid complications.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Peripheral Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Aortoiliac Occlusive Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Aortoiliac Occlusive Disease?
Aortoiliac occlusive disease (AIOD) is a common form of
peripheral artery disease
. It affects arteries in your belly and pelvic area — specifically, the lower part of your aorta and your iliac arteries.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The typical cause is plaque buildup in these arteries, which limits blood flow to your butt and legs. This can lead to leg pain when you’re active and erectile dysfunction (in
males
). More severe cases can cause leg pain at rest and sores that have trouble healing.
AIOD can sometimes lead to sudden, severe blockages that need treatment right away.
Call 911 or your local emergency number
if you have these leg symptoms:
Severe pain (often the first thing you’ll notice)
Skin that’s paler than normal
Skin that feels cool to the touch
“
Pins and needles
” or numbness
Every minute counts. The longer blood flow is blocked, the more your tissues become damaged. Severe damage can lead to limb loss or death.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of aortoiliac occlusive disease
Some people have no symptoms at all. If you do have AIOD symptoms, they can include:
Intermittent claudication
: This is pain, cramping or fatigue in your butt, thighs or calves that starts when you move around and stops when you rest.
Erectile dysfunction
: Males may have difficulty getting and keeping an erection during sex.
Rest pain
: As AIOD progresses, you may have leg pain when you’re not moving. It may wake you from sleep.
Leg ulcers
: Open sores on your legs and feet that heal slowly or don’t heal are a symptom of severe AIOD.
Advertisement
A common sign that your provider may find in an exam is a missing or weak pulse in your groin area. You may not notice this on your own.
What causes aortoiliac occlusive disease?
Atherosclerosis
is the most common cause of AIOD. This is the gradual buildup of plaque in arteries throughout your body. The plaque narrows the space where blood can flow. With AIOD, affected arteries include your:
Abdominal aorta (below the
renal artery
branches)
Common iliac arteries
External iliac arteries
Together, these arteries are known as the aortoiliac segment — and that’s how this condition gets its name. But many people with AIOD also have plaque in leg arteries, including the
femoral arteries
,
popliteal arteries
and their branches.
Less common causes of aortoiliac occlusive disease include
Takayasu’s arteritis
and radiation to your pelvis. Both can cause inflammation in your artery walls, which reduces blood flow.
Risk factors
Anyone can develop aortoiliac occlusive disease. But the risk is greater if you:
Smoke
Have diabetes, high cholesterol, high blood pressure or chronic kidney disease
Have a history of peripheral artery disease in your biological family
Were diagnosed with atherosclerosis somewhere else in your body, like your coronary arteries or carotid arteries
Your risk also goes up as you age. AIOD is estimated to exist in 15% to 25% of people over age 70. But this may be lower than the actual number, as some people don’t have symptoms.
Complications
Without treatment, aortoiliac occlusive disease can lead to serious complications, like:
Chronic limb-threatening ischemia
: Severe plaque buildup raises your risk of limb loss and death.
Acute limb ischemia
: A blood clot or piece of plaque suddenly blocks blood flow in your artery. This is a life-threatening medical emergency.
Gangrene
: Tissues in your leg or foot start to die from lack of blood flow.
Limb loss
: Severe AIOD can damage your leg so much that it can’t be saved. In this case, you need
surgery
to remove part or all of your leg. Early treatment can help avoid this.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Healthcare providers diagnose aortoiliac occlusive disease through a physical exam and testing. During the exam, they may feel your pulse at various points in your legs and feet. This helps them learn how well blood is reaching your lower body. They’ll also look for sores, changes in skin color and other signs of more advanced disease.
Your healthcare provider may do one or more tests to help diagnose AIOD. These include:
Ankle-brachial index (ABI)
: This test compares the blood pressure in your arms versus your legs. It shows how well your blood is reaching your legs and feet.
CT angiogram
or
MRA
: These imaging tests show your arteries in detail. They can help if an ABI isn’t enough to reach a diagnosis. They’re also useful for planning procedures and surgeries to treat AIOD.
Pulse volume recording
: Like an ABI, this test uses blood pressure cuffs and a small ultrasound to measure the blood volume and its relative speed moving through your legs. This can help find the general location of blockages.
Vascular ultrasound
: This test shows images of your arteries and the blood flow. It can help providers see spots that are narrow or blocked.
Advertisement
Types of this condition
Healthcare providers classify aortoiliac occlusive disease into three types. These are based on the extent of plaque buildup in your arteries, which all connect like branches on a tree:
Type 1
: Plaque is limited to your lower
aorta
and its closest branches (common
iliac arteries
). This is typically the mildest form. Blood can usually reroute to other arteries that aren’t diseased. So, you may have mild symptoms or none at all.
Type 2
: Plaque extends into branches lower in your pelvis, just above your groin.
Type 3
: Plaque extends even farther into arteries in your thigh. This is the most severe type. It can lead to serious blood flow problems that threaten the health of your leg.
Management and Treatment
How is aortoiliac occlusive disease treated?
Treatment for AIOD depends on the severity of your condition. If you have mild or no symptoms, your provider may recommend more conservative treatments, like changes to your habits and taking some medicines. If symptoms disrupt your daily life or you’re at risk of limb loss, you may also need a procedure or surgery to improve blood flow.
Changes to your habits
Quitting smoking
is one of the most important things you can do to manage AIOD (and any form of peripheral artery disease). Smoking harms all of your blood vessels, but
research
shows the aorta and iliac arteries are especially vulnerable. Your healthcare provider can offer resources and may prescribe medicines to help you quit.
Advertisement
Your provider might also recommend:
A heart-healthy diet
: This can help manage diabetes, high blood pressure and high cholesterol.
Supervised exercise therapy
: This isn’t the same as exercising on your own. A healthcare provider makes a plan for you and watches over your sessions. This can help you walk farther without leg pain.
Medications
There’s currently no medicine that specifically reverses or cures AIOD. But your provider may prescribe certain medicines to manage risk factors, slow plaque buildup and reduce symptoms. For example, you may need:
Antihypertensive drugs
to keep your blood pressure at a healthy level
Antiplatelet drugs
to lower your risk of blood clots
Cilostazol
to treat leg pain and help you walk farther
Statins
and other medications to lower your cholesterol
Procedures and surgeries
If other treatments don’t help enough, you may need a procedure or surgery. Options your provider may discuss with you include:
Angioplasty and stenting
: This procedure opens up narrowed arteries so blood can flow through better.
Peripheral artery bypass surgery
: Your surgeon makes a new route for blood to flow around narrow or blocked arteries. Often, this new path starts higher up in your aorta and connects to arteries in one or both of your thighs (
aortobifemoral bypass
).
Endarterectomy
: This surgery removes plaque from your arteries. Surgeons don’t use it as often for AIOD these days, but it can help in some situations.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Your provider will tell you how often you need to come in for follow-up care. Make sure you go to all of your appointments, even if you’re feeling fine. Your provider can do simple tests to check blood flow and make sure your treatments are helping.
Also, call your provider any time you experience new or changing symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Peripheral Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have aortoiliac occlusive disease?
Your outlook depends on many things, including the extent of plaque buildup. People with type 3 AIOD (plaque that extends from their lower aorta into their legs) have a shorter life expectancy than those with type 1. But early treatment can make a big difference. Your healthcare provider will work with you to manage this condition and avoid serious complications.
Additional Common Questions
What is Leriche syndrome?
Leriche syndrome was previously used to describe aortoiliac disease when you have all three of the following symptoms/signs:
Pain, cramping or fatigue in your thigh or butt
Erectile dysfunction
Absent pulse in your groin area (femoral artery)
This syndrome got its name from a French surgeon named René Leriche. His team described this “triad” of symptoms in 1948. Today, it’s more common for providers to use the term “aortoiliac occlusive disease.” That’s because not all people with this disease have this triad of symptoms/signs.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Aortoiliac occlusive disease (OID) might make you avoid things you used to enjoy, like strolling through the park or your favorite museum. The leg pain is real, but it’s easy to assume it’s from something else — not blood flow issues. If you’ve been wondering or waiting, now’s the time to see a healthcare provider.
Your provider can diagnose this common issue with some simple tests. They can also rule out other causes of your leg pain so there’s no more guesswork. The sooner you seek treatment, the more it can help you feel better and avoid complications down the road.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Plaque in your blood vessels can cause tingling, pain and numbness. Cleveland Clinic’s experts treat circulatory problems, including peripheral artery disease.
Peripheral Artery Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/23/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment