Mononeuropathy: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Mononeuropathy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Mononeuropathy
Mononeuropathy is damage to a single peripheral nerve. It can cause symptoms like pain, numbness and muscle weakness. Treatment for mononeuropathy depends on several factors, like the nerve that’s affected, the underlying cause and the severity of damage.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neuropathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is Mononeuropathy?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What is Mononeuropathy?
Mononeuropathy is a type of peripheral neuropathy. Persistent pressure on a nerve typically causes it.
Mononeuropathy is damage to a single
nerve
that causes issues like
pain
, abnormal sensations (
paresthesia
) and/or movement issues. Mononeuropathy is a type of
peripheral neuropathy
— it happens to nerves in your body that are outside of your brain and spinal cord.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Persistent pressure on a nerve typically causes mononeuropathy, often due to an injury or
inflammation
. Damage can happen to the protective covering of the nerve (
myelin sheath
) or part of the nerve cell (the axon), slowing or preventing signals from traveling through it.
Types
Technically, any individual nerve in your body can experience damage, leading to mononeuropathy. But it’s more likely to happen to nerves that run close to your
skin
or near a
bone
. Many of these types of mononeuropathy have their own name. Mononeuropathy can affect:
The
median nerve
in your wrist (
carpal tunnel syndrome
)
The
sciatic nerve
that runs through your pelvis down the back of your leg (
sciatica
)
The
ulnar nerve
in your elbow (
ulnar nerve entrapment
)
The
radial nerve
in your upper arm (
radial tunnel syndrome
)
The
ulnar nerve
in your arm (
ulnar nerve entrapment
,
cubital tunnel syndrome
or Guyon’s canal syndrome)
The
peroneal nerve
, just below your knee
The
axillary nerve
in your shoulder
The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve in your thigh
Another group of mononeuropathies is cranial mononeuropathies. They affect the 12
cranial nerves
that come directly from your
brain
or
brainstem
.
Bell’s palsy
is one example. It affects the
facial nerve
(seventh cranial nerve) in your face.
Advertisement
You can also develop multiple mononeuropathies. This happens when you have damage to two or more nerves at the same time in different parts of your body.
Certain forms of mononeuropathy are common. For example:
Sciatica affects about 40% of people in the U.S. at some point in their lives.
About 1 in 60 people in the U.S. will get Bell’s palsy at some point in their lives.
Around 3 out of every 1,000 people in the U.S. experience carpal tunnel syndrome each year.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of mononeuropathy
Symptoms of mononeuropathy vary depending on the affected nerve. The most common symptoms are:
Numbness
in the affected area
Pain or a burning sensation
A feeling of “pins and needles”
Muscle weakness in the affected area, which may result in
muscle atrophy
(loss of muscle bulk/size)
You should see a healthcare provider if you experience any of these symptoms.
Untreated mononeuropathy can lead to:
Chronic pain
Loss of sensation
Permanent weakness or
paralysis
Mononeuropathy causes
Several situations and conditions can cause mononeuropathy, including:
Injuries
Compression
Health conditions
Injuries
Direct injury to a nerve is the most common cause of mononeuropathy. This can happen through:
Repetitive motions (
repetitive strain injuries
)
Overextension of a joint
Sustained forceful muscle contractions (like tightly gripping a tool)
Bone fractures
that damage a nerve
Trauma to a nerve, like from a knife wound or surgery
Radiation therapy
for cancer
Nerve compression
Any of the following conditions or situations can result in nerve compression (squeezing), leading to mononeuropathy:
A
tumor
Excessive swelling (
edema
)
A poorly fitted
cast
Using
crutches
Prolonged cramped postures (like while you’re gardening)
Being confined to a bed or a single position
Health conditions
Certain health conditions can cause mononeuropathy, though they’re more likely to affect several nerves at once, not just one. Examples of health conditions that can cause mononeuropathy include:
Alcohol use disorder
Autoimmune
and inflammatory conditions, like
lupus
and
rheumatoid arthritis
Certain infections, like
HIV
and
shingles
Diabetes
Vitamin and nutrient deficiencies
Diagnosis and Tests
How is mononeuropathy diagnosed?
In most cases, healthcare providers can diagnose mononeuropathy by:
Asking about your symptoms
Reviewing your medical history
Doing a
physical exam
and a
neurological exam
But because mononeuropathy has several possible causes, your provider may recommend additional testing if the cause isn’t obvious or if your symptoms are severe. Tests that can help confirm the diagnosis and/or find the underlying cause include:
EMG (electromyography)
Nerve conduction study
Blood tests
Imaging tests, like an
ultrasound
, an
MRI scan
or a
CT scan
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for mononeuropathy?
Treatment for mononeuropathy depends on several factors, like:
The affected nerve
The cause
The severity
Your symptoms
Your healthcare provider will recommend treatments based on your unique situation. Some examples of treatment include:
Conservative treatment, like rest and taking medicines for pain management
Splints to immobilize the area
Steroid injections
Physical therapy
Treatment of any associated underlying medical condition
Surgery to relieve pressure if the other treatments don’t work
When should I see my healthcare provider?
It’s important to see a healthcare provider if you experience symptoms of mononeuropathy, like pain, numbness and/or muscle weakness. The sooner you can get treatment, the better the outcome.
If you have a mononeuropathy diagnosis and your symptoms get worse or change, talk to your provider.
It may be helpful to ask your provider the following questions:
What type of mononeuropathy do I have?
What caused it?
What are my treatment options? What do you recommend?
How long will it take to recover from this?
Will I have complete or partial recovery?
How can I prevent this type of mononeuropathy from happening again?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neuropathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for someone with mononeuropathy?
The prognosis (outlook) for someone with mononeuropathy varies based on several factors, like the nerve that’s affected, the underlying cause and the severity of the nerve damage.
Advertisement
This condition can be painful and affect your ability to do everyday tasks. Some people experience long-lasting symptoms of mononeuropathy. But if your healthcare provider can find the cause of it and treatment is successful, mononeuropathy can be temporary.
Additional Common Questions
What’s the difference between mononeuropathy and polyneuropathy?
Polyneuropathy happens when many nerves throughout your body malfunction at the same time. One example of acute (sudden) polyneuropathy is
Guillain-Barré syndrome
.
Mononeuropathy is damage to a single nerve in your body. Sometimes, it’s difficult for healthcare providers to distinguish multiple mononeuropathy from polyneuropathy.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may know mononeuropathy by some of its other names, like carpal tunnel syndrome, Bell’s palsy and sciatica. It’s just a fancy name for damage to one nerve. It’s important to see a healthcare provider if you develop symptoms of this condition, like pain or numbness. The sooner you can get treatment, the better.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Neuropathy, or nerve pain, can make daily life challenging. We can treat the causes of nerve pain and get you back to living life as pain-free as possible.
Neuropathy Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment