Hip Arthritis: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment Options
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hip Arthritis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hip Arthritis
Hip arthritis is usually osteoarthritis, a degenerative disease that affects the cartilage in your joint. Sometimes, rheumatic (inflammatory) arthritis can also affect your hip. Exercise and lifestyle changes are essential to managing arthritis pain and maintaining your mobility. Medications and surgery can help when these are no longer enough.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Overview
In hip arthritis, the cartilage that cushions the joint wears away.
What is hip arthritis?
Hip arthritis is pain and stiffness in your
hip joint
, related to the soft tissues in the joint. It usually affects the
cartilage
that cushions your
joint
, and sometimes the
synovial membrane
that lubricates it.
Arthritis
causes inflammation and swelling in these tissues, or it wears them down, or both. If they wear down, your joint won’t have enough padding or lubrication when it moves.
Swelling
may make the joint stiff.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Are there different types of hip arthritis?
Most of the time, arthritis of the hip is
osteoarthritis,
which is simple wear and tear on the joint. Less commonly, inflammatory types of arthritis may affect your hips — like rheumatoid arthritis. This is a different type of disease. Typically,
inflammatory arthritis
will affect many parts of your body at once, not just large joints like your hips. Besides
joint pain
, these conditions often cause other symptoms, too.
Types of inflammatory arthritis that may affect your hip include:
Rheumatoid arthritis
.
Spondyloarthritis
.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
.
Gout
.
Pseudogout
.
Septic arthritis
.
Lupus
-related arthritis.
Lyme disease
-related arthritis.
Osteoarthritis affects the majority of people older than 55, and the hip joint is the
second most common
joint that osteoarthritis affects. Osteoarthritis of the hip may affect
up to 25%
of people older than 55. The average age for developing it is 65. Inflammatory types of arthritis are more likely to appear earlier.
Symptoms and Causes
What are hip arthritis symptoms?
Arthritis in your hip can cause:
Pain and stiffness when your hip joint moves.
Limited range of motion of your hip.
Difficulty bending at the waist or
walking with a limp
.
A grinding or locking sensation when you move your hip.
A crackling or clicking sound when it moves, called crepitus.
Advertisement
Do you always feel hip arthritis pain in your hip?
You might feel hip arthritis pain in areas surrounding your hip joint. This is called
referred pain
. Sometimes, it seems to move from one area to another. Many people feel hip arthritis pain in their:
Groin
.
Thigh.
Buttocks.
Knee
.
Will I get hip arthritis in both hips?
Osteoarthritis often affects just one hip at a time. Inflammatory arthritis often affects both hips, and other joints besides. If you have osteoarthritis in one hip, you won’t necessarily get it in the other.
What causes hip arthritis?
Osteoarthritis of the hip is mostly the result of normal wear and tear on your hip joint. Our hips bear a lot of weight and stress throughout our lives from normal activities like walking, sitting down and standing up. As we age, it’s common for the cartilage in our hip joints to start to wear down.
But some people do have more wear and tear on their joints than others, and at earlier ages. Lifestyle factors, genetic factors, injuries and diseases may contribute to wearing down the cartilage in your joint sooner. These factors can increase your risk of developing hip arthritis over your lifetime.
Risk factors for developing osteoarthritis of the hip include:
Increasing age.
Occupations or sports that put repetitive stress on your hip joint.
Carrying extra weight on your body when you walk.
Previous injury or surgery in your hip joint (
post-traumatic arthritis
).
Poorly aligned hip joint (
hip dysplasia
or
hip impingement
).
Family history of osteoarthritis.
Inflammatory arthritis isn’t due to wear and tear, although the inflammation can trigger degenerative changes in your joints. Most inflammatory conditions are
autoimmune disorders
. This means that your
immune system
malfunctions and attacks your own tissues, triggering inflammation in your joints.
Risk factors for developing inflammatory arthritis include:
Certain
genetic mutations
.
Certain autoimmune
antibodies
.
Family or personal history of autoimmune disease.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hip arthritis diagnosed?
Diagnosing hip arthritis begins with a survey of your symptoms and a
physical examination
of your hip joint. A healthcare provider will test your range of motion and your pain levels and observe how you walk. Then, they’ll take
X-rays
to look for signs of swelling, erosion or other degenerative changes in your joint. If they suspect inflammatory arthritis, you might have
blood tests
to check for certain indicators.
Management and Treatment
What’s the best treatment for hip arthritis?
The best treatment for hip arthritis depends on the type and how severe it is. Regardless of the type, healthcare providers usually start by recommending conservative therapies and lifestyle changes.
Conservative treatment for hip arthritis includes:
Lifestyle modifications
to reduce stress on your hip joint, like
losing weight
, changing jobs or stopping certain activities. You might benefit from using an assistive walking device, like a
cane
.
Heat/cold therapy
. Both
heat and cold can reduce arthritis pain
in different ways. Ice packs or gel packs are helpful for reducing inflammation. Heat pads or baths can help relax a stiff joint.
Physical therapy
. Gentle exercise is important for maintaining your joint flexibility and strength, especially when you’re reducing other activities. A
physical therapist
can help advise you.
Over-the-counter
pain relievers
,
especially
NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), which reduce both inflammation and pain.
Topical pain relief
products can also be helpful.
Advertisement
As arthritis progresses, your provider might suggest therapeutic
injections
or medications to slow it down.
Prescription treatments for hip arthritis include:
Cortisone shots
. Steroid injections provide powerful, temporary pain relief and inflammation control directly to your hip. They’re a standard treatment for inflammatory hip arthritis.
Platelet-rich plasma injections
. PRP is an alternative pain relief option and a standard treatment for osteoarthritis. Studies suggest it may help stimulate your cartilage to repair itself.
Oral corticosteroids
. Steroids are anti-inflammatory drugs that work by suppressing your immune system. They’re a standard treatment for inflammatory types of arthritis.
DMARDS
. Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs are a group of medications that treat inflammatory types of arthritis. They reduce inflammation throughout your body.
When other treatments are no longer effective,
joint replacement surgery
can offer relief.
Surgical treatments for hip arthritis include:
Hip resurfacing
. A surgeon trims damaged bone and cartilage from the ball and socket of your hip joint and replaces the surfaces with a metal cap and shell. These surfaces move against each other without friction or pain.
Total hip replacement
. This procedure replaces your hip socket and the head of your
femur
bone with a
prosthesis
, which commonly lasts several decades.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is hip arthritis curable?
There’s no
cure
for osteoarthritis, but conservative treatments can help manage the symptoms. When conservative treatments fail, hip replacement surgery can reliably eliminate the symptoms of hip osteoarthritis. Depending on your age, your hip replacement may last the rest of your life. Younger people may need another surgery after several decades, as the prosthesis wears out over time.
What worsens hip arthritis?
Activities to avoid with hip arthritis include:
High-impact exercise, like running and jumping.
Lifting or carrying too much weight while standing.
Repetitive squats, twists or
lunges
.
Too much sitting, or crossing your legs while you sit.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Arthritis can be debilitating, especially when it affects a joint that you depend on for everyday mobility. Unmanaged arthritis pain might make it hard to do your job or participate in activities you enjoy. This can depress your quality of life. But living like this isn’t inevitable, even if you’re getting older. Hip arthritis care has made great advances. With quality care, you can get your mobility and life back.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have an inflammatory or autoimmune condition, you need experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll create an individualized treatment plan for you.
Rheumatology Care
Rheumatology Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/24/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment