Sex During Pregnancy: Benefits, Myths and Safety
Search
Advertisement
Advertisement
June 27, 2025
/
Living Healthy
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Is It OK To Have Sex When You’re Pregnant?
Unless your healthcare provider tells you otherwise, it’s typically considered safe to have sex during pregnancy
Let’s talk about sex, baby. Whether you’re
newly pregnant
or ready to pop, you may have questions about whether it’s still safe for you to have sex and how your sex drive will change.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Pull up a chair. Ob/Gyn
Oluwatosin Goje, MD
, takes on some of your most pressing questions and concerns about pregnancy sex.
Is sex safe during pregnancy?
Yes, it’s typically safe to have sex when you’re pregnant. Unless your healthcare provider tells you otherwise, you can go ahead and get busy right up until before you deliver.
But there’s a caveat: If you’re experiencing pain or bleeding in the early days of pregnancy, Dr. Goje recommends holding off on vaginal sex until you’ve had your first appointment with a healthcare provider, which usually comes around the 10-week mark of pregnancy.
“I typically suggest refraining from intercourse until a provider can examine your cervix or perform an
ultrasound
,” she says. “Once we’ve ruled out any concerns, you can go back to normal sexual activity.”
Benefits of having sex when you’re pregnant
In general, having
a healthy sex life
is ... well, healthy. And pregnancy sex brings a unique set of benefits, too.
More satisfying sex:
For some
women
, pregnancy sex feels better than ever. “That’s because of increased blood flow to the
vulva
, the outer part of the female genitals,” Dr. Goje explains. “It can make that area especially sensitive.”
Feel-good hormones:
Orgasming releases a hormone called
oxytocin
, which acts as a chemical messenger between your body and brain that carries feelings of sexual arousal, trust and romantic attachment.
Better sleep:
Though pregnancy often brings sleep troubles, post-coital relaxation may bring some relief.
Studies show
that orgasming can improve sleep quality.
Continued intimacy:
Sex can be a great way to help couples feel closer and more connected throughout pregnancy.
Advertisement
Common questions about pregnancy sex
Dr. Goje responds to some of the questions she’s most often asked about sex during pregnancy.
Can having sex during pregnancy cause a miscarriage?
“There is no evidence that having sex during early pregnancy increases the risk of miscarriage,” Dr. Goje says.
But she does note that pregnancy sex may cause
some spotting
. While this can be understandably scary, it’s often the result of increased blood flow to the cervix and vagina, which is normal during pregnancy — not a sign of a miscarriage.
“Usually it’s nothing to worry about,” Dr. Goje continues, “but it’s always a good idea to check in with your provider if you’re bleeding or spotting after sex.”
Will it hurt the baby?
No, having sex doesn’t hurt a growing fetus. Your body is pretty hardy! The uterus is strong and muscular to provide protection, and
amniotic fluid
offers an added layer of security.
Some people also worry that having sex during pregnancy could do psychological damage to their future child. But Dr. Goje says this is an unfounded concern.
“Sex won’t affect your pregnancy or have any effect on your child,” she confirms.
Is sex painful during pregnancy?
Sex shouldn’t be painful — so if it is, talk to your provider to determine the cause. During pregnancy, in particular, you could be dealing with something like:
A corpus luteum cyst
Hemorrhoids
Pelvic congestion syndrome
Round ligament pain
A yeast infection
Other times, sex may not necessarily hurt, but it may not feel quite right either. If pregnancy’s bodily changes make having sex uncomfortable for you, there are steps you can take to make it feel better:
Use lube
to relieve vaginal dryness.
Support yourself with pillows to relieve discomfort.
Try different sex positions to minimize pressure on your belly.
Communicate with your partner about your needs.
“Sex should still be enjoyable during pregnancy,” Goje reinforces. “Sometimes, it just takes a little experimentation to figure out what needs to change.”
Will you lose interest in sex when you’re pregnant?
There’s no one-size-fits-all answer to this question. Some women lose interest in sex, while others find that they want it more than ever (and enjoy it more than ever, too).
In
one study
, 58% of respondents said their libido decreased during pregnancy. This can happen for a variety of reasons, like:
Low energy levels:
Pregnancy-related symptoms
like nausea and vomiting can make you feel too fatigued for sex.
Increased sensitivity:
Erogenous zones are parts of your body that are sexually stimulated when touched, like your
breasts
,
nipples
and vulva. Pregnancy hormones can make these areas tender to the point of discomfort.
Less vaginal lubrication:
Sometimes, pregnancy hormones can lead to vaginal dryness (though lube can help).
Emotional changes:
You may not want to have sex if you feel unattractive or uncomfortable in your pregnant body.
Other factors:
Pregnancy can raise your chances of issues like
hemorrhoids
or
yeast infections
, causing discomfort that interferes with your desire for sex.
Advertisement
On the other hand, the opposite can be true, too. You could be more interested in sex if your pregnancy hormones lead to:
Higher libido:
Pregnancy brings fluctuating hormone levels that can make you want sex more often than usual.
Increased sensitivity:
Pregnancy hormones could make your erogenous areas feel extra sensitive in a pleasurable way.
More vaginal lubrication:
While some women experience a decrease in vaginal lubrication during pregnancy, it’s also common to experience an
increase
. This can make sex feel better.
More powerful orgasms:
“Pregnancy can bring an increase in blood flow to the clitoral area,” Dr. Goje reports. “So, some women say they experience better orgasms while pregnant.”
In other words: “Sex is personal, so your experience with pregnancy sex will be, too,” Dr. Goje says.
Can having sex induce labor?
Having sex won’t lead to
preterm labor
(as long as your Ob/Gyn hasn’t instructed you to refrain from it due to a medical condition). But what about in that home stretch? Though some people still swear by it, there’s no definitive research showing that sex can kickstart labor.
In theory, why
might
it have an effect? Semen contains
sperm
, which is high in a substance called
prostaglandins
— the same one the uterus creates when it’s time for labor. In fact, healthcare providers sometimes use synthetic prostaglandins to induce labor. But research doesn’t show any increase in spontaneous labor after sex.
Advertisement
But if you’re sitting around waiting for baby to arrive, Dr. Goje says sex can’t hurt either: “If you’re in the mood, it’s worth a shot!”
Can you still have an orgasm when you’re pregnant?
Yes, many women can still achieve
orgasm
during pregnancy (and it’s totally safe to do so).
Some studies
say orgasms become less likely as pregnancy progresses, but this isn’t the case for everyone.
If you
can’t orgasm
while pregnant, it may have more to do with the positions you’re trying. “My best advice is to explore new positions until you find what works,” Dr. Goje suggests.
Best sex positions during pregnancy
When you’re pregnant, pain or discomfort during sex could be a matter of positioning, especially if you’re used to missionary-style sex.
“If you’re on your back for sex, gravity is pulling all that baby weight down on your spine,” Dr. Goje points out. Ouch!
Plus, she says that
you shouldn’t lie on your back
for extended periods of time when you’re pregnant, especially during the second and third trimesters, when the weight of your growing belly can compress important blood vessels.
So, skip missionary-style and try these positions instead:
Side-by-side or spooning
Penetration from behind (“doggy style”)
Woman on top
Standing
And don’t forget other types of intimacy, too, like oral sex, manual stimulation, massage and good old-fashioned cuddling.
Advertisement
When to avoid sex during pregnancy
Hold off on sex and talk to your Ob/Gyn if you have concerning vaginal symptoms like:
Undiagnosed vaginal bleeding
:
Some spotting is often normal during pregnancy, especially after penetrative sex, but heavy bleeding warrants a visit with your provider.
Leaking
:
Your water typically breaks after contractions begin, but fluid dripping from your vagina can be a sign that it’s happened too soon. Having sex could increase your risk of infection.
There are also times when your provider may tell you that sex
isn’t
safe for you during pregnancy, like if you have one of these conditions:
Cervical changes
:
Normally, the cervix creates a barrier between your vagina and uterus. Changes like early dilation (when your cervix opens too soon) could make sex risky.
History of premature labor
:
If you’ve delivered before 37 weeks in the past, your provider may ask you to refrain from intercourse.
Placenta previa
:
If the placenta is covering your cervix, vaginal sex can disrupt the placenta and cause bleeding.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
:
Some STIs can infect a fetus in the uterus, while others can be passed on during delivery. To stay safe, refrain from unprotected sexual intercourse until you’ve been treated and retested.
“In these cases, your provider may tell you to refrain from vaginal intercourse,” Dr. Goje reiterates. “But if you don’t have any
pregnancy complications
, sex is typically considered very safe. Talk with your Ob/Gyn if you have any concerns about pregnancy sex — and please don’t feel embarrassed to ask. We’re used to all types of questions!”
Learn more about our
editorial process
.
Health Library
Pregnancy
Overview
Health Library
Pregnancy
Overview
Advertisement
Related Articles
October 6, 2025
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Is It Safe To Take Tylenol if You’re Pregnant?
The best available evidence indicates that, used correctly, acetaminophen is safe to take throughout a pregnancy
September 15, 2025
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Considering a Prenatal Massage? Here’s What To Know
Prenatal massage, done properly, is a safe and effective way to lower stress and relieve pregnancy discomforts
July 1, 2025
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Foods To Avoid During Pregnancy
Avoid high-mercury fish and processed meat, and go easy on salt and caffeine
May 2, 2025
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Hot Tub Safety During Pregnancy: What To Know
Hot tubs and saunas raise your body temperature and can pose risks
May 1, 2025
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
What To Know About Taking a Bath While Pregnant
Baths can be safe if you turn down the temp, avoid irritating bath products and take extra precautions against
April 14, 2025
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Are Antidepressants Safe During Pregnancy?
SSRIs are the safest antidepressants to take in pregnancy — and pose less risk than unmanaged depression
April 11, 2025
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Pregnancy Discharge: What’s Normal and What’s Not
Progesterone during pregnancy can cause clear, white or pale yellow discharge
April 1, 2025
/
Pregnancy & Childbirth
The Best Age To Get Pregnant
Your peak reproductive years tend to fall between your late teens and your late 20s
Trending Topics
Sleep
Breathing Problems? Try These Sleep Positions
If you’re feeling short of breath, sleep can be tough — propping yourself up or sleeping on your side may help
Mental Health
What Is Anxious Attachment Style — and Do You Have It?
If you fear the unknown or find yourself needing reassurance often, you may identify with this attachment style
Nutrition
Are Prebiotic Sodas Good for You?
If you’re looking to boost your gut health, it’s better to get fiber from whole foods
Health Categories to Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Ad
Rendered:
Mon Oct 27 2025 16:41:41 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)