da Vinci Robotic Surgery: What It Is, Benefits & Risks
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
da Vinci Robotic Surgery
Advertisement
Advertisement
da Vinci Robotic Surgery
da Vinci robotic surgery is a specific type of robot-assisted surgery. Surgeons use da Vinci surgery to do a wide range of procedures, including urological, colorectal and thoracic surgeries. It’s less invasive than open surgery. In many cases this results in fewer post-op side effects and shorter recovery time.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
Da Vinci robotic surgery uses an endoscopic camera and four robotic arms your surgeon controls. It's less invasive than traditional surgery.
What is da Vinci robotic surgery?
da Vinci robotic surgery is a specific type of
robot-assisted surgery
. It enhances the dexterity and range of motion for your surgeon’s hands and adds precision in hard-to-reach areas.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Three or four robotic arms hold surgical instruments and an
endoscopic
camera that allows your surgeon to see inside your body. The instruments fit through small incisions. This eliminates the need for larger incisions, like the ones surgeons make in traditional “open” surgeries. In most cases, this results in fewer postoperative wound complications and a quicker recovery time.
Most importantly, robotic instruments only move when the surgeon is controlling them. At no point does the robot operate on its own.
The da Vinci Surgical System® got its name from Leonardo da Vinci’s study of human anatomy. The FDA (U.S. Food & Drug Administration) cleared the da Vinci robot for surgical use in July 2000. It’s still one of the leading surgical robotic systems used in healthcare today.
Parts of a da Vinci robot
The da Vinci Surgical System consists of three main parts:
Control center
. Your surgeon sits here during the operation. A screen gives them high-definition, 3D views of the surgical site and allows them to control the robotic arms. The controls look a bit like arcade joysticks — but they’re far more advanced.
Patient cart
. This cart stays next to you during your operation. It holds the robotic arms and any necessary instruments for the procedure.
Vision cart
. This unit contains the hardware and software necessary to operate the da Vinci surgical robot. It also has a secondary video screen so your surgery team can see what’s happening during your procedure.
Advertisement
What surgeries does the da Vinci robot do?
Surgeons use da Vinci for many procedures across different specialties. Some of the most common include:
Colostomy
Endometrial ablation
Gallbladder removal
Gastric sleeve surgery
Gastrotomy (feeding) tube placement
Hysterectomy
Mitral valve repair
Polypectomy
Splenectomy
Tonsillectomy
Surgeons use da Vinci robotic surgery for many different types of procedures. But it’s not available in every country or hospital. Ask your healthcare provider if da Vinci surgery is an option for you.
How common is da Vinci robotic surgery?
Worldwide, healthcare providers have used the da Vinci robot for over 10 million surgeries. Its use is becoming increasingly popular.
Treatment Details
What happens during da Vinci robotic surgery?
What happens during surgery depends on the type of procedure you need. But all da Vinci surgeries begin the same way:
An
anesthesiologist
will give you general
anesthesia
. This will help you sleep during your procedure.
Your surgical team will set up the da Vinci robot and position the patient cart next to you.
Your surgeon will make a few small incisions. (The exact number depends on what type of procedure you need and what part of your body needs treatment.)
Next, your surgeon will carefully insert the instruments through the incisions.
Then, they’ll attach the surgical instruments to the robotic arms.
Your surgeon will sit down at the control center. Here, they can see a clear, high-definition view of the surgical site.
Your surgeon uses the robot’s controls to guide the instruments. The robotic arms move like enhanced wrists, reaching tight spaces with precision. The robot only moves when your surgeon does.
Once your surgeon completes your procedure, they’ll remove the surgical instruments and close your incisions.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the advantages of da Vinci robotic surgery?
During your procedure, potential benefits of da Vinci surgery include:
Less blood loss
Less trauma to your tissues
Smaller incisions
After your procedure, potential benefits may include:
Fewer complications and
infections
Less pain
Less scarring
Quicker return to normal daily activities
Shorter hospital stays
Shorter recovery time
What are some disadvantages of the da Vinci robot?
There are always risks with surgery, including reactions to anesthesia and bleeding. There are two disadvantages of da Vinci surgery:
Your surgery will take longer.
The surgery may cost more than a traditional surgery. Talk to your hospital’s billing department about costs.
Recovery and Outlook
How long does it take to recover from da Vinci robotic surgery?
It depends on a few factors, like your overall health and the type of procedure you need. Your provider can give you a recovery timeline based on your health and procedure.
When To Call the Doctor
When should I call my doctor?
Be sure to attend all follow-up appointments with your healthcare provider. You should also tell your surgeon immediately if you develop:
Discoloration, swelling, drainage or tenderness at your incision sites — these can be signs of infection
A
fever
of 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius) or higher
Excessive bleeding
When in doubt, it’s always OK to reach out to your care team.
When should I go to the ER?
Don’t hesitate to call 911 or go to the emergency department if you have symptoms like:
Advertisement
Trouble breathing
Chest pain
Fainting
Uncontrolled bleeding
Pain that gets worse and doesn’t improve with medication
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Not every surgeon uses the da Vinci Surgical System. It’s not available at every hospital or for every type of surgery. However, da Vinci surgeries are becoming more popular as more healthcare providers learn about them. Speak with your own healthcare providers about the possibility of replacing an open surgery with a da Vinci surgery.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sometimes you have surgery planned. Other times, it’s an emergency. No matter how you end up in the OR, Cleveland Clinic’s general surgery team is here for you.
Schedule General Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us