Uterine Cancer (Endometrial Cancer): Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Uterine Cancer (Endometrial Cancer)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Uterine Cancer (Endometrial Cancer)
Uterine cancer includes two types of cancer: endometrial cancer (more common) and uterine sarcoma (rare). Uterine cancer symptoms include bleeding between periods or after menopause. Treatment often consists of a hysterectomy to remove your uterus.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endometrial Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
The most common form of uterine cancer forms in the lining, or endometrium.
What is uterine cancer?
Uterine cancer is a general term that describes cancer in your uterus:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Endometrial cancer
develops in the endometrium, the inner lining of your uterus. It’s one of the most common gynecologic cancers — cancers affecting your
reproductive system
.
Uterine sarcoma
develops in the myometrium, the muscle wall of your uterus.
Uterine sarcomas
are very rare.
Are endometrial cancer and uterine cancer the same?
Uterine cancer can refer to either endometrial cancer or uterine sarcoma. But people often consider the terms “endometrial cancer” and “uterine cancer” the same. That’s because endometrial cancer makes up about 95% of all cases of uterine cancer. A diagnosis of uterine sarcoma is rare.
What does the uterus do?
The uterus is part of the reproductive system of
women
. It’s where a fetus develops during
pregnancy
.
The top part of your uterus is called the body or corpus. At the end of your uterus is your
cervix
, which connects your uterus to your
vagina
. Uterine cancer refers to cancer in the body of your uterus. Cancer in your cervix —
cervical cancer
— is a different type of cancer.
What does the endometrium do?
The endometrium is the inner layer of your uterus. It changes during your
menstrual cycle
.
Hormones called
estrogen
and progesterone cause the endometrium to thicken in case of pregnancy. If no pregnancy occurs, your body produces less
progesterone
which causes the endometrial lining to shed. That’s when periods take place.
Advertisement
How common is uterine cancer?
In the United States, endometrial cancer is the most common cancer affecting the reproductive system of women. Endometrial cancer mainly develops after menopause. About 3% of women will receive a diagnosis of uterine cancer at some point during their lives. Each year, about 65,000 women receive a diagnosis.
Symptoms and Causes
Risk factors for uterine cancer.
What are the symptoms of uterine cancer?
Signs of uterine cancer can resemble those of many conditions. That’s especially true of other conditions affecting reproductive organs. If you notice unusual pain or irregular vaginal bleeding, talk to your healthcare provider. An accurate diagnosis is important so you can get the proper treatment.
Symptoms of endometrial cancer or uterine sarcoma include:
Vaginal bleeding
between periods before menopause.
Vaginal bleeding or spotting after menopause, even a slight amount.
Lower abdominal pain
or cramping in your pelvis, just below your belly.
Thin white or clear
vaginal discharge
if you’re postmenopausal.
Extremely prolonged, heavy or frequent vaginal bleeding if you’re older than 40.
What causes uterine cancer?
Researchers aren’t sure of the exact cause of uterine cancer. Something happens to create changes in cells in your uterus. The mutated cells grow and multiply out of control, which can form a mass called a
tumor
.
Certain risk factors can increase the chances you’ll develop uterine cancer. If you’re at high risk, talk to your healthcare provider about steps you can take to protect your health.
What are risk factors for uterine cancer?
There are several risk factors for endometrial cancer. Many of them relate to the balance between estrogen and progesterone. These risk factors include having obesity, a condition called
polycystic ovarian syndrome
(PCOS) or taking unopposed estrogen (taking estrogen without taking progesterone, too). The genetic disorder
Lynch syndrome
is another risk factor unrelated to hormones.
Risk factors include:
Age, lifestyle and family history
Age:
As you get older, your likelihood of developing uterine cancer increases. Most uterine cancers occur after age 50.
Diet high in animal fat:
A high-fat diet can increase your risk of several cancers, including uterine cancer. Fatty foods are also high in calories, which can lead to
obesity
.
Family history:
Some people inherit genetic disorders that increase cancer risk. People with Lynch syndrome, or
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)
, have increased risk of endometrial cancer, along with other kinds of cancer.
Other conditions
Diabetes:
This disease is often related to obesity, a risk factor for cancer. But some studies suggest a more direct tie between
diabetes
and uterine cancer as well.
Obesity (having excess body weight):
Some hormones get changed to estrogen by fat tissue, raising uterine cancer risk. The higher the amount of fat tissue, the greater the effect on estrogen levels.
Ovarian diseases:
People who have certain ovarian tumors have high estrogen levels and low progesterone levels. These hormone changes can increase uterine cancer risk.
Advertisement
Menstrual and reproductive history
Early menstruation:
If your period started before age 12, your risk for uterine cancer might increase. That’s because your uterus gets exposed to estrogen for more years.
Late menopause:
Similarly, if
menopause
occurs after age 50, the risk also increases. Your uterus gets exposed to estrogen longer.
Long menstruation span:
The number of years menstruating might be more important than your age when periods started or ended.
Not getting pregnant:
People who haven’t been pregnant have a higher risk.
Previous treatments for other conditions
Earlier radiation therapy to your pelvis:
Radiation therapy to the pelvis to treat other cancers can damage cell DNA. This damage may increase your risk of developing a second type of cancer.
Estrogen replacement therapy (ERT):
Some people receive
estrogen therapy
to help relieve menopause symptoms. Getting ERT without progesterone places you at a higher risk for uterine cancer.
Use of tamoxifen:
People may receive this
drug for breast cancer treatment
. It acts like estrogen in the uterus and can increase the risk of uterine cancer.
What are complications of endometrial cancer?
The most serious complication of endometrial cancer is
death
. However, when your healthcare provider diagnoses endometrial cancer at an early stage, the prognosis is usually very good.
Advertisement
Other complications of endometrial cancer include:
Anemia
.
The cancer spreading to other parts of your body (
metastasizing
).
Your body doesn’t respond well to treatment.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is uterine cancer diagnosed?
Talk to your healthcare provider if you notice possible signs of uterine cancer. Your provider will:
Ask about your symptoms, risk factors and family history.
Perform a
physical exam
.
Perform a
pelvic exam
.
What tests will I need to diagnose uterine cancer?
Your provider may perform one or more tests to confirm a diagnosis of uterine cancer:
Blood tests:
CA-125 assay
measures CA-125, a protein. A certain amount of CA-125 can point to cancer in your body.
Imaging tests:
CT scan
s
take a series of detailed pictures of the inside of your body.
MRI scan
s
use radio waves and a powerful magnet to create images.
Transvaginal
ultrasound
inserts a special probe (smooth, rounded device) into your vagina to get pictures of your uterus.
Other tests:
Endometrial biopsy
inserts a thin, flexible tube through your cervix (opening of your uterus) and into your uterus. Your provider removes a small amount of the endometrium.
Hysteroscopy
inserts a hysteroscope, a long thin tube, through your vagina and cervix to reach your uterus. This narrow instrument with a light and camera provides detailed images of your uterus.
Dilation and curettage (D&C)
is a more complex procedure to remove uterine tissue. It takes place in the operating room.
Advertisement
If you had a D&C or biopsy to remove tissue samples, your provider then sends the sample to a lab. There, a pathologist looks at the tissue to confirm if there’s cancer.
Can a Pap test diagnose uterine cancer?
No. The
Pap test (Pap smear)
doesn’t screen for or diagnose uterine cancer. It checks for cervical cancer.
What else does an endometrial cancer diagnosis show?
If your healthcare provider diagnoses endometrial cancer, they also need to determine the type. Knowing the cancer type helps your care team figure out the best treatment:
Type 1 endometrial cancers
are less aggressive. They usually don’t spread to other tissues quickly.
Type 2 endometrial cancers
are more aggressive. They’re more likely to spread outside of the uterus and need stronger treatment.
Your provider will also determine cancer stage. Uterine cancers are staged on a scale that ranges from I to IV.
Stage I cancer
hasn’t spread beyond your uterus.
Stage II cancer
has spread to your cervix.
Stage III cancer
has spread to your vagina, ovaries and/or lymph nodes.
Stage IV cancer
has spread to your bladder or other organs far away from your uterus.
In some cases, your provider may not be able to determine what stage of cancer you have until you’ve had surgery to remove it.
Management and Treatment
How is uterine cancer treated?
Most women with endometrial cancer need surgery. Your particular treatment plan depends on the type of cancer and your overall health. Other treatments you may have include:
Chemotherapy
, which uses powerful drugs to destroy cancer cells.
Radiation therapy
,
which sends targeted radiation beams to destroy cancer cells.
Hormone therapy
, which gives hormones or blocks them to treat cancer.
Immunotherapy
,
which helps your immune system fight cancer.
Targeted therapy
,
which uses medications to target specific cancer cells to stop them from multiplying.
Researchers continue to study more ways to treat endometrial cancer.
What type of uterine cancer surgery will I need?
Surgery is usually the primary treatment for endometrial cancer. You’ll most likely have a
hysterectomy
, with the surgeon removing your uterus and cervix. There are four types of hysterectomy procedures:
Total abdominal hysterectomy:
The surgeon makes an incision (cut) in your abdomen to access and remove your uterus.
Vaginal hysterectomy:
The surgeon removes your uterus through your vagina.
Radical hysterectomy:
If cancer has spread to your cervix, you may need a radical hysterectomy. The surgeon removes your uterus and the tissues next to your uterus. The surgeon also removes the top part of your vagina, next to your cervix.
Minimally invasive hysterectomy:
The surgeon makes multiple small incisions (cuts) to remove your uterus. This may be done laparoscopically or robotically.
During a hysterectomy, surgeons often perform two other procedures, as well:
Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO)
to remove your ovaries and fallopian tubes. Most people need this extra step to make sure all cancer gets removed.
Lymph node dissection (lymphadenectomy)
to remove
lymph nodes
and see if cancer has spread.
Do I need to have my ovaries removed?
Many women who have uterine cancer need their
ovaries
removed. But removing the ovaries means you’ll go through
menopause
if you haven’t already. If you’re younger than 45 and premenopausal, talk to your care team to see if you should keep your ovaries.
What can I expect after uterine surgery?
Side effects of uterine cancer surgery include:
Infertility
, not being able to get pregnant.
Menopause (if you were premenopausal and ovaries were removed) and its symptoms, including vaginal dryness and night sweats.
How is a uterine sarcoma treated?
Often, surgeons use a single procedure to diagnose, stage (describe severity) and treat uterine sarcoma. Treatment options are like those for endometrial cancer. You may have a hysterectomy, as well as a BSO to remove your ovaries and fallopian tubes.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Endometrial Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the survival rate for people with uterine cancer?
The five-year survival rate for endometrial cancer is 81%. That means 81% of women diagnosed with the disease are alive five years later. The rate is even higher when cancer hasn’t spread outside your uterus. Then, the survival rate reaches as high as 95%. Treatments continue to improve, along with survival rates. Uterine cancer is fatal when it goes undiagnosed and spreads. The survival rate decreases to 17% when cancer spreads to other parts of your body outside your uterus. Early detection and early treatment are key to a favorable prognosis.
Is there a cure for uterine cancer?
Fortunately, endometrial cancer is often diagnosed at an early stage. That’s because many people notice unusual bleeding and tell their healthcare providers. If cancer gets caught early and hasn’t spread to other organs, removing your uterus can cure it.
Prevention
Can uterine cancer be prevented?
Most of the time, you can’t prevent uterine cancer. But you can take steps to reduce your risk by:
Managing diabetes.
Maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you.
Talking to your provider about using progesterone-based or combined estrogen and progesterone
hormonal contraceptives
. These medications can offer some protection against uterine cancer.
Will estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) make me more likely to get uterine cancer?
If you’re considering ERT, talk to your healthcare provider. Together, you can discuss your cancer risk and make the decision that’s best for you.
Is there a screening test for uterine cancer?
No, there’s no screening tool. And healthcare providers usually don’t recommend regular testing for people without symptoms. They may do so if you’re at higher risk, though. If you’re at high risk, talk to your provider about regular checks for uterine cancer.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Discuss any unusual bleeding or spotting with a provider. If you have an inherited endometrial cancer risk (passed down through genes), talk to your provider about yearly testing. You may need an endometrial biopsy every year, starting at age 35.
What should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you’ve received a uterine cancer diagnosis, ask your provider:
What’s the stage of my cancer?
What treatment options will be best for me?
Will I need more than one treatment?
Are there clinical trials I can take part in?
What’s the goal of treatment?
What can I expect after treatment?
Will cancer come back?
Am I at high risk for other cancers?
How can I take care of myself after uterine cancer treatment?
After you finish treatment, your care team will talk to you about your
follow-up visits
. It’s important to go to these appointments. During a follow-up visit, your provider will do a pelvic exam. They’ll also ask you about any symptoms. The goal is to make sure cancer isn’t coming back (recurring) and that you’re feeling OK after treatment.
You can also talk to your provider about ways to live a healthy life after cancer. Eating well, getting enough sleep and exercising can help you feel your best.
Additional Common Questions
What are the warning signs of uterine cancer?
Let your provider know about any irregular bleeding. Abnormal bleeding includes bleeding between periods if you still menstruate and bleeding or spotting if you’re postmenopausal. Abnormal bleeding is a symptom of many conditions, including endometrial cancer.
Does uterine cancer spread quickly?
Type 1 cancers, the most common type, don’t spread quickly. Type 2 cancers can spread quickly and may require more aggressive treatment.
At what age is endometrial cancer most common?
Endometrial cancer is most common in people who’ve gone through menopause. The average age of menopause is 51.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Uterine cancer includes endometrial cancer and uterine sarcoma. It’s the most common cancer affecting women's reproductive systems. Often, healthcare providers use the term endometrial cancer to describe uterine cancer because it’s the most common. Uterine cancer symptoms include vaginal bleeding between periods or after menopause. If healthcare providers catch uterine cancer before it spreads, surgery can cure it. If you experience any signs of uterine cancer, contact your healthcare provider.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you have endometrial cancer, you’ll want the best care. Cleveland Clinic’s experts are here to help with personalized treatment focusing on your needs.
Endometrial Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/21/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment