Ascites: What it is, Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Ascites
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ascites
Ascites is a buildup of fluid in your abdomen causing a swollen belly. It most often occurs because of cirrhosis, a liver disease. Talk to your healthcare provider if you have cirrhosis and notice you’re gaining weight very quickly. Your provider will talk to you about treatments, which could include a low-sodium diet, medication, surgery or a liver transplant.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cirrhosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
Ascites is the buildup of fluid in your abdomen, typically due to cirrhosis of the liver. It can make your belly swell and cause shortness of breath.
What is ascites?
Ascites (ay-SITE-eez) is when too much fluid builds up in your abdomen (belly). This condition most often happens in people who have
cirrhosis (scarring) of the liver
. It can make movement difficult and be very uncomfortable.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A sheet of tissue called the
peritoneum
covers your abdominal organs, including your
stomach
,
intestines
,
liver
and
kidneys
. The peritoneum has two layers. Ascites happens when fluid builds up between the two layers. The fluid can make it look like you have a watermelon or basketball in your belly.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of ascites
The main symptoms of ascites are a large belly and rapid weight gain (two or three pounds per day for three days). You may also have
swelling
in your ankles (
edema
).
Other symptoms include:
Shortness of breath
Difficulty sitting and/or difficulty with movement
Digestive issues, like bloating,
abdominal pain
,
indigestion
and
constipation
Back pain
Fatigue
Ascites causes
Cirrhosis is the most common cause of ascites, but it’s not the only cause. Other conditions that can cause it include:
Congestive heart failure
Kidney failure
Cancer
of the organs in the abdomen and pelvis
Tuberculosis
An even less common cause is
nephrotic syndrome
.
How does cirrhosis cause ascites?
Cirrhosis damages your liver and affects how
blood
flows through it. This damage can increase pressure in your
portal vein
, which carries blood to your liver. When this happens, it’s called
portal hypertension
. This sends an incorrect signal to your kidneys to hold onto sodium and water. When this goes on long enough, salt and water spill out into your abdominal cavity.
Advertisement
Risk factors for ascites
Having a condition that causes cirrhosis puts you at the greatest risk of developing ascites. These conditions include:
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH)
Alcohol use disorder
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Autoimmune hepatitis
Genetic liver diseases like
hemochromatosis
,
Wilson disease
and
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency
Complications of ascites
Ascites can lead to:
Chronic abdominal discomfort
. The fluid buildup may lead to
pain
, discomfort and difficulty breathing. These symptoms can interfere with your ability to eat, walk and do daily activities.
Infection
.
Peritonitis
is when the fluid in your abdomen becomes infected. You may develop a fever and stomach pain. You’ll need IV
antibiotics
and long-term antibiotic treatment to keep the infection from coming back.
Hepatic hydrothorax (fluid around the lungs)
. Abdominal fluid can leak into your chest and lungs, causing shortness of breath,
cough
and
hypoxemia
(lack of oxygen in your blood). You may need
thoracentesis
to remove the fluid.
Ascites-related hernias
. The increase in abdominal pressure can lead to
hernias
. Your healthcare provider will discuss your treatment options.
Kidney failure
. If cirrhosis worsens, it can lead to
kidney failure
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose ascites
Your healthcare provider performs a
physical exam
and checks your belly for signs of fluid buildup. They’ll ask you about your symptoms and medical history. They may also order
blood tests
to check your
liver
and
kidney function
.
Tests for ascites
After the exam, your provider will recommend other tests to confirm a diagnosis:
Ultrasound
or
CT scan
. These imaging scans show your abdominal area in more detail. They can show areas of fluid as well as the size of your liver.
Paracentesis
. You’ll get a local anesthetic before this procedure so you don’t feel pain. Your provider inserts a needle into your abdomen to remove fluid. They examine the fluid for signs of cancer, infection and other conditions.
Your healthcare provider will check to make sure the ascites aren’t due to heart or kidney problems or cancer.
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for ascites?
Treatment for ascites involves reducing fluid buildup in your belly. Healthcare providers typically try these treatment methods first:
Limiting sodium
. Healthcare providers may recommend limiting sodium intake to less than 2,000 milligrams a day. A
dietitian
can help create a healthy eating plan for you. They can also teach you how to read food labels so you can avoid high-sodium foods.
Taking diuretics
.
Diuretics
(or water pills) help your kidneys get rid of extra fluid and sodium.
Treat the underlying condition
. For example, if cancer is causing ascites,
chemotherapy
can help shrink the tumor and stop the fluid from building up.
Advertisement
Sometimes, diuretics and lowering sodium intake aren’t enough to improve ascites. You may need other treatments, including:
Paracentesis
. Your provider inserts a needle into your abdomen to remove the fluid. This procedure can remove a large amount of excess fluid and be done as often as necessary.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS)
. TIPS involves your provider creating a new pathway (shunt) for blood to travel so it avoids your liver. This can prevent fluid from leaking into your abdomen. TIPS may be appropriate if your ascites aren’t responding to other therapies.
Liver transplant
. A
liver transplant
may be necessary in severe cases of cirrhosis.
The treatment your provider recommends is based on factors like the severity of ascites, your medical history and the overall health of your liver.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact your provider if you have cirrhosis of the liver and notice the following symptoms:
Rapid weight gain
Increase in the size of your belly
Shortness of breath
Go to the emergency room right away if you have:
Fever
Intense stomach pain
What should I ask my healthcare provider?
If you have ascites, ask your healthcare provider:
What treatments are available?
Should I consider a liver transplant?
What foods should I avoid?
What medications are available?
Will the ascites return?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cirrhosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for people with ascites?
Ascites is a sign that your liver isn’t working as it should. It can impact your quality of life and cause uncomfortable symptoms. Medications, low-sodium foods and procedures like paracentesis can help improve your symptoms and reduce your risk of complications. Your healthcare team will monitor you to make sure treatment is working.
If you have ascites, these steps can help you manage the condition:
Check your weight
. Weigh yourself daily. Call your healthcare provider if you gain more than two pounds per day for three consecutive days.
Limit alcohol
. It’s best to avoid beverages that contain alcohol to reduce your ascites risk.
Limit NSAID use
.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
, like ibuprofen (Motrin
®
and Advil
®
) and aspirin cause your body to retain excess water and salt.
Eat a low-salt diet
. Try to consume no more than 2,000 milligrams of sodium per day.
Prevention
How can I prevent ascites?
The best way to prevent ascites is to take care of your liver. Some things you can do are:
Avoid beverages containing alcohol.
Avoid foods that are high in salt.
Get some physical activity every day.
Maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Reduce your risk of hepatitis B and C (which increase your risk for cirrhosis).
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ascites is a sign of liver damage that can lead to uncomfortable symptoms. It may make you feel self-conscious about your appearance or worry about the health of your liver. There are treatment options available to you that help you manage ascites so you can feel your best. Restricting your salt intake is one of the most effective treatments. Ask your provider about working with a dietitian to plan meals that are low in sodium. Regular check-ins with your provider are important so they can make sure treatment is helping to manage ascites.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cirrhosis is a serious condition that causes liver damage. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts will help you manage cirrhosis and relieve symptoms.
Cirrhosis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us