Group B Strep In Pregnancy: Test, Risks & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Group B Strep Pregnancy
Advertisement
Advertisement
Group B Strep Pregnancy
Group B strep (GBS) is a bacterial infection that lives in your vagina or rectum. You can pass it to your baby during childbirth. If a newborn gets group B strep, it can cause serious complications. You’ll be screened for the infection in the third trimester. Antibiotics can treat GBS if you test positive. This protects your baby from getting it.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Group B Strep?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Group B Strep?
Group B strep is a bacteria that can be passed to your baby during childbirth. It can be harmful to newborns. You'll be screened for Group B strep in your third trimester.
Group B strep (group B streptococcus or GBS) is a type of
bacteria
that typically lives in your
vagina
,
intestines
and
rectum
. GBS doesn’t cause problems in most healthy adults. But if you’re pregnant, you can pass it to your baby during a
vaginal delivery
. Group B strep can be harmful to newborns because they lack immunity against the bacteria.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
For this reason, healthcare providers screen for group B strep between 36 and 37 weeks of
pregnancy
. Group B strep testing involves your provider taking a swab of your vagina and rectum. If you test positive, you’ll receive
antibiotics
during labor and delivery. This almost always prevents you from passing the infection to your baby. About 1 in 4
females
test positive during pregnancy.
Even though group B strep is mostly known for causing illness in newborns, adults with
suppressed immune systems
can also get sick from the infection.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of group B strep
Most adults don’t have symptoms of group B strep. It can cause symptoms in people with certain health conditions, but this is rare. These symptoms include:
Fever, chills and fatigue
Difficulty breathing
Chest pains
Muscle stiffness
What does group B Strep do to my baby?
Symptoms can become serious quickly for newborns. Some symptoms include:
Fever
Difficulty feeding
Irritability
Breathing difficulties
Lack of energy or drowsiness
Most babies show symptoms within the first few hours and days after birth. This is called early-onset GBS and is more common and more serious. But some infants don’t show symptoms until one week to three months later. This is called late-onset GBS. It’s less common and usually less severe.
Advertisement
Group B strep causes
Streptococcus agalactiae
causes group B strep. These bacteria naturally occur in certain parts of your body. Experts aren’t entirely sure how the bacteria spread, but they know that they’re potentially harmful in babies and people with weaker immune systems.
It’s not a
bacterial infection
you get from poor hygiene or from sharing food or drinks with an infected person. Other people who live with you, including other children, aren’t at risk of getting GBS from you. GBS isn’t a
sexually transmitted infection (STI)
.
Risk factors for GBS
Anyone can test positive for GBS during pregnancy. If you test positive and don’t receive antibiotic treatment, there’s a chance you could pass it to your baby.
These factors also increase your risk of having a baby with group B strep:
Your baby is born
before 37 weeks of pregnancy
You have another child who had GBS as a baby
You develop a fever during labor
More than 18 hours pass between your
water breaking
and your baby being born
Taking antibiotics during labor is the best way to lower your baby’s risk of infection. Your provider will usually give you antibiotics if your test results aren’t back yet, especially if you have any risk factors.
What are long-term problems of group B strep in newborns?
Group B strep infection can lead to life-threatening illnesses like:
Sepsis
Pneumonia
Meningitis
Most infants don’t develop any long-term complications. But, about 1 in 4 infants with meningitis from GBS develop:
Cerebral palsy
Hearing
problems
Learning disorders
Seizures
Diagnosis and Tests
When am I screened for group B strep?
Your healthcare provider will test you for GBS around 36 to 37 weeks of pregnancy.
Your
obstetrician
uses a cotton swab to obtain samples of cells from your vagina and rectum. This test doesn’t hurt and takes less than a minute. Then, the sample is sent to a lab to check for group B strep. If you’re using a
midwife
, you might be given instructions on how to test yourself at home and submit the swab to a lab.
Most people receive their results within 48 hours. A positive result means you’re GBS positive. But this doesn’t mean you or your baby will get sick. Testing positive means your healthcare provider will want to give you antibiotics during labor and delivery. This greatly reduces the chance that you’ll pass GBS to your baby.
Management and Treatment
What are the treatment options for group B streptococcal infection?
Healthcare providers prevent GBS infection in your baby by treating you with intravenous (IV) antibiotics in the hospital. The antibiotics work best when given at least four hours before
delivery
. It’s not effective to treat GBS before labor begins. The most common antibiotic to treat group B strep is
penicillin
or ampicillin. With antibiotic treatment, about
1 in 4,000 babies
will get a GBS infection at birth. If you don’t receive antibiotics during labor, your chances of passing the infection to your baby are about 1 in 200.
Advertisement
One exception to the timing is when GBS is found in your pee. When this is the case, oral antibiotic treatment begins right away (regardless of the stage of pregnancy). You’ll still receive antibiotics through an IV during labor.
Anyone who’s previously given birth to a baby who developed a GBS infection or who’s had a
urinary tract infection
in this pregnancy from GBS will also receive antibiotics during labor.
How is group B strep treated in newborns?
Some babies still get GBS infections despite testing and antibiotic treatment. Your healthcare provider might take a sample of your baby’s blood or
spinal fluid
to see if they have GBS infection. If they do, they’ll get treatment with antibiotics through an IV.
When should I see my healthcare provider if I’m positive for group B strep?
Talk to your provider about what you can expect during labor and delivery if you have group B strep. It’s important to remember that you’ll need treatment with IV antibiotics for at least four hours before your child is born. In most cases, your pregnancy care team can make sure this happens.
Do I need treatment for group B strep if I’m having a C-section?
No, you don’t need antibiotics if you’re having a
C-section
delivery. But you’ll still be tested for GBS during pregnancy. This is because labor could start before your scheduled C-section. If your water breaks and you’re GBS positive, your baby is at risk of getting the infection.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Outlook / Prognosis
How does group B strep affect my pregnancy?
Once you test positive for GBS, you’re considered positive for the rest of your pregnancy. Nothing in your pregnancy will change until you’re in labor. Your healthcare team will need to make sure you receive antibiotics for at least four hours before your baby can be born. This prevents you from passing GBS to your baby. It’s OK to remind your care team that you’re GBS positive when you get to the hospital.
Even if you receive antibiotic treatment, your baby’s pediatrician will check them for signs of infection.
Does group B strep go away after pregnancy?
No. The bacteria naturally live in about 25% of adults. They usually don’t cause health problems.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Try not to panic if your healthcare provider tells you you’re positive for group B strep during pregnancy. Bacteria that live naturally in your body cause it, not anything you did. Your provider will give you antibiotics during labor through an IV in your arm. The chances of passing group B strep to your baby are very low. Talk to your provider about group B strep and share any concerns you have about testing positive.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Trying to choose where to give birth? Learn why Cleveland Clinic is the best choice to help you through each step of the labor and delivery process.
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment