Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a disease that damages your bile ducts and liver. It makes your bile ducts narrow, which eventually causes bile to back up into your liver. PSC may not initially cause any symptoms. It can lead to cirrhosis and liver failure. A liver transplant is the only treatment to cure the condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) causes your bile ducts to narrow, blocking the flow of bile. This leads to bile backing up into your liver.
What is primary sclerosing cholangitis?
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) (pronounced “SKLEH-roh-sing” “koh-lan-JI-tis”) is a disease that affects your
bile ducts
, which are the tubes that carry
bile
from your liver to other organs in your digestive system. It causes chronic swelling and irritation there (inflammation), which healthcare providers call
cholangitis
. Eventually, this can cause scarring.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
When scar tissue forms in your bile ducts, there’s less room for bile to flow through them (
biliary stricture
). When bile can’t flow, it backs up and gradually damages your liver. Within 10 to 15 years, this can lead to
liver failure
. You can’t live without a liver. While there are temporary treatments, there is currently no cure for PSC, except for a
liver transplant
.
While you might not have symptoms at first, PSC gets worse over time. When the flow of bile slows (
cholestasis
), it can leak bile toxins into your blood. This can eventually make you very sick. Treatment can help you manage symptoms until a liver transplant is available.
Stages of PSC
Healthcare providers categorize PSC into stages. The stages mainly refer to how much scar tissue (or fibrosis) has formed in your liver. There are four stages:
Stage 1:
Very little scarring in the corners of your liver (portal areas)
Stage 2:
Scarring extends from the portal areas, but doesn’t yet connect to each other
Stage 3:
Areas of scarring connect to each other
Stage 4:
Connected and widespread scarring, leading to
cirrhosis
(permanent scarring)
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of primary sclerosing cholangitis?
The symptoms of PSC change as the disease progresses. Up to 50% of people may have no symptoms at all at the time of diagnosis. PSC is often found by accident when testing for other conditions. The first symptoms might be vague. They may include:
Advertisement
Fatigue
Pain in the upper right side of your abdomen
Itchy skin (pruritus)
Fever or chills
Jaundice
Unintended weight loss
Dark pee or pale poop
As the disease worsens, your symptoms may include:
Swollen abdomen
Enlarged liver
Enlarged spleen
Vomiting blood or having black poop
What causes primary sclerosing cholangitis?
It’s not entirely clear what causes PSC, but it appears to involve a combination of factors, including:
Genetics
Immune system problems
Changes to the bacteria in your
gut microbiome
Environmental factors
Healthcare providers believe that PSC may be a type of
autoimmune disease
.
Inflammation
is one of the tools of your immune system. It’s supposed to be a response to an attack, but when inflammation becomes chronic, it tends to be a sign of disease.
Experts have also noticed that people who have PSC are prone to other autoimmune diseases, including:
Inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD)
Celiac disease
Thyroid disease
Type 1 diabetes
Autoimmune hepatitis
Autoimmune pancreatitis
Certain environmental factors (like exposure to unsafe toxins) may trigger an autoimmune response in some people.
Is PSC caused by alcohol?
No, PSC isn’t related to drinking beverages containing alcohol.
What are the risk factors for PSC?
Risk factors for primary sclerosing cholangitis include:
Having a penis
Being between 30 and 60
Having inflammatory bowel disease, most often
ulcerative colitis
What are the complications of advanced PSC?
Some of the more common complications of primary sclerosing cholangitis include metabolic dysfunction, infection and an increased risk of cancer. But this disease gets worse slowly. As your bile ducts and liver become increasingly scarred, their functions begin to fail.
Metabolic diseases
When your bile ducts become significantly blocked, they won’t be able to deliver bile to your small intestine to help with digestion. Bile is necessary to help break down fats in your intestines and absorb fat-soluble vitamins. Without it, your digestive system may have trouble processing fats, and you may not be able to absorb these essential vitamins from your food. This can lead to a variety of additional complications, including:
Fatty stools and diarrhea
Malabsorption
and
malnutrition
Easy bruising and bleeding (vitamin K deficiency)
Osteomalacia and osteoporosis (vitamin D deficiency)
Poor nighttime vision
Portal hypertension
Liver damage due to cirrhosis can
reduce blood flow to your portal vein
. This can cause pressure to build up in the veins around your digestive system, including veins in your esophagus and abdomen. These swollen veins can rupture, leading to internal bleeding.
Infections
Blocked bile ducts make you more likely to get infections, which may cause fever, abdominal pain,
blood infection
or
sepsis
. This usually requires hospitalization with IV antibiotics, as it can be life-threatening.
Advertisement
Cancer
Advanced PSC leads to an increased risk of developing several cancers, including:
Bile duct cancer
Gallbladder cancer
Liver cancer
(hepatoma)
Colorectal cancer
(if you also have IBD)
Diagnosis and Tests
How is primary sclerosing cholangitis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers often find PSC by accident while testing for something else. Early signs of the disease may show up on a blood test or imaging test. A blood test may show high levels of
alkaline phosphatase
or indicate an immune response is happening. Having high
white blood cells
is usually a sign of infection in your liver.
To confirm the disease, your healthcare provider may suggest a more specific test, like:
Liver function test
:
These blood tests look for high levels of certain liver enzymes. High levels of alkaline phosphatase may indicate PSC.
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)
:
This test uses magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to produce detailed pictures of the biliary tree (your liver, gallbladder and bile ducts). This is the first-line imaging test for PSC because it’s non-invasive and avoids radiation exposure.
Management and Treatment
How is primary sclerosing cholangitis treated?
Currently, there isn’t a treatment that can slow or stop primary sclerosing cholangitis from getting worse. But you can treat some of the symptoms and complications. For example, your healthcare provider may prescribe:
Advertisement
Medications to treat itchy skin (pruritus)
Supplements to treat vitamin deficiencies
Antibiotics to treat infections
Your healthcare provider will also keep an eye on your liver and bile ducts. As the disease progresses, they may be able to open a blocked bile duct. They can do this through an
ERCP (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography)
, a type of endoscopy.
This involves a gastroenterologist passing tiny instruments through a tube to treat your bile ducts. Your provider can open your bile duct with a balloon or prop it open with a stent. If ERCP isn’t possible, then they obtain access directly through the skin (percutaneous trans-hepatic cholangiography).
This is a temporary solution, though. Over the course of 10 to 20 years, primary sclerosing cholangitis eventually progresses from early to late-stage
liver disease
, and finally, liver failure. Your healthcare provider will monitor your liver damage to determine when you should begin to consider liver transplantation. You’ll need to pass certain qualifications to get on a liver transplantation waiting list.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the life expectancy with primary sclerosing cholangitis?
After diagnosis, the average life expectancy is about 10 to 20 years. A liver transplant can give you a new lease on life. But in up to 1 in 5 cases, PSC may return after a liver transplant. When this happens, the new liver may fail. The average life expectancy in this case is about nine months.
Advertisement
Another factor that can affect life expectancy is cancer. If cancer develops as a complication of PSC, you may not be a good candidate for a liver transplant. In carefully selected cases, healthcare providers may attempt to treat cancer first with radiation or chemotherapy and then try a liver transplant.
Living With
How should I take care of myself if I have primary sclerosing cholangitis?
There are things you can do to help manage the fatigue that’s common with PSC and prevent additional damage to your liver. For example:
Avoid beverages containing alcohol.
If you smoke cigarettes, ask your provider for help quitting.
Eat more healthy foods like lean meats, whole grains, fruits and vegetables.
Find ways to manage your stress.
Get plenty of sleep.
Exercise a little each day.
Maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
PSC may not cause any symptoms in the early stages. But you may begin feeling sick as the disease gets worse. Contact your healthcare provider if you have any of the following symptoms, especially if you have an inflammatory bowel disease like ulcerative colitis:
Pain in your abdomen
Jaundice
Itchy skin
Fatigue
Fever
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between primary sclerosing cholangitis and secondary sclerosing cholangitis?
“Primary” means that this disease is the original cause of inflammation and scarring of your bile ducts. There’s no other cause but the disease. In secondary sclerosing cholangitis, inflammation and scarring of your bile ducts are caused by something else. Some causes of secondary sclerosing cholangitis include:
Bile duct injury (for example, during surgery)
Infections of the bile ducts
Chemotherapy
Gallstones
in your bile ducts
Recurring
pancreatitis
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a rare and unpredictable condition that you can’t prevent. It gets worse so gradually that you might not notice symptoms at first. This uncertainty can be hard. But remember, you’re not alone in this journey. Visiting your healthcare provider for routine screenings can play a key role in managing this condition. You may be able to detect changes early, before they start impacting your everyday life.
Remember, it’s OK to feel scared and overwhelmed right now. But with time, support and the right medical care, you can find the strength to navigate this new path.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have issues with your digestive system, you need a team of experts you can trust. Our gastroenterology specialists at Cleveland Clinic can help.
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/27/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us