Denture Stomatitis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Denture Stomatitis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Denture Stomatitis
Denture stomatitis causes swelling, tenderness and discoloration of the tissues inside your mouth. It’s common among denture wearers and usually appears in areas where your appliance covers your gums. You can reduce your risk for denture-related stomatitis by practicing good oral hygiene and visiting your dentist regularly.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is denture stomatitis?
Denture stomatitis is a type of
thrush
that affects
denture
wearers. It refers to swelling and discoloration of the tissues inside your
mouth
, usually in areas where your denture covers your
gums
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Denture stomatitis may make wearing dentures a painful experience. But there are treatments to
cure
the condition and steps you can take to keep denture stomatitis from coming back.
How common is denture stomatitis?
According to research studies, denture stomatitis affects
up to 67% of denture wearers
worldwide. People who wear full dentures are more likely to develop the condition than those who wear partials or
implant-supported dentures
.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of denture stomatitis?
Denture stomatitis symptoms may include:
Canker sores
Cracks in the corners of your mouth (
angular cheilitis
)
Pain when swallowing
Soreness in your mouth or
throat
White or red patches on your
tongue
, gums, lips, inner cheeks or roof of your mouth
What causes denture stomatitis?
Candida
— a type of fungus (yeast) causes denture stomatitis. It’s normal to have small amounts of
Candida
in your mouth. But when there’s an imbalance, the
Candida
can grow out of control and cause
candidiasis
(a type of
fungal infection
).
Candida albicans
is the most common fungus that causes denture stomatitis. Less common funguses that may contribute to the condition include:
Candida glabrata
Candida krusei
Candida parapsilosis
Candida tropicalis
Risk factors for denture stomatitis
Some risk factors are preventable. These things cause fungal overgrowth that results in denture-related stomatitis:
Advertisement
A diet high in sugars and
carbohydrates
Broad-spectrum
antibiotics
Consuming beverages that contain alcohol
Poor oral hygiene
Smoking
or
vaping
Wearing your dentures for prolonged periods of time (like while you sleep)
Factors out of your control can also increase your risk for denture stomatitis, like:
A weakened
immune system
Age (denture stomatitis occurs more often in people over 65)
Nutritional deficiencies
Endocrine
dysfunction
Diagnosis and Tests
How is denture stomatitis diagnosed?
Healthcare providers can identify denture stomatitis during a
physical examination
. They’ll ask you to remove your denture so they can check your gums for telltale
swelling
and patterns of discoloration.
To confirm your diagnosis, your provider might swab the inside of your mouth and send the sample to a
pathologist
for testing. The pathologist will look for the presence of
Candida
.
Management and Treatment
How is denture stomatitis treated?
Denture stomatitis treatment and management options include:
Antifungals
. Antifungal medications, like
nystatin
or
miconazole
, are usually the fastest way to heal denture sores. These medications come in different forms, including lozenges.
Laser therapy
. A
dentist
can use low-energy laser therapy to treat denture-induced stomatitis, especially when antifungal medications don’t work.
Oral surgery
. Some denture wearers develop small nodules on the roof of their mouths. This can interfere with your denture and keep it from fitting properly. Minor oral surgery can remove these nodules.
In addition to the above treatments, your provider may clean, polish and glaze your denture to prevent microorganisms from contaminating it. They’ll also check your bite and make any necessary adjustments to your appliance. In some cases, you might need a new denture. Your provider can tell you what’s best in your situation.
Complications of denture-related stomatitis
Left untreated, denture stomatitis can cause persistent irritation and soreness in your mouth. In some cases, constant
inflammation
can lead to ill-fitting dentures in the future.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
Most people feel better within two weeks of starting denture stomatitis treatment. But this timeline can vary, depending on severity and whether you have an underlying health issue.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for denture stomatitis?
Denture-induced stomatitis is typically harmless and doesn’t cause any long-term consequences. But it can be very painful. Denture stomatitis can interfere with routine tasks like eating and speaking. This constant discomfort can eventually take its toll.
The sooner you get treatment, the sooner you’ll feel better. Prompt treatment also decreases the possibility of needing new dentures.
Prevention
Can denture stomatitis be prevented?
You might not be able to prevent all cases of denture stomatitis, especially when underlying health conditions cause it. But following these tips can greatly reduce your risk:
Advertisement
Avoid smoking and vaping
Clean your dentures
thoroughly before wearing them
Leave your dentures out as much as possible while you’re healing
Practice good
oral hygiene
Soak your dentures in denture solution every night (or in an antifungal solution if your provider recommends it)
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
It’s normal for denture wearers to experience gum irritation from time to time. But if you notice denture sores, you should schedule an appointment with your healthcare provider right away. They can rule out more serious issues and create a personalized treatment plan to help you feel better.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Sore gums from dentures can cause unnecessary discomfort and have a negative impact on your daily life. But there are steps you can take to treat the condition and reduce your risk for future flare-ups. If you think you have denture stomatitis, call your healthcare provider as soon as possible so you can start treatment and feel better.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Dentistry plays an important role in oral health. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can design a personalized plan that will keep you smiling for the long haul.
Get Dental Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment