Luminal A Breast Cancer: Symptoms, Treatment & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Luminal A Breast Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Luminal A Breast Cancer
Luminal A breast cancer is a molecular subtype of breast cancer. It’s HR+ (hormone receptor-positive) and HER2- (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 negative). Treatments for luminal A breast cancer include hormone therapy, radiation therapy and surgery. Luminal A breast cancer has the best outlook among the molecular breast cancer subtypes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is luminal A breast cancer?
Luminal A breast cancer is a subtype of hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer. HR+ breast cancer cells have proteins (receptors) inside them that encourage cancer growth when
estrogen
or
progesterone
attach to them. “Luminal” refers to cells in your breast duct lining, where most
breast cancers
start.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Characteristics
Luminal A cells usually have low levels of Ki-67 — a protein found in rapidly dividing cells. Because of this, luminal A breast cancers usually grow slower than
luminal B
and other subtypes of breast cancer.
Luminal A cancer cells are:
Positive for estrogen
. This means they contain high estrogen receptor (ER) proteins that may help cancer cells grow.
Positive for progesterone
. They have high progesterone receptor (PR) proteins that may encourage cancer growth.
HER2-negative (HER2-)
. Luminal A cells don’t usually contain a protein called human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). (Other breast cancer types, like luminal B, may be
HER2+
or HER2-.)
Low in Ki-67
. Ki-67 is a protein found only in rapidly dividing cells. That’s why luminal A breast cancers typically grow slower than luminal B breast cancers.
Lower grade
. Luminal A cells are usually less aggressive and less likely to
recur
(come back) than luminal B cancers.
All this information can be confusing. But it’s important. It represents a molecular-level analysis of the cancer cells in your breast. It can help your healthcare provider design a personalized plan and predict how you’ll respond to various treatments.
How common is luminal A breast cancer?
Luminal A makes up about
50% to 60%
of all breast cancer cases. It’s the most common molecular subtype of breast cancer.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of luminal A breast cancer?
Luminal A breast cancer symptoms may include:
A lump in your
breast
.
Breast pain
.
Nipple discharge
.
Thickened or dimpling skin.
Swelling of your breast or in your
armpit
.
However, you might not have any symptoms. This is because healthcare providers often detect breast cancer during routine
cancer screenings
, before symptoms develop.
What causes luminal A breast cancer?
Luminal A breast cancer occurs when healthy cells in your breast
change
and grow uncontrollably. Experts aren’t exactly sure why this happens. But they’ve identified factors that may increase your chances of developing breast cancer.
Risk factors include:
A family history of breast or
ovarian cancer
.
Being over the age of 50.
Dense breast tissue.
Drinking alcohol.
Prior radiation treatment to your chest or breasts.
Prolonged exposure to hormones like estrogen or progesterone. This can happen because of things like early menarche (your first period), late menopause or HRT.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is luminal A breast cancer diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose most breast cancers with screening
mammograms
. Your provider will order additional imaging tests if your mammogram results look suspicious. These tests might include:
Diagnostic mammogram.
MRI
.
Ultrasound
.
They’ll likely do a
breast biopsy
, too. During this procedure, they’ll remove a small sample of your breast tissue and send it to a
pathologist
for further testing. If the pathologist finds cancer cells, they’ll run more tests to determine whether the cells are Luminal A.
Knowing which cancer subtype you have can help your
oncologist
determine which treatments will be most effective. It can also tell them whether the cancer is likely to return after treatment.
Management and Treatment
How is luminal A breast cancer treated?
Luminal A breast cancer treatment options include:
Hormone-blocker therapy
. Because luminal A breast cancer is HR+, it usually responds well to hormone blocker therapy. This might include
tamoxifen
aromatase inhibitors or ovarian suppression therapy.
Surgery
. This includes
lumpectomy
or
mastectomy
to remove cancer cells from your breast.
Radiation therapy
. Your oncologist may recommend radiation after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells in the area.
Chemotherapy
. Chemotherapy drugs usually work best for fast-growing tumors. But some people with luminal A breast cancer may benefit from chemotherapy. Your oncologist can tell you if this is an option for you.
You may need a combination of these treatments. Your oncologist will tailor your care plan based on your biopsy results.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for people with luminal A breast cancer?
Luminal A breast cancer has the best outlook of all the molecular subtypes. Still, your prognosis depends on the tumor’s size, how fast it grows and whether it has spread at the time of your diagnosis. The sooner you start treatment, the better your outlook will be.
Advertisement
Luminal A breast cancer can go into
remission
with treatment, and in most early stage cases, it’s
curable
.
Luminal A breast cancer survival rates
The five-year survival rate for luminal A breast cancer is
95%
. That means that 95% of people with this type of breast cancer are still alive five years after their diagnosis.
Survival rates
are only estimates based on past outcomes of other people with luminal A breast cancer. They can’t tell you specific information about your case. To learn more about what survival rates mean for you, talk to your healthcare provider.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk for luminal A breast cancer?
Some risk factors are unavoidable, like having a family history of breast cancer. But doing the following may help reduce your overall cancer risk:
Avoid
smoking
and
vaping
.
Eat lots of fruits, veggies and whole grains.
Increase your physical activity.
Limit alcohol intake.
Maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Living With
How can I take care of myself?
Having cancer comes with a range of emotions. However you feel is OK. Some days, you might feel fine. Other days, it might be hard to get out of bed. It’s important to listen to your body. These suggestions might help:
Eat lots of fruits, vegetables and whole grains.
Get plenty of sleep.
Manage
stress
with
yoga
,
meditation
or
art therapy
.
Rest when you need to.
Seek support from
cancer survivorship
programs.
Talk with others who have similar diagnoses.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll see your healthcare provider for routine check-ups. But you should let them know if you develop any new symptoms or if your existing symptoms get worse.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
If you have luminal A breast cancer, here are some questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider:
What grade or
stage of cancer
do I have?
Has the cancer spread to other areas?
What treatments do you recommend for the type of breast cancer I have?
How long will treatment take?
How often will I need to come in for checkups?
Will I have any treatment side effects?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Luminal A breast cancer has an excellent prognosis with treatment. Still, a cancer diagnosis is a life-changing event. You’ll need to take it easy and lean on your loved ones for support. Talk to your healthcare provider about any fears or worries. They can explain what type of breast cancer you have, and which treatments will work best.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A breast cancer diagnosis can turn your world upside down. At Cleveland Clinic, we offer expertise, compassion and personalized treatment plans.
Breast Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/22/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials