Charles Bonnet Syndrome (Visual Release Hallucinations)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Charles Bonnet Syndrome (Visual Release Hallucinations)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Charles Bonnet Syndrome (Visual Release Hallucinations)
Charles Bonnet Syndrome (visual release hallucinations) is when you see images or scenes that aren’t really there. Experts think it happens when your brain fills in gaps after something makes you lose some of your vision. There’s no cure, but your healthcare providers can help you adjust.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Charles Bonnet Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Charles Bonnet Syndrome?
Visual release hallucinations can vary. But they usually follow these general rules.
Charles Bonnet syndrome (CBS) is a condition that happens after you develop
low vision
. It makes you experience visual hallucinations. Healthcare providers also call it experiencing visual release hallucinations.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A
hallucination
is something you sense that seems real, but isn’t. Other people around you won’t see or experience it. If you have visual release hallucinations, your brain creates images that aren’t coming from your eyes. Visual release hallucinations aren’t related to psychiatric conditions.
Visual release hallucinations can be simple, like bright-colored patterns that show up over everything you see (unformed hallucinations). You might also see more complex images, like animals, buildings or people that don’t exist (formed hallucinations).
You’ll probably know the images aren’t real. Even if you can tell the hallucinations aren’t really there, they can still make you feel
stressed
or upset. The hallucinations shouldn’t speak to you or touch you.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Charles Bonnet syndrome
Seeing visual release hallucinations is the main CBS symptom. Some examples include:
Imaginary or fantasy animals
:
This includes seeing fictional creatures like dragons, unicorns or monsters from a movie.
Nature scenes
:
You might see waterfalls, trees, mountains, bugs or a park scene.
People or animals you know
:
You can see faces of loved ones, coworkers or neighbors from your past or present. Some people see pets or other animals.
Repeated patterns
: You might see a brick wall, netting, a web or another grid-like pattern that repeats the same shape and lines.
Advertisement
No matter what you see, the hallucinations may be:
Clearer and more vivid when your eyes are open (closing your eyes may make images cloudy or harder to “see”)
In color or black-and-white
Silent (they won’t make you hear any unusual sounds)
Still images (static) or moving pictures like a TV show
You may see the same image or scene each time, but some people see something different each time they experience visual release hallucinations.
Charles Bonnet syndrome causes
Losing some or all of your vision causes CBS. Experts think it happens when your
brain
tries to fill in the gaps after you experience vision loss.
Usually, your
retina
converts light into a visual signal for your brain. If you have low vision, your
eyes
can’t transmit as much information to your brain as it’s used to. When this happens, your brain may try completing the picture on its own. It may use your memories or make up new images.
Conditions related to developing Charles Bonnet syndrome include:
Age-related macular degeneration
Stroke
Cataracts
Glaucoma
Retinitis pigmentosa
Diabetes-related retinopathy
Optic neuritis
Giant cell arteritis
Eye removal (
enucleation
or
evisceration
)
Remember, a psychiatric condition doesn’t cause these hallucinations.
Risk factors
Your risk of visual release hallucinations increases as you age. Up to half of people with low vision experience CBS at some point. But it usually happens after age 80.
You may be more likely to develop Charles Bonnet syndrome if you live alone or aren’t socially connected to many people. Spending a lot of time in the dark (indoors with natural light blocked out) may increase your risk, too.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose visual release hallucinations
A healthcare provider or
eye care specialist
will diagnose the hallucinations with a
physical exam
and a complete
eye exam
. They’ll ask about your medical history. Tell your provider when you first experienced a hallucination and if you know you have any eye conditions that reduce your vision.
Tell your provider if you’ve recently had
eye surgery
or started a new medication. Hallucinations can be a temporary side effect.
Tests that are used
Your provider may give you a
neurological exam
or use imaging tests like an
MRI
or
CT scan
to rule out other issues that can cause hallucinations. Other conditions that can cause similar symptoms include:
Alzheimer’s disease
Drug and
alcohol withdrawal
Lewy body dementia
Parkinson’s disease
Schizophrenia
Management and Treatment
Charles Bonnet syndrome treatment
There aren’t any treatments that can cure or prevent CBS. Fortunately, many people have fewer hallucinations (or stop having them completely) once their brain and eyes adjust to having reduced vision. This adjustment period usually takes a year or two.
Advertisement
Your healthcare provider can suggest ways to manage the hallucinations. These aren’t treatments to stop visual release hallucinations, but they can help your brain adjust. Your provider may recommend:
Adding lighting
:
Spending more time in brightly lit environments can help reduce how often you experience CBS. Opening the blinds or curtains during the day, or turning on an extra lamp or two at night, can help.
Getting plenty of sleep and managing stress
: Resting and relaxing are important to your overall health. And getting a healthy amount of
sleep
is one of the best ways to support your mental health. Your provider may suggest relaxation techniques, like
meditation
or breathing exercises.
Intentional eye movements
:
Blinking your eyes may help dismiss a hallucination. Moving your eyes to focus on something else can help, too. Even if you know the image isn’t real, not looking at it can take your brain’s attention off it.
Medications
:
There aren’t any medications that treat CBS, but your provider may prescribe anti-anxiety medications or
antidepressants
if the hallucinations affect your mental health.
Staying socially connected
: Spending time with loved ones can help keep your brain active and engaged. This can help you feel less isolated. Your provider may be able to recommend a support group where you can connect with others who have CBS.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider or eye care specialist as soon as you notice any changes in your eyes or vision. The sooner you get the underlying cause of CBS diagnosed, the better. Tell your provider if you’re having more (or more intense) visual release hallucinations. They may be able to suggest other ways to help manage them.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have Charles Bonnet syndrome?
You might have to manage CBS for a while. It may disappear over time, but it can take a year or two to go away.
You may find it difficult to do some of your daily tasks or move around in places you don’t know well if you’re experiencing hallucinations. Don’t be afraid to ask for help from your healthcare provider or trusted loved ones. They can help you get any support and accommodations you need to do all your favorite activities.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Experiencing any kind of hallucination can be scary. It might be even more upsetting when you learn the condition that’s already affecting your vision causes it. But the good news is that most people adjust to Charles Bonnet syndrome and stop experiencing visual release hallucinations. There’s no cure, but your healthcare providers will suggest ways to help you adjust.
Talk to your loved ones and healthcare providers about what you’re seeing and feeling. The symptoms you’re experiencing are real, even if the images you see aren’t. You deserve to feel safe and supported no matter what.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/09/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2020
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment