Diastrophic Dysplasia (Dwarfism): What It Is & Symptoms
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Diastrophic Dysplasia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Diastrophic Dysplasia
Diastrophic dysplasia (diastrophic dwarfism) is a rare inherited disorder that’s present at birth. It affects the development of cartilage and bone. People with the condition often have short stature, short arms and legs, and problems with their joints.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Diastrophic Dysplasia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Diastrophic Dysplasia?
Diastrophic dysplasia (DTD or diastrophic dwarfism) is a rare inherited disorder. It affects how fetuses’
bones
and
cartilage
form during
fetal development
. People with this condition are unusually short and have short arms and legs. They may have other physical differences, too. Experts estimate about 1 in 500,000 babies in the U.S. are born with diastrophic dysplasia (die-uh-STRAH-fik dis-PLAY-zhuh).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of diastrophic dysplasia
The most common symptom is
short stature
. The average height for someone with DTD is less than 4 feet (120 centimeters).
Diastrophic dysplasia may affect many areas of your child’s head and body. Your child may have some of the following issues or symptoms:
Cleft palate
Difficulty breathing due to
cartilage
in the
trachea
Ears
with physical differences like unusual thickness
Flat nasal bridge (bony area at the top of the
nose
)
Full or prominent cheeks
The disorder may affect your child’s
skeletal system
. It may cause issues with your child’s neck and shoulders. Your child may also have conditions that affect their
spine
, hands, hips,
knees
and feet. Conditions and symptoms may include:
Cervical instability (weak ligaments and connective tissue in your child’s neck)
Cervical kyphosis
Clubfoot
Hip and knee flexion contractures that cause pain and affect your child’s ability to move around
Dislocated joints
, including your child’s shoulder or elbow
Osteoarthritis
that causes
joint pain
Scoliosis
Short fingers and toes
Diastrophic dysplasia causes
DTD happens when the
SLC26A2
gene
changes
. This gene makes a protein that helps your body form cartilage and convert it to bone.
Children may inherit this condition if both of their parents are carriers for it. Carriers stay healthy, but when two carriers have a child together, there's a 25% chance for the child to be affected. Healthcare providers call this an
autosomal recessive
inheritance pattern.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose diastrophic dysplasia
Typically, an
obstetrician
diagnoses this condition at birth. They may do tests like
X-rays
or
CT scans
to look at the bones in your baby’s arms and legs.
Sometimes,
prenatal ultrasounds
detect signs of diastrophic dysplasia. An obstetrician may recommend
genetic tests
to diagnose this condition.
Management and Treatment
How is DTD treated?
There’s no set treatment for this condition. Your child’s healthcare team will develop treatment plans for specific health issues. Your child may have treatments like:
Braces that support their spine and joints
Medication to manage
pain
and
inflammation
Orthodontic
treatment to fix issues with their jaw and teeth
Physical therapy
and
occupational therapy
Surgery to correct physical differences
Research
shows people with diastrophic dysplasia may have
anxiety
and
depression
. Your child may benefit from mental health support.
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
Your child will have regular checkups with their pediatrician and other caregivers. But you should contact caregivers if you see changes in your child, like new symptoms or worsening pain. That way, caregivers can act quickly to help your child.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has diastrophic dysplasia?
Diastrophic dysplasia is a chronic disease that affects people in different ways. This condition causes medical challenges, but it’s not life-threatening. It doesn’t affect
life expectancy
.
Your child may need surgery when they’re still very young. Surgery and hospital stays can be hard on little ones and their families. Working with a
child life specialist
may help.
Prevention
Can diastrophic dysplasia be prevented?
There’s no way to prevent DTD. If someone in your family has this condition, consider talking to your healthcare provider about genetic testing before pregnancy. Tests will show if you have the genetic variation that causes this condition. If you do, a genetic counselor will help you understand what the test results mean.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If your baby is born with diastrophic dysplasia, they have physical differences. They may have medical issues. But these differences don’t define who they are or what they’ll accomplish as they grow up.
Having diastrophic dysplasia creates challenges, and your child may need extra support throughout their life. Your child’s care team understands those obstacles, and they’ll be there to help you and your child manage them.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/22/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment