Milroy’s Disease: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Milroy’s Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Milroy’s Disease
Milroy’s disease is a type of lymphedema that a child can inherit and have at birth. This issue makes it hard for them to manage lymphatic fluid in their legs, leading to a buildup of this fluid. Simple treatments help many children with this problem, but it’s a lifelong disease.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is Milroy’s disease?
Milroy’s disease is a type of primary
lymphedema
(an issue with lymph drainage). “Primary” means another disease doesn’t cause it. This
genetic (inherited) disease
is congenital (present at birth). It doesn’t allow the usual
lymphatic system
nodes and channels to develop fully, which makes them unable to work well. Without lymphatic drainage,
lymph
fluid builds up and causes swelling in a baby’s lower legs and feet.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Another name for Milroy’s disease is hereditary lymphedema type I.
The process of getting a diagnosis for Milroy’s disease can be frustrating because healthcare providers don’t see many cases of it. But if you notice swelling in your baby’s legs, it’s worth asking their provider about it. The sooner your child sees a provider, the faster they can get a diagnosis and start treatment.
How rare is Milroy’s disease?
This disease happens in about 1 in 6,000 births. It’s more common in
females
. For every one male who has it, there are at least two females who have it.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms?
Your child may have these Milroy’s disease symptoms as a newborn:
Swelling (
edema
) in their lower legs (usually below both knees)
Veins
that stick out from their lower legs
Hydrocele
(fluid causing swelling in your
scrotum
)
Toenails that slant up
Papillomatosis (noncancerous growths)
Gastrointestinal (digestive) issues
What causes Milroy’s disease?
A variant in the
FLT4
gene
causes Milroy’s disease. People with Milroy’s disease usually have a biological parent who has the disease. It passes to children in an
autosomal dominant
pattern, which means it only takes one parent to pass it on. One sibling with this disease may have more severe symptoms than the other or have symptoms at a different age.
Advertisement
About 9 out of 10 people with the
FLT4
variant have swelling in their legs by age 3.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is it diagnosed?
A Milroy’s disease diagnosis begins with a
physical exam
. It may also include tests like:
Ultrasound
(imaging)
during pregnancy
or after birth
Lymphoscintigraphy
(imaging)
Genetic testing
Your child’s provider may refer you to a pediatric-certified lymphedema therapist.
Management and Treatment
How do you treat Milroy’s disease?
You can use at-home treatments to help your baby’s swelling from this disease. Milroy’s disease treatment for leg swelling includes:
Compression therapy
(socks)
Kinesiology or KT tape (
athletic tape
)
Shoes that provide support
These simple treatments work well in most cases. If not,
lymphatic drainage massage
can help. A provider can perform this and teach you how to perform it, as well.
If these methods don’t work, your child’s provider may recommend surgery at some point to help your child’s lymphatic system work better. This could involve:
Removing affected tissue
Using a bypass procedure to redirect lymphatic fluid away from areas that need better lymph drainage
Moving working
lymph nodes
from elsewhere in your child’s body to their legs (a procedure known as vascularized lymph node transfer)
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has this condition?
Because Milroy’s disease is rare, you may need to explain it to teachers and others in your child’s life. Talking about it can help a teacher understand why your child may take longer to change clothes for gym class or why they shouldn’t be barefoot (the risk of injury and infection). But they can still do most of the things their classmates can do.
Milroy’s disease is a chronic (long-term) condition. Leg swelling can get worse in some people and better in others. Without treatment, swelling from this disease can make the affected area feel hard. People with this condition may also develop
cellulitis
, an infection that can spread to your
bloodstream
.
Living With
How do I take care of my child?
Ways to care for your child with Milroy’s disease include:
Take good care of your child’s
skin
and treat infections right away to limit issues with cellulitis.
Try to protect them from injuring their legs because they’re more at risk of infection than others who don’t have Milroy’s disease.
Make sure they’re moving their legs often and aren’t keeping them still for long.
Encourage physical activity, especially swimming.
Check with your provider before giving your child medicine to be sure it won’t make swelling worse.
Limit how much salt they eat
, as it makes their body retain fluid.
Encourage your child to eat nutritient-dense foods so they take in enough nutrition.
When should my child see a healthcare provider?
Your child will have regular checkups with their healthcare provider for Milroy’s disease. This helps their provider see how they’re doing and find out if the disease is staying the same or getting worse. Contact your child’s provider if you feel that treatments aren’t helping and you want to try others. Your child may also see an
occupational therapist
to help them use their limbs better.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your child’s provider include:
Which of our relatives could be at risk for this disease?
Do you know of any support groups for Milroy’s disease?
Can you help me find a source for compression garments for my child?
In your experience, how well will simple treatments work?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having a child with Milroy’s disease isn’t like having one with a common condition. Educating yourself and others about your baby’s condition is the first step in providing care. Learn what you can and don’t be afraid to ask your child’s care team questions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment