Arthus Reaction: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Arthus Reaction
Advertisement
Advertisement
Arthus Reaction
Arthus reaction is a hard, painful swelling that can happen when you get an additional dose of a vaccine shot. It’s caused by fluid and cells collecting at the injection site. It usually goes away on its own without treatment. Contact your provider if you experience severe pain or swelling that goes on for more than a few days after vaccination.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is arthus reaction?
Arthus reaction is a hard, painful, swollen area that can happen under your skin where you’ve received a booster
vaccination
. It’s most common with
diphtheria
and
tetanus
vaccinations (which are combined in a
Tdap shot
), but can happen with any shot that you’ve received multiple doses of.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Arthus reaction is a type III hypersensitivity response. Hypersensitivity responses happen when your
immune system
overreacts or incorrectly responds to something foreign — like pollen or
germs
— entering your body. Arthus reaction is usually something that can happen when you’re injected with a booster dose (an additional dose of a previous vaccine). But some people also consider farmer’s lung (a type of
hypersensitivity pneumonitis
) and other localized type III hypersensitivities to be arthus reactions. Bug bites could also potentially cause an arthus reaction.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of arthus reaction?
Symptoms of arthus reaction happen around the area where you got an injection, within four to 12 hours of vaccination. Symptoms include:
A hard, very painful lump.
Swelling.
Redness or discoloration.
Open sore or ulcer.
What causes arthus reaction?
Arthus reaction happens when your body reacts to an additional dose of a vaccine by sending cells and fluid to the injection site.
Your immune system recognizes things it encounters in your body as “self” or “non-self” by attaching to (binding) markers called
antigens
. When your immune system first sees an antigen it doesn’t recognize, it can create
antibodies
that are designed to bind to the antigen and alert other immune system cells to attack it. Your immune system then remembers that antigen so it can attack the antigen more quickly the next time it sees it.
Advertisement
Vaccines use different methods to get your body to recognize an antigen without making you sick. The next time your body sees that antigen after you’ve been vaccinated against it, it can fight it off quickly. When you get a booster shot, the IgG antibodies you made during the original vaccination can activate immune cells at the injection site. This causes your blood vessels to open up, filling the area with fluid and immune cells.
This buildup of fluid and cells causes a lump and swelling under your skin — arthus reaction. Sometimes, immune complexes (antibodies bound to antigens) cause
vasculitis
by sticking to the insides of your blood vessels. When this happens, blood might not be able to flow through, causing tissue to die from lack of oxygen.
What are the complications of arthus reaction?
Rarely, arthus reaction can cause your tissue to die (
necrosis
). If left untreated, this can lead to wound
infection
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is arthus reaction diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose arthus reaction by learning about your symptoms and examining the injection site. They may test tissue or fluid around the reaction or do
blood tests
to help make a diagnosis.
Management and Treatment
How is arthus reaction treated?
Arthus reactions usually go away on their own and don’t need treatment. If the reaction is severe or lasts more than a few days, your provider might treat you with:
Corticosteroids
to reduce inflammation.
Pain relievers to keep you comfortable.
Antihistamines
to block some of the chemicals causing the reaction.
Icing the area to decrease swelling.
If you have complications like necrosis, a provider may surgically remove dead tissue (debridement) or prescribe
antibiotics
to treat or prevent infections.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does arthus reaction last?
Arthus reaction usually goes away on its own in a few days. If your reaction is severe or lasts a long time, you may need treatment to get better or to prevent complications.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider if you develop a hard, painful lump after getting a vaccine or being bitten by a bug, or if you have a wound that’s not healing. They can diagnose the issue and determine what kind of treatment (if any) is best.
When should I go to the ER?
Go to the nearest emergency room or seek emergency medical care if you have swelling or a wound that’s:
Very painful.
Blistering.
Foul-smelling.
Black.
Warm to the touch.
Oozing gray or white fluid.
What questions should I ask my doctor?
You may want to ask your provider:
Is this an arthus reaction or an expected vaccine side effect?
When can I expect it to get better?
How can I take care of myself at home?
Is there any way to prevent this in the future?
When should I follow up with you?
Prevention
Can arthus reaction be prevented?
You can prevent arthus reaction by avoiding the cause. If you’ve been diagnosed with arthus reaction to a diphtheria or tetanus vaccine, your provider might suggest you go longer between boosters than is typically recommended. It’s important not to skip scheduled vaccinations without consulting a healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
How common is arthus reaction to vaccines?
Arthus reaction to vaccines is extremely rare. Only 1 in 10 million people report having this kind of reaction.
What’s the difference between arthus reaction and serum sickness?
Arthus reaction and serum sickness affect your body differently and happen under different circumstances. Arthus reaction happens only at the site of a vaccine injection. Serum sickness causes inflammation in your entire body. It can happen with treatments like
monoclonal antibodies
(a concentrated fluid, or serum, that contains antibodies that help you fight an infection) when your immune system mistakenly attacks the serum.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Arthus reaction is a rare and painful condition you can get after receiving certain vaccinations. But most often, it goes away on its own without causing any lasting effects. Talk to a healthcare provider if you think you’re experiencing arthus reaction. They can let you know what serious symptoms to look out for and how to avoid it in the future.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/19/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment