Orgasm: What is an Orgasm, Types of Orgasms & Health Benefits
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Orgasm
Advertisement
Advertisement
Orgasm
Orgasm occurs after stimulation of the genitals or erogenous zones. It’s the peak of sexual arousal and causes intense feelings of pleasure. Orgasms have several positive effects on overall health. Everyone experiences sexual climax differently, which is normal and healthy. But some factors can make it difficult to achieve orgasm.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
What is an orgasm?
An orgasm is the height or peak of sexual arousal when your body releases sexual tension and pressure. It involves very intense feelings of pleasure in your genitals and throughout your body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
An orgasm usually lasts a few seconds and feels very good.
Orgasm occurs during sexual stimulation of your genitals and sexual (erogenous) zones of your body. These include the:
Penis
Testicles
Clitoris
Vagina
Nipples
Anus
An orgasm can occur during masturbation or during sex with a partner. It is one of four stages in your body’s
sexual response cycle
:
Desire (libido)
Excitement (arousal)
Orgasm
Resolution
Having an orgasm is also called climaxing, cumming, or having the “big O.”
What happens during an orgasm?
Certain things happen throughout your body during orgasm:
Your body suddenly releases sexual tension that built up during the first two phases of the sexual response cycle.
Heart rate, blood pressure and breathing rate increase.
Hormones are released into your bloodstream.
Muscles in your genitals and anus rhythmically contract repeatedly (about once per second for several seconds).
Muscle contractions play an important role in orgasm. For example, the muscles of your vagina and uterus often contract. This may cause a small amount of fluid to release from your genitals. Likewise, the muscles at the base of your penis contract, which usually leads to
ejaculation
(when the body releases semen).
What happens after an orgasm?
In the few minutes after orgasm, your body slowly returns to its normal state. As you recover:
Advertisement
Body parts that became swollen or erect, such as your penis or clitoris, go back to their previous size and color.
Genitals may feel overly sensitive or uncomfortable to touch.
Skin all over your body can look and feel flushed (pink or red).
You may feel satisfied, relaxed or tired.
Some people may become sexually aroused again a few minutes after orgasm and can have multiple orgasms. Some need more time before they can orgasm again. This differs widely from person to person.
Are there different types of orgasms?
There are different kinds of orgasms, including:
Anal orgasm:
This type of orgasm is achieved by stimulating your anus (the opening in your butt).
Clitoral orgasm:
The clitoris is the external, or outside, part of the female genitalia. It’s located at the top of the vaginal opening, where the inner labia (lips) meet. (This is called the clitoral hood.) Clit orgasms are felt most on your body’s surface, such as a tingling on your skin.
Vaginal orgasm:
The vagina is the opening to the female reproductive system. Vaginal orgasms are felt deeper in your body.
Combo:
If you experience orgasm through your clitoris and vagina at the same time, this can cause a more intense orgasm.
Erogenous zones:
More rarely, some people may reach a climax with stimulation of the erogenous zones. Examples include ears, elbows, knees, neck, breasts, nipples and wrist.
What does an orgasm feel like?
Orgasm is generally intense and pleasurable. But it can feel different for everyone, and it can even feel different for a person each time. All of the differences are normal and healthy.
You may or may not ejaculate or release fluids.
Orgasm usually lasts a few seconds but can last longer.
Orgasmic sensations can be mild or intense.
You may need specific stimulation or sexual aids, such as vibrators, to climax.
Sometimes you may reach orgasm quickly and easily, without much stimulation. But sometimes, orgasm requires more time and effort.
Why does an orgasm feel good?
During orgasm, your body releases dopamine, known as “the feel-good hormone,” and oxytocin, sometimes called “the love drug.” These hormones increase feelings of happiness and other positive emotions, and they counteract the “stress hormone,” cortisol.
Why am I having trouble having an orgasm?
Many people have to experiment with different methods and communicate well with their partners before they can achieve orgasm.
Other factors also can interfere with the ability to reach sexual climax:
Advancing age
Beliefs or taboos about sex
Expectations
Hormone imbalances such as
hypogonadism
Lack of emotional connection or comfort with a partner
Past bad experiences with sex
Poor physical or mental health, including some medical and psychological conditions
Stress
Use of certain medications, drugs or alcohol
Advertisement
If you have trouble having an orgasm and it bothers you, talk to a healthcare provider. Some people have
sexual dysfunction
, disorders that interfere with orgasm. You can speak to a
primary care provider (PCP)
to learn more. Or, to address sexual dysfunction in females, you may want to visit a gynecologist.
Are there health benefits of orgasm?
Research indicates that orgasms have several health benefits, including improvements in:
Headaches
and other pain
Heart health
Menstrual cramps
Self-confidence
Sleep
Stress
A note from Cleveland Clinic
An orgasm is a pleasurable feeling at the height of sexual arousal. Everyone experiences orgasm differently, and many factors can affect your ability to climax. Talk to a healthcare provider if trouble reaching orgasm is bothering you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/09/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider