Frontotemporal Dementia: What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Frontotemporal Dementia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Frontotemporal Dementia
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a progressive brain disease. This means it gets worse over time as parts of your brain stop working. Depending on where it starts, it can affect your behavior, movement and ability to speak and understand others. There isn’t a cure, but your provider can help you manage symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Frontotemporal Dementia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Frontotemporal Dementia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Frontotemporal Dementia?
Frontotemporal dementia causes your frontal and temporal lobes to shrink.
Frontotemporal
dementia
is a
neurodegenerative disorder
that affects the
frontal
and
temporal
lobes of your brain. It happens when there’s damage to
nerve
cells (neurons) in these parts. As it affects more cells, your frontal and temporal lobes shrink.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms target your behavior, movement, personality and/or language. It’s a progressive disorder. This means that symptoms get worse over time.
A healthcare provider can help you manage symptoms for as long as possible.
Types of frontotemporal dementia
The types of FTD include:
Behavioral variant (bvFTD)
: Damage to your frontal lobes affects your behavior and personality. Unawareness of inappropriate behavior and memory problems may or may not be present.
Primary progressive aphasia
: Damage to your temporal lobes affects your communication and language skills.
Corticobasal degeneration
: Damage to your frontal and temporal lobes causes problems with movement, like difficulty using one side of your body and changes in thinking.
Progressive supranuclear palsy
: Damage within your frontal lobe affects eye movements, balance and walking.
Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism
: Damage in your frontal and temporal lobes affects your movement, language, behavior, balance and muscle control.
FTD-ALS
: A combination of FTD and ALS symptoms affect your behavior and language skills with progressive muscle weakness and muscle jerks.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of frontotemporal dementia
The symptoms of FTD vary by type and the part of your brain it affects. They may include:
Apathy
: No motivation, social isolation, a lack of self-care or hygiene
Food interest changes
: Overeating or eating things that aren’t food (
pica
)
Inappropriate social behaviors
: No filter when speaking, lack of respect for others or participating in risky behaviors
Loss of empathy (emotional blunting)
: Difficulty reading the emotions of others or acting in an unfeeling way
Loss of executive function
: Difficulty planning, solving problems and staying organized
Loss of language and communication skills
: Not having the right words to say, mixing up words, losing the ability to read and write
Repeated behaviors
: Saying or doing the same things over and over
Movement changes
: Muscle stiffness, weak muscles, slowed movements, jerking muscle movements
Advertisement
Symptoms may start mild and will get worse over time.
Frontotemporal dementia causes
This condition happens when nerve cells (neurons) in your brain die. Proteins group together within the cell and damage it. As your neurons lose function, parts of your frontal and temporal lobes shrink. This leads to symptoms of FTD.
Studies show that there may be a
genetic variant
that causes some cases of the disease. This is a change to the instruction manual that your DNA uses to do a specific job in your body.
In other cases, the exact reason why FTD happens isn’t fully understood. Research is ongoing to learn more.
Risk factors for FTD
You may be more at risk of developing FTD if:
It runs in your biological family history
You had a
traumatic brain injury
Complications
As FTD gets worse, you may have the following complications:
Agitation or aggression
Delusions or
hallucinations
Difficulty swallowing
Loss of all communication or language skills
Loss of muscle control
Memory loss
Mental health challenges like depression
Trouble recognizing loved ones
Severe symptoms may require full-time care to keep you safe and help you meet your needs.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose frontotemporal dementia
A healthcare provider will diagnose frontotemporal dementia based on your medical history and a physical and neurological examination.
It can be challenging to diagnose FTD. That’s because symptoms may look like other conditions. Tests help rule these out. Your provider may offer the following:
Blood tests
Imaging tests of your brain (MRI, CT scan or PET scan)
Genetic testing
Cognitive testing
Each type of FTD has its own staging system. Your provider will review your symptoms and identify how severe they are when they make a diagnosis. Most staging includes mild, moderate and severe, among other classifications. Stages will change as the condition gets worse.
Management and Treatment
How is frontotemporal dementia treated?
There isn’t a cure for FTD. There are treatment options available for managing symptoms. These vary by the type of frontotemporal dementia and the symptoms you have. Your provider may recommend:
Taking
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) to help with certain behavior challenges
Exercising at physical or occupational therapy for movement changes
Using assistive devices like a walker or wheelchair to help you navigate safely
Practicing different forms of communication during
speech therapy
Taking
antidepressants
or
antipsychotic
medications to manage mood changes or mental health complications
Participating in
clinical trials
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Frontotemporal Dementia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have frontotemporal dementia?
FTD changes how your brain works. This means that some of the things that you used to be able to do will become harder as the disease affects more of your brain. Over time, you may need full-time care. This is to help you complete your daily routine since living independently can be unsafe.
Advertisement
If you have an early diagnosis of FTD, you may want to talk to your loved ones or to anyone you trust to make important decisions for you. These conversations help your caregivers honor your wishes if you can’t make choices on your own in the future.
While these conversations may feel difficult, having them sooner can help avoid confusion in the years to come. They also mean your loved ones won’t face the painful, difficult situation of having to guess what you want.
Also, you should put your wishes and decisions in writing. That includes preparing documents connected to
legal issues and what happens if you can’t make decisions for yourself
.
Your healthcare provider can tell you more about what to expect. They can also direct you to resources and services that might help you.
What is the life expectancy of FTD?
The average life expectancy after a diagnosis of FTD is
seven to 13 years
after symptoms start. This varies from person to person and by type. Your provider is the best person to talk to about your situation because it may or may not match statistics.
While this condition isn’t fatal on its own, it often causes other issues that are serious or even life-threatening. One common issue is trouble swallowing. This causes problems with eating, drinking and speaking. It increases the risk of developing
pneumonia
or
respiratory failure
.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Frontotemporal dementia can be a devastating diagnosis to receive. Not only will it impact you, but it can have a significant impact on your loved ones, as well. As symptoms get worse, you could lose your ability to control your behavior and movement. It may even impact your ability to speak and understand those around you. This can be scary, frustrating and emotionally draining.
When a diagnosis happens, it’s important to work with your care team. Put your wishes or instructions about your future into writing as soon as possible. The effects of FTD will impact your ability to make decisions and take care of yourself. These documents will be helpful in the years to come. If you have any questions or concerns, a healthcare provider can help you.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Frontotemporal dementia can change your life. Cleveland Clinic is here for you and your family, offering care and support for all types of dementia.
Frontotemporal Dementia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/02/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment