Laboring Down: What It Means & Is It Safe
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Laboring Down
Advertisement
Advertisement
Laboring Down
Laboring down is the process of not actively pushing once the second stage of labor and intense contractions begin. Some people wait one to two hours before pushing, which allows their baby to move down the birth canal naturally. Laboring down has risks and benefits.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
What is laboring down?
Laboring down is a labor and
delivery technique
that involves delaying pushing. Typically, you begin pushing once your
cervix dilates
(opens) to 10 centimeters. This is also known as the second stage of labor. But if you labor down, you delay pushing for one to two hours after the second stage begins instead of pushing right away.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are several reasons you may want to labor down. One of the main reasons is that you may not feel the urge to push yet. In these cases, it’s often helpful to wait until your baby is lower in the birth canal or until there’s a strong, natural urge to push. This approach allows gravity and
contractions
to help move your baby farther down. It’s also a more natural approach because you let your body do most of the work on its own when it’s ready.
Laboring down is sometimes called delayed pushing or passive descent.
What are the benefits of it?
Some healthcare providers believe that laboring down:
Helps you conserve energy by shortening how long you push
Helps your body work naturally
Improves the chances of a
vaginal delivery
Reduces the risks of needing a
C-section
Studies
show that laboring down cuts the total time that you push before delivery by about 27 minutes. But it also extends the length of the second stage of labor by almost an hour.
Is it safe?
It’s not safe to labor down if your baby is showing
signs of distress
or isn’t moving down the birth canal. If you’re showing signs of infection, it may not be safe to wait the extra time to delivery.
Some studies
show there isn’t any evidence that delayed pushing leads to a higher rate of vaginal delivery. The same study shows slight increases in the following
complications
with delayed pushing:
Advertisement
Chorioamnionitis
(a bacterial infection in the
amniotic fluid
)
Postpartum
hemorrhage
(heavy bleeding)
Because of these risks, some hospitals have policies against laboring down. Before deciding to labor down, talk with your
obstetrician
,
midwife
or
doula
about the pros and cons. Your health, how your labor is going and your baby’s position can all affect whether it’s a safe option for you.
What is the best position for laboring down?
The best positions are ones that open your pelvis. There are a few ways you can do this. Lying on your side with a peanut ball is one way. You use the ball to prop up one bent leg. Another way involves being on all fours and swaying or rocking your hips.
Can you labor down with an epidural?
Yes. It’s possible to labor down with an
epidural
. But if you’re numb, you may not feel the natural urge to push.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) doesn’t recommend laboring down if it’s your first time giving birth and you’ve had an epidural. But ultimately, the decision is between you and your healthcare team and based on your specific situation.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If you’re thinking about laboring down, it’s OK to have questions. You’re probably just trying to figure out what’s best for you and your baby. The best thing to do is to talk it through with your provider and labor and delivery nurse. They can help you decide if it’s a good fit for your labor.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Trying to choose where to give birth? Learn why Cleveland Clinic is the best choice to help you through each step of the labor and delivery process.
Having Your Baby
Getting Started
Labor & Delivery Services
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/18/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment