Spinal Stroke: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Spinal Stroke
Advertisement
Advertisement
Spinal Stroke
Spinal strokes happen when something stops blood flow in your spinal cord. Blood clots are the most common cause, but hemorrhages (broken vessels) can cause them, too. Spinal strokes cause different symptoms than strokes in your brain, but they’re just as serious. Get emergency help right away if you think you’re experiencing spinal stroke symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is a spinal stroke?
A spinal stroke is a type of
stroke
that stops blood flow in your
spinal cord
. Healthcare providers also call them spinal cord strokes, spinal infarctions or spinal infarcts.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most strokes happen when a
blood vessel
in your
brain
is blocked by a blood clot or breaks (ruptures) and bleeds. The same issues cause spinal strokes, but the blockage or bleeding (hemorrhage) happens in your spinal cord.
Spinal strokes are very rare (less than 1% of all strokes). But they can still be fatal or cause permanent disabilities.
If you think you or someone you’re with is having a spinal stroke,
immediately call 911 (or your local emergency services number)
. The sooner someone is diagnosed and treated, the more likely it is they’ll survive a stroke. Every second counts.
Symptoms and Causes
What are spinal stroke symptoms?
A spinal stroke can cause lots of different symptoms depending on which part of your spinal cord it affects. Some of the most common symptoms include:
Sudden, intense
neck pain
or
back pain
Pain that spreads (radiates) from your back into your arms or legs
Numbness
or tingling in your arms or legs
Muscle weakness (especially in your legs)
Losing sensations like touch or noticing temperature changes
Losing control of your pee (
urinary incontinence
) or poop (
bowel incontinence
)
Paralysis
What causes a spinal stroke?
There are two types of spinal strokes that have different causes.
Ischemic spinal strokes happen when a
blood clot
blocks a blood vessel in your spinal cord. Most spinal cord strokes are ischemic. Health conditions that increase your risk of blood clots can include:
Advertisement
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
Atherosclerosis
(hardened arteries)
Clotting disorders
Atrial fibrillation
(especially when
sleep apnea
causes it)
Heart defects (including
atrial septal defect
and
ventricular septal defect
)
Hemorrhagic spinal strokes happen when a vessel in your spinal cord breaks or tears. Causes can include:
High blood pressure
(especially if it’s very high or you have it for a long time)
Spinal tumors
Aneurysms
It’s rare, but other causes can include:
Spinal cord injuries
Infections like
meningitis
Accidental damage during surgery
Spine fractures (broken back)
Risk factors
Anybody can experience a spinal stroke, but you may have higher risk if you:
Smoke
or use other forms of tobacco or nicotine (like
vaping
)
Are older than 65
Are Black
Use recreational or nonprescription drugs
Having certain health conditions can increase your stroke risk, including:
High blood pressure (hypertension)
High cholesterol (hyperlipidemia)
COVID-19
Diabetes
Obesity
Alcohol use disorder
What are the complications of a spinal stroke?
A spinal stroke can be fatal. It can also permanently damage your spinal cord, which can cause:
Permanent paralysis
Chronic pain
Breathing problems
Sexual dysfunction
Permanent incontinence
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose a spinal stroke?
A healthcare provider will diagnose a spinal stroke with a
physical exam
, a
neurological exam
and tests. Providers in the emergency room may diagnose it if emergency services transport you to the ER.
Your provider will use an
MRI
to take pictures of your spinal cord. This will let them check for signs of a stroke or other issues that could cause the symptoms you’re experiencing. They might use a
lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
to check for infections or signs of inflammation in your cerebrospinal fluid. These issues can share symptoms with spinal strokes.
Management and Treatment
What are spinal cord stroke treatments?
Spinal cord stroke treatments vary depending on which type you experience. Your healthcare providers will try to restore normal blood flow to your spinal cord as fast as possible to reduce your risk of death and permanent complications.
If the stroke is ischemic, your providers will try to break up or remove the blood clot. You might need:
Blood thinners (anticoagulants)
Thrombolytic medications
(clot-busting medications)
Surgery (usually a
mechanical thrombectomy
) to break up and remove the clot
Your providers may also give you medications to manage your blood pressure.
If you had a hemorrhagic stroke, your providers will stop the bleeding in your spinal cord. You’ll need medications to control the bleeding and manage your blood pressure. You might need surgery to reduce increased pressure on your spinal cord from the bleeding in or around it.
Advertisement
Your providers will tell you exactly which treatments are best for you and what to expect.
Spinal cord stroke rehabilitation
Stroke rehab is an important part of stroke treatment.
Physical therapy
will strengthen your muscles, improve your balance and help you regain full or partial use of your arms and legs. You might also need
occupational therapy
to help you safely complete your daily tasks, especially chores or activities that need precise body movements.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Can you fully recover from a spinal stroke?
What you can expect (the prognosis) after a spinal stroke depends on a few factors, including:
Which type of stroke you had
How quickly it was treated
If the stroke permanently damaged your spinal cord
Your overall health
Your age
A full recovery looks different for each person. You might regain all of your original body functions and abilities to move. This usually takes at least a few months. But you might have long-term effects like new or different disabilities.
For example, you’ll probably need a
walker
or a
cane
while you recover. You might need one for the rest of your life. But some people eventually regain their full original mobility. It can take years, but it’s possible.
Your provider will tell you what to expect. They’ll help you set recovery goals and expectations that fit your unique health and situation.
Advertisement
Life expectancy after a spinal stroke
Spinal strokes can be fatal. But it’s hard for experts to estimate an accurate survival rate. There’s no standard recovery timeline or outlook that’s accurate for everyone.
Ischemic strokes usually have better outcomes than hemorrhagic strokes, but that doesn’t mean your recovery will be easier, faster or better if you have one type or the other. Everyone’s body responds differently to a stroke.
Prevention
Can you prevent a spinal cord stroke?
Maintaining your overall health is the best way to reduce your risk of a spinal cord stroke. In general, try to:
Quit smoking
.
Eat plenty of healthy foods (like the
Mediterranean diet
) and maintain a weight that’s healthy for you.
Manage your blood pressure, cholesterol and any health conditions you have.
Get regular physical activity.
Visit a healthcare provider every year (or as often as they suggest). Many of the conditions that can cause spinal cord strokes develop or build up over time. Some don’t cause symptoms you can feel or notice. For example, many people with high cholesterol or high blood pressure never sense anything wrong before they’re diagnosed. Your provider will help you catch and manage any warning signs before they increase your stroke risk.
Living With
How do I take care of myself after a spinal stroke?
Rehabbing and recovering after a stroke is hard work. Once you and your provider finalize your treatment plan, follow it as closely as possible. In general, you should:
Advertisement
Go to your rehab and other therapy appointments.
Tell your therapists if anything makes you feel unsafe or uncomfortable. Rehab can be tough, but you shouldn’t be in constant pain or discomfort.
Remember your mental health.
Depression
and
anxiety
are extremely common after a stroke. You’re not weak or a quitter for feeling sad or upset. Your emotional health can be just as important as how your physical body is doing. Talk to your provider or a mental health professional if you feel like you need help processing anything during your recovery.
Take your medications.
Taking your medicine as often as your provider instructs will help your body heal.
When should I go to the ER?
Call 911 (or your local emergency services number) if you think you’re experiencing stroke symptoms again. Another stroke has an even higher risk of being fatal or causing severe complications. Don’t wait to call for help.
People who’ve had a stroke have an increased risk of other potentially serious complications, including:
Heart attack
Pneumonia
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Pulmonary embolism
Seizures
Call emergency services or go to the ER if you think you’re experiencing any symptoms of these issues.
Which questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Which type of stroke did I have?
Which medications will I need and how do I take them?
Which kinds of rehab will I need?
What is my risk of another stroke in the future?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Spinal strokes can happen suddenly, and some of the symptoms may be easy to dismiss. But don’t wait to call for help. You know your body better than anyone, and you know when something is off or feels wrong. The faster you get treatment, the better.
Remember to celebrate your progress during your recovery. It may feel like that’s easier said than done some days. Rehab is hard work — physically and mentally. And you deserve credit for all your effort. Talk to your provider and therapists throughout your recovery. They’ll help you appreciate how far you’ve come.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
After a stroke, it’s essential to get treated right away. Cleveland Clinic’s stroke care specialists can help you manage recovery and improve your quality of life.
Stroke Care
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/13/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment