Colic Symptoms, Causes & Solutions
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Colic
Advertisement
Advertisement
Colic
Babies cry. A lot. It’s what they do. But if your baby cries nonstop for more than three hours a day at least three days a week, they may have colic. There’s often nothing you can do to calm a colicky baby. If your baby has the condition and you’re feeling overwhelmed, it’s important to reach out for help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Colic?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Colic?
Colic means your otherwise healthy baby cries excessively for no clear reason. Often, there’s nothing you can do to settle your colicky baby. Healthcare providers define colic as intense
crying
:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
For more than three hours a day
At least three days a week
For more than three weeks
All babies cry — it’s the way they communicate their needs. But you can’t soothe a baby with colic. They’ll continue to scream without any obvious cause. The crying usually starts suddenly at about the same time every day. This is often in the afternoon or evening hours. But when your baby isn’t crying, they act completely normal.
Colic in newborns is harmless and passes quickly. But the condition can be frustrating for parents. Managing an infant’s colic only adds to the stress and fatigue of new parenthood. The condition has been linked to
postpartum depression
and
shaken baby syndrome
. So, if your fussy baby has colic, it’s important to reach out for help if you need it.
When does colic start?
Typically, babies get colic within the first few weeks after birth. It peaks between 4 and 6 weeks of age. Then, it usually ends rather abruptly when your baby is 3 to 4 months old.
Symptoms and Causes
Colicky babies have repeated periods of inconsolable crying without apparent reason. Symptoms of colic in babies can vary.
Colic symptoms
Colicky infants are healthy babies. But they have repeated periods of crying —
without an obvious reason
— and you can’t comfort them. These crying episodes last for hours without stopping.
Signs of colic in babies can vary. Colicky babies usually get fussy at the end of the day. But the crying can happen at any time. It can be hard to comfort your baby during these stretches of time. There’s no link between these periods of fussiness and hunger or discomfort. Although your infant is fussy and cries, they continue to eat well and gain weight.
Advertisement
Symptoms of colic in an infant may include:
Clenched fists
Legs curled up over their tummy
Arched back
A hard,
swollen belly
Passing of gas
Active grimacing or a “painful” look on their face
Face turning bright red or a deeper shade after long periods of crying
What causes colic in babies?
Researchers don’t know the exact reason babies get colic. But several factors may play a role.
Baby colic causes may include:
Belly (abdominal) pain
or
discomfort from gas
due to air swallowed while nursing or crying
Reflux
(bringing up) of
stomach
contents
Food allergies
Milk-protein intolerance
Underfeeding or overfeeding
Sensory overload
An early form of
migraine
headache
Emotional reaction to frustration, fear or excitement
Underdeveloped
digestive system
Complications of colic
Newborn colic can take a toll on first-time and experienced parents alike. The overwhelming
stress
that the condition can place on caregivers can lead to postpartum depression and shaken baby syndrome.
No matter how impatient or angry you become, don’t shake your baby. Shaking an infant can cause blindness, brain damage or even death. Let your healthcare provider know if you’re having feelings of
depression
or trouble dealing with your emotions. They can recommend ways to help.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do you know if your newborn has colic?
You can usually figure out your fussy infant has colic by the pattern of their symptoms. It’ll help if you keep a record of:
When your baby’s crying spells occur
When your
baby sleeps
What your
baby eats
and how often
When your
baby poops
If you go to your baby’s
pediatrician
, they may do a physical exam. This is to rule out a physical condition as the cause of your baby’s fussiness. These conditions may include:
Esophageal reflux
Infection
Allergy
Management and Treatment
How do you soothe a colicky baby?
There’s no cure, but there are steps you can take to help ease colic in newborns. You may try the following baby colic treatments.
Feeding your baby
If you’re
breastfeeding
your baby, keep track of all the foods and drinks you consume in a
food journal
. You pass on everything you eat to your baby, and it can affect them. You may have to stop eating:
Milk products
Caffeine
Chocolate
Nuts
Onions
Cabbage
Any other potentially irritating foods
Ask your healthcare provider if there are any medications you should avoid.
If you’re
feeding your baby formula
,
you may want to try a different brand of formula. Infants can be sensitive to certain proteins in formulas. Talk with your baby’s pediatrician about switching to a specific kind. You can also try feeding your baby smaller meals more often. But avoid feeding your baby too quickly or too much.
Advertisement
Comforting your baby
You may want to introduce a
pacifier
to your crying newborn. Some breastfed babies will actively refuse it. But it can provide instant relief for others. You could also try
infant colic drops
or a natural remedy like Colic Calm®. These colic medications for newborns can help relieve gas.
Other ways you can help your colicky baby include:
Skin-to-skin contact
Rocking, either in a rocking chair or in your arms as you sway from side to side
Gently stroking your baby’s head or patting their back or chest
Swaddling
by wrapping them snugly in a receiving blanket
Singing or talking
Playing soft music
Walking with them in your arms or a stroller
Riding in the car with your baby properly secured in their
car safety seat
Rhythmic noise and vibration
Burping
them to relieve any trapped gas bubbles
Warm
baths
, which most babies like, but not all
Using quiet voices and turning off electronics like TVs and phones
When should I call my baby’s healthcare provider?
Call your baby’s healthcare provider
if your baby stops gaining weight, shows dramatic changes in behavior or has any of the following symptoms:
Fever
Forceful
vomiting
(especially green in color or with blood in it)
Diarrhea
Blood in their poop
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long does colic last?
Although a bout of colic can be frightening to watch — especially for first-time parents — it isn’t harmful to your baby’s health. Babies with the condition will eventually outgrow it. Typically, colic ends by the time your baby is 3 to 4 months old.
Advertisement
Additional Common Questions
How do I take care of myself if my baby has colic?
Thankfully, colic is a short-lived issue that doesn’t have any long-term effects on your baby. But that doesn’t make it any easier on you. It can be hard to look after a newborn who won’t stop crying. You may be feeling overwhelmed or frustrated. Your emotions are valid.
But if your baby has colic and your emotions are becoming too hard to handle, reach out to a trusted friend or family member. Ask them to watch over your baby while you take a break. Get out of the house. Clear your head. Give yourself time to calm down.
If you don’t have a trusted caregiver, place your baby in a safe place (like their crib) and leave the room. Your baby will be OK for a few minutes while you walk down the hall and take a breather. Remember, the crying won’t last forever.
What types of colic can adults get?
When you hear the word “colic,” you may think of the kind infants get. But adults can get colic, too. Adult colic refers to pain in your intestinal or
urinary system
. Types of colic in adults include:
Biliary colic
.
This is abdominal pain that occurs due to a blockage in one of the ducts of your biliary tree.
Renal colic
.
This is intense pain between your ribs and hips (flank). It occurs due to a blockage in part of your urinary tract.
Intestinal colic.
This is painful cramps in your abdomen due to a blockage in your
large intestine
or
small intestine
.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
All babies cry, but if your baby is crying for hours on end, they may have colic. Researchers don’t know exactly why colic happens. But it has nothing to do with your parenting. It can be frustrating, especially for new parents trying to figure out how to take care of an infant. If you need help, reach out to a trusted friend or family member for a break. If you don’t have any trusted caregivers nearby, reach out to a healthcare provider. They can help you carefully manage this overwhelming bump in the road of parenthood.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us