Scarlet Fever Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Scarlet Fever
Advertisement
Advertisement
Scarlet Fever
Scarlet fever is a bacterial infection that causes a rough, bumpy rash over much of your body. The bacteria that cause it (strep A) also cause strep throat and skin infections. The rash usually appears after a few days of a sore throat, fever and other symptoms. It’s treatable with antibiotics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Scarlet Fever?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Scarlet Fever?
Scarlet fever is a widespread rash you get from a
group A strep infection
. Group A strep is a type of
bacteria
that also causes
strep throat
and skin infections (
impetigo
). In fact, you most often get scarlet fever along with the symptoms of strep throat.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The rash is bumpy, rough and can spread over most of your body. It’s not harmful on its own, but the
bacterial infection
needs to be treated with
antibiotics
so it doesn’t progress to more serious health conditions.
Symptoms and Causes
Scarlet fever rash is made up of tiny, rough bumps. Your child might have other symptoms before the rash appears.
Symptoms of scarlet fever
Scarlet fever causes a distinctive, bumpy rash. You often have other symptoms a day or two before the rash shows up, including:
Fever
Headache
Body aches (
myalgia
)
Sore throat
Nausea,
vomiting
or stomach pain
Tiredness or generally feeling unwell
White coating on your tongue
Red and bumpy tongue (
strawberry tongue
)
Swollen lymph nodes
(glands)
Swollen
tonsils
with white patches or streaks
Small red spots on the roof of your mouth (
petechiae
)
Red, itchy sores that turn to scabs (impetigo)
What does the scarlet fever rash look like?
Scarlet fever rash is made up of tiny, rough bumps. It might feel a bit like sandpaper if you run your hand over it. If your skin is light, it’ll appear red or pink. If you have darker skin, it might look different from the surrounding skin, or it might be hard to see it. There’s often a pale area and/or a rash-free area around your mouth. Creases in the skin of your underarms, elbows and groin might be brighter red than the rest of the rash (pastia lines). Sometimes, the rash is itchy.
Advertisement
The rash might spread in stages:
It usually appears first around your neck and chest.
Then, it can spread to your back, arms, legs and face. The palms of your hands and soles of your feet often don’t have a rash.
Your skin might peel seven to 10 days after the rash fades, especially on your fingertips.
Scarlet fever causes
Group A
Streptococcus
(strep A) bacteria cause scarlet fever. It’s the same bacteria that cause strep throat and impetigo, a skin infection. But not everyone who gets infected with the bacteria will get the rash.
Is scarlet fever contagious?
Yes, the bacteria that cause scarlet fever are contagious (spread from person to person). People who are infected can easily spread it by coughing or sneezing, which sends tiny droplets that contain the bacteria into the air. You can get infected if you:
Breathe in the droplets
Touch a surface containing the droplets and then touch your
nose
or
mouth
Share food or drinks with someone who’s infected
Kiss someone who is infected
Touch sores that contain the bacteria
Eat food contaminated with the bacteria (this is rare)
Some people who are infected get no symptoms but can still spread the bacteria to others.
Risk factors
Kids between the ages of 5 and 15 are at the highest risk for scarlet fever. Experts aren’t sure why some people develop a rash from strep A and others don’t. You’re also at a higher risk of infection if you live or work with people in close contact with each other, like at a daycare, school or correctional facility.
You’re at higher risk for serious illness if you:
Have a chronic health condition, like
cancer
,
diabetes
, or heart, kidney, or lung disease
Have a
weakened (compromised) immune system
due to illness or medications
Have open wounds or skin disease
Are of Native American or Alaska Native descent
Are 65 or older
Inject drugs
Are experiencing homelessness
Complications of scarlet fever
The bacteria that cause scarlet fever can lead to other infections and serious complications. These include:
Abscesses (pockets of pus) around your tonsils or
brain
Arthritis
or
osteomyelitis
Ear,
sinus
or skin infections
Kidney damage
Mastoiditis
Meningitis
Necrotizing fasciitis
PANDAS
(pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcus)
Pneumonia
Rheumatic fever
Septicemia
Toxic shock syndrome
Death
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose scarlet fever
Healthcare providers diagnose scarlet fever by looking at the rash and performing a strep test. This means swabbing your throat with a stick that looks like a long Q-tip® to test it for bacteria.
Management and Treatment
How is scarlet fever treated?
Healthcare providers treat scarlet fever with antibiotics. These could include types of
penicillin
(like amoxicillin), cephalosporins or
macrolides
(like erythromycin, azithromycin or clindamycin). You might have to take antibiotics in pill or liquid form for about 10 days. Take the full course of medication as prescribed, even if you feel better. In some cases, you might get a single injection of antibiotics.
Advertisement
Recovery time
The rash from scarlet fever lasts for about a week. It may continue to peel for several weeks as your skin heals. You may still have swollen lymph nodes for a few weeks.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should call your healthcare provider if you or your child develops a rash. It’s also important to contact them if you or your child develops additional symptoms of scarlet fever, especially fever, a sore throat or swollen glands.
After you start on antibiotics, call your healthcare provider if:
Your symptoms don’t improve within 24 hours after starting treatment
You develop new or worsening symptoms after starting treatment
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is scarlet fever dangerous?
With early treatment, scarlet fever usually isn’t serious. But without treatment, the bacteria can spread to other parts of your body and cause severe complications.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
While the antibiotics do their job, you might be able to feel better by:
Eating soft foods and liquids, like soup, scrambled eggs or popsicles (if cold feels good on your throat)
Gargling with salt water to help the throat pain
Taking over-the-counter pain medications such as
acetaminophen
(Tylenol®) or
ibuprofen
(Advil®) for fever or pain (talk to your child’s
pediatrician
before giving them over-the-counter medications to make sure it’s safe)
Using anti-itch skin creams, like 1% hydrocortisone cream or calamine lotion, which can help if the rash itches
Advertisement
Prevention
Can you prevent scarlet fever?
You can reduce the spread of the bacteria that cause scarlet fever by:
Not sharing things like toothbrushes or eating utensils
Washing your hands
frequently
Using an alcohol-based sanitizer if soap and water aren’t available
Covering your mouth and nose when coughing and sneezing
Avoiding other people if you have scarlet fever or strep throat
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Scarlet fever used to be much more common than it is today. So, it’s understandable that a rash when your child already isn’t feeling well can set off alarm bells. Luckily, while it’s an unwelcome addition to strep throat, it’s treatable with antibiotics. It’s usually not serious if you treat it quickly and finish the entire course of antibiotics as prescribed.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider