What Is the Rooting Reflex in Babies?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Rooting Reflex
Advertisement
Advertisement
Rooting Reflex
Feeding is important to your baby, and they have the rooting reflex to help the process. When your baby turns their face to follow a touch, it’s because that reflex tells them to expect feeding. And this reflex can signal that your baby is hungry, too. Knowing how this reflex works can help you better understand what your baby wants and needs.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is the rooting reflex?
The rooting reflex is an automatic action healthy
newborns
have that helps them
latch
onto your breast or a bottle to begin
feeding
. You can see that reflex if you gently touch the corner of your baby’s mouth or face with your hand or a nipple. Your baby should automatically turn toward that touch and open their mouth with their tongue on their bottom lip.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Also known as the root reflex, this is one of the
newborn reflexes
, or primitive reflexes, babies should have when they’re born. Your baby uses this reflex to latch onto a nipple so they can feed. Your baby needs to do this to survive, which is why it’s hardwired into their
nervous system
. That’s how they know how to do it without learning.
When does the rooting reflex develop?
A fetus develops the rooting reflex around 32 weeks of gestation. That’s why babies usually have the reflex when they’re born.
When does the rooting reflex disappear?
The rooting reflex should go away by the time your baby is 4 to 6 months old. It goes away as the
frontal lobe
of your baby’s
brain
develops and takes over movement control. That makes newborn reflexes like the rooting reflex or
Moro (startle) reflex
disappear.
What’s the difference between my baby’s rooting reflex and sucking reflex?
The rooting and sucking reflexes aren’t the same, but they’re related. The rooting reflex is the first step for feeding. It makes your baby turn in the right direction to feed.
The sucking reflex is the second step. It happens when something touches the roof of your baby’s mouth. Your baby’s nervous system processes that feeling as a sign to start sucking so they can feed.
The sucking reflex during
breastfeeding
happens in two stages.
Your baby will place their lips around your areola, the circular area of skin around your nipple. Your nipple will be far back in your baby’s mouth when they squeeze your breast between their tongue and the roof of their mouth. That forces (expresses) milk out.
Your baby’s tongue will move from your areola to your nipple to begin nursing (milking).
Advertisement
Your baby’s sucking reflex coordinates your baby’s breathing with swallowing. And even though the sucking reflex is instinctive, it’s not easy. Your newborn has to learn how to suck, breathe and swallow all at the same time. But with a little practice, they’ll usually get the hang of it.
How do I know if my baby’s reflexes are developing correctly?
Healthcare providers will do a
neurological exam
, including checking your baby’s reflexes, right after they’re born. Your baby’s
pediatrician
will also check reflexes when looking for developmental milestones at
well checks
.
It’s a good idea to talk to your baby’s pediatrician if you notice:
Newborn reflexes that disappear earlier than expected
Newborn reflexes that don’t disappear when they should
Newborn reflexes that suddenly return
If your baby still has their rooting reflex at 4 months to 6 months old, don’t panic. It could just be them developing at their own pace. But if you have questions about your baby’s newborn reflexes, talk to your baby’s pediatrician. They can let you know if there’s any reason for concern.
What if my baby is born premature?
Premature (preterm) babies
, especially those born before 32 weeks of gestation, might not have a rooting reflex, or it might be weaker. A fetus develops reflexes at specific times based on cues they get inside your
uterus
. Babies born prematurely don’t get those cues, so they might not develop reflexes as expected. And if your baby doesn’t have reflexes like the rooting and sucking reflex, they might not be able to feed like they should.
Babies born prematurely need specialized care, like in a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). And if your baby is born early and doesn’t have the reflexes they need to feed, it’s understandable to feel anxious or scared about what that means for them.
Early on, your baby will likely need
tube feeding
to make sure they get the proper nutrition. Healthcare providers will also use sensory stimulation to help your baby develop their rooting and sucking reflexes. As those reflexes develop, your baby should find it easier to eat. Providers will also help you learn what your baby needs and how you can support their growth.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Additional Common Questions
Does the rooting reflex mean a baby is hungry?
Yes, it can mean your baby is hungry. Babies will often show you signs they’re hungry, like the rooting reflex and other cues. Some of those cues include:
Making sucking noises or motions
Using their mouth on their own hands or objects
Clenching their hands into fists on their torso
If you don’t feed your baby when they use their hunger cues, they’ll tell you in ways that are harder to miss, like
crying
. Learning your baby’s hunger signs before they start crying can help keep your baby — and everyone around them — more comfortable.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It might seem like your newborn is relatively helpless. And while they do depend on you for constant care, they still have some amazing built-in abilities. The rooting reflex is one of them, and it’s a key part of how your baby eats. That reflex can also signal to you that your baby is hungry, so it’s a good idea to learn to recognize it. And if you have any questions about your baby’s rooting reflex, don’t hesitate to ask their pediatrician. They can help you understand the reflex, how it works and what to watch for.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us