Flu During Pregnancy: Symptoms, Risks & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Flu While Pregnant
Advertisement
Advertisement
Flu While Pregnant
Flu in pregnancy is a serious yet treatable illness. Pregnant women are more likely to be hospitalized for the flu than nonpregnant women. When diagnosed early, pregnancy-safe treatments can help reduce symptoms and shorten the length of the illness. Doctors recommend an annual flu shot for prevention.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is flu in pregnancy?
Influenza (flu)
is a common respiratory infection that mostly occurs in winter. It’s caused by a virus that easily travels from person to person. When someone with the flu coughs, sneezes or speaks, the virus spreads through the air and on surfaces.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Flu during
pregnancy
is more likely to cause severe illness than flu in nonpregnant
women
. Pregnant women who get the flu are also more likely to be hospitalized for treatment. If you're pregnant and have the flu or
flu-like symptoms
, see your healthcare provider.
Who is more likely to get the flu?
You’re at higher risk of flu during pregnancy than when you’re not pregnant. That’s because pregnancy naturally suppresses your
immune system
, which is your body’s defense against illness. This suppression increases your risk of infections, including the flu. Studies suggest pregnant women who've gotten a flu shot are less likely to get the flu compared to those who haven't gotten a
flu vaccine
.
If I get the flu while pregnant, does my baby get sick, too?
Getting the flu during pregnancy can affect your baby’s development.
Fever
, a common flu symptom, can cause neural tube defects and other problems in a developing baby.
Can the flu cause miscarriage?
Studies have shown that flu during pregnancy increases your risk of
miscarriage
,
premature birth
and low birth weight.
Symptoms and Causes
What causes the flu in pregnancy?
The same virus causes the flu in pregnant and nonpregnant women. The flu virus infects your lungs, nose and throat, causing respiratory symptoms similar to a
cold
. You can get the flu by inhaling the virus through the air or by touching something that has the flu virus on it.
Advertisement
The flu is contagious beginning one day before symptoms start and five to seven days after feeling sick. That means you can spread the flu to others before you even know you’re ill.
What are the symptoms of flu during pregnancy?
The most common symptoms of flu while pregnant include:
Chills
Dry
cough
Headache
.
Loss of appetite
Nasal congestion
Muscle aches
Runny nose
Sore throat
Sudden onset of moderate to high fever
Fatigue
Diagnosis and Tests
How is flu during pregnancy diagnosed?
To diagnose the flu, your healthcare provider may use a
flu (influenza) test
such as:
Rapid influenza diagnostic test (RIDT):
This test shows results in 10 to 15 minutes.
Rapid molecular assay:
This test shows results in 15 to 20 minutes.
Your healthcare provider will wipe the inside of your nose or the back of your throat with a long cotton swab. The test should be quick and painless.
Management and Treatment
How is the flu treated during pregnancy?
When diagnosed early, your healthcare provider may prescribe an
antiviral
medication. While antivirals don’t cure the flu, they can stop symptoms from getting worse. Many providers prefer the oral antiviral oseltamivir (Tamiflu®) for pregnant women.
Talk to your provider about other medications you can safely take during pregnancy. These may include:
Acetaminophen (Tylenol®) to reduce flu symptoms, especially fever.
Dextromethorphan (Robitussin®-DM or Delsym®), guaifenesin (Mucinex®) or cough drops to relieve respiratory symptoms.
How can I treat the flu at home while pregnant?
Flu symptoms can last for a week or more. Make sure to rest and drink plenty of fluids to avoid
dehydration
. Take over-the-counter medications such as acetaminophen to help relieve symptoms. Follow the instructions on all medications, including prescriptions.
How soon after treatment for flu during pregnancy will I start to feel better?
If your healthcare provider prescribes an antiviral, you should start to notice symptom improvement within a day or two. Over-the-counter pain and fever medications can start helping right away.
You should notice an improvement in your symptoms within five to seven days. If you don’t start feeling better after a week, call your provider.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for someone with the flu while pregnant?
With early diagnosis and treatment, many pregnant women recover from the flu with no problems. But those who are pregnant have a higher chance of getting serious complications from the flu — sometimes requiring hospitalization.
Prevention
How can I prevent flu in pregnancy?
Healthcare authorities recommend the flu shot to prevent getting the flu during pregnancy. The best time to get your flu shot is before flu season starts, but you can get it at any time during your pregnancy.
Pregnant women should also follow general flu prevention best practices:
Avoid close contact with people who are sick
Avoid touching your eyes or nose
Clean surfaces at home and work with disinfectant
Cover your mouth and nose
Wash your hands
frequently
Advertisement
Is the flu shot safe during pregnancy?
Yes. Many studies have proven the safety and effectiveness of the flu vaccine during pregnancy. Healthcare providers recommend that pregnant women get the flu shot.
Many people have questions about vaccines. Discuss any questions or concerns with your care team. They want you to feel safe and comfortable with your decision.
Can a flu shot during pregnancy harm the baby?
No. The flu shot can benefit your baby during pregnancy. When you get this vaccine while pregnant, flu-fighting antibodies pass to your baby through the
placenta
. Breast milk delivers those same antibodies after birth, providing more protection from the flu.
Living With
When should I contact my healthcare provider about flu during pregnancy?
See your healthcare provider if you notice any flu symptoms or any symptoms that seem unusual or concerning.
Should I go to the ER if I have the flu?
Call 911 or go to the emergency room right away if you have any of these severe flu symptoms:
Decreased or no movement of your baby
Dizziness
, confusion or the inability to wake up
Extreme weakness or unsteadiness
Fever or cough that comes and goes or gets worse
High fever that doesn’t change after taking acetaminophen
No urine for an extended period
Ongoing pain or pressure in the chest or abdomen
Seizures
Severe
muscle pain
Trouble breathing or
shortness of breath
How do I take care of myself when I have the flu while pregnant?
The best way to take care of yourself (and your baby) is to:
Advertisement
Follow your healthcare provider’s directions for any medications
Rest
Drink plenty of fluids to stay hydrated
Avoid spreading the virus to others
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Flu in pregnancy is a serious illness. See your healthcare provider if you notice any signs of the flu. Early treatment with antiviral medications can reduce symptom severity and help you feel better sooner. Getting a flu shot during pregnancy can help protect you and your baby.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/26/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment