Hip Replacement Surgery: What It Is & Recovery Time
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Hip Replacement Surgery
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hip Replacement Surgery
Hip replacement surgery replaces your natural hip joint with prosthetic implants. It takes an hour or two to complete. The recovery time can take up to 12 weeks, and most people who’ve had a hip replacement live with it for the rest of their lives.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Joint Replacement Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hip Replacement Surgery?
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
What Is Hip Replacement Surgery?
Total hip replacements are much more common. Your surgeon will replace the top of your femur and the socket it fits into.
Hip replacement surgery is a procedure to replace your natural hip joint with an
artificial implant
. It’s a type of
joint replacement surgery
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Signs you may need a hip replacement
You may need hip replacement surgery if symptoms in your hip make it hard (or unsafe) to do all your usual activities. Severe hip pain, stiffness and loss of range of motion (how far you can move your hip) are the most common symptoms that might make you choose a hip replacement.
Any condition or injury that damages your hip can cause these symptoms. But
hip arthritis
is the most common one.
Your healthcare provider will probably suggest other treatments like medication, physical therapy or using a cane or walker before surgery.
Types of hip replacements
An
orthopedic surgeon
will replace some or all of your hip joint:
Total hip replacement
: A surgeon will replace your entire hip with a prosthetic joint. They’ll replace the top of your
thigh bone
and the socket it fits into. Almost all hip replacement surgeries are total hip replacements.
Partial hip replacement
: These are very rare. Your surgeon will replace only part of your hip. These are usually only done to repair broken hips or remove certain types of tumors.
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for a hip replacement?
Your surgeon will perform a physical exam and some tests before your hip replacement surgery. They’ll ask you about your symptoms and check your current range of motion. Tell your surgeon which medications and supplements you take.
Advertisement
Your surgeon will compare the hip that needs replacing with your other hip. They’ll have you move your hip in different directions. These motions will help them check the muscles that support your hip and leg.
You’ll probably need several tests before a hip replacement, including:
Blood tests
(like a
basic metabolic panel
)
Hip X-rays
Urinalysis
(testing your pee)
You might need other imaging tests in addition to X-rays, including:
CT scan
MRI
EKG
What happens during hip replacement surgery?
Hip replacement surgery usually follows these steps:
You’ll receive regional
anesthesia
before your surgery. Regional anesthesia blocks pain in a large area of your body but doesn’t completely put you to sleep. Some providers refer to regional anesthesia as a spinal block or a spinal.
Your surgeon will remove bone and
cartilage
from your existing hip joint.
They’ll insert the prosthesis. Prosthetic hips are usually made of metal, plastic or ceramic.
After they secure the hip implants in place, your surgeon will close your surgery site with stitches.
Hip replacements usually take one to two hours. Your surgeon will tell you how long your surgery will take based on the type you need.
What are the potential benefits and risks of this procedure?
Hip replacement surgeries are usually very successful. Most people who have a hip replacement experience a dramatic decrease in their symptoms — especially pain and stiffness.
Once you’re fully recovered, you should have increased mobility. A hip replacement surgery usually makes it easier to walk, climb stairs and do other physical activities.
Like all surgeries, there are some risks to having a hip replacement. Complications are rare, but can include:
Blood clots in your legs (
deep vein thrombosis
) or lungs (
pulmonary embolism
)
Broken bones around the prosthesis
Infections
Issues with the prosthesis, including it loosening or dislocating
Stiffness in your joint
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Joint Replacement Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after hip replacement surgery?
Your anesthesiologist will make sure you wake up from anesthesia correctly and don’t experience any immediate complications from your surgery.
Most hip replacements are outpatient surgeries. That means you can go home the same day. You might need to stay in the hospital overnight (outpatient extended recovery).
Your surgeon or a physical therapist will give you stretches and exercises to start as soon as 24 hours after surgery. They’ll monitor the strength and flexibility in your leg and hip. And they’ll keep an eye on your ability to stand and sit.
Ask your surgeon or physical therapist for tips on moving through your home safely after your surgery. They can show you how to:
Bathe or shower
Get dressed
Go to the bathroom
Sit down and stand up
Use stairs
Walk and move
Advertisement
What is the recovery time?
It will probably take you several months to recover from a hip replacement. You’ll need physical therapy for a few months.
It might be six to 12 weeks before you’re able to use your hip with no restrictions. During that time, you’ll need to do exercises that strengthen and stretch the muscles around your hip joint. You’ll slowly return to climbing stairs, bending and walking. Over time, your range of motion and strength will come back.
People over 70 can sometimes take longer to recover. But there’s no way to know ahead of time how long your body will take to heal. Your age doesn’t necessarily mean your recovery will be faster or slower than anyone else’s.
The most important part of your recovery is how you feel. As you progress through physical therapy and your body heals, you should notice that it’s easier to move and use your hip than it was before your surgery.
What things shouldn’t you do after this procedure?
Your care team will give you a list of dos and don’ts after your surgery. In general,
don’t
:
Cross your legs or ankles
Drive until your surgeon says it’s safe
Pull your knees past your waist
Twist your legs or ankles too far in or out
Everyone’s recovery is unique. These restrictions won’t be permanent. Your surgeon will tell you what you can or can’t do, and when it’s safe to drive and move in certain ways again.
Advertisement
How long does a hip replacement last?
Prosthetic hip implants used in hip replacements usually last a long time. Lots of people who have hip replacements keep the implants for the rest of their lives.
It’s rare, but you might need more surgeries on your hip in the future. Your surgeon will tell you what to expect.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your surgeon right away if you notice any of the following after a hip replacement:
Bleeding or other drainage at your surgery site
Discoloration or redness around your surgery site
Drainage or pus at your surgery site (especially if it has a foul odor)
Severe pain
Swelling
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having any surgery can be scary, especially when it’s to replace a part of your body with a prosthesis. But hip replacements are extremely safe, effective and successful surgeries. If you’re experiencing symptoms like pain, stiffness and trouble moving your hip, ask your provider if a hip replacement could be a good option for you.
After your surgery, you’ll need time to strengthen your muscles and heal your body. Take your recovery slow and don’t rush yourself. Talk to your surgeon or physical therapist about your movement goals and which activities you’d like to participate in after your hip replacement.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Stiff, painful joints don’t have to slow you down for good. Cleveland Clinic’s joint replacement surgery experts can help you get back to doing what you love.
Get Joint Replacement Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment