Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a type of acute myeloid leukemia. Healthcare providers may call it APL leukemia or M3-leukemia. It’s a type of blood cancer that can be life-threatening. It may cause serious bleeding issues, severe anemia and infections. Treatment can cure most cases of APL, but it can come back.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)?
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a rare
blood cancer
. It’s a form of
acute myeloid leukemia
that happens when a genetic mutation (change) creates abnormal
white blood cells
that multiply uncontrollably in your
bone marrow
. Healthcare providers may call this condition APL leukemia or M3-leukemia.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
APL is a serious condition with life-threatening symptoms, including excessive bleeding, which come on suddenly and quickly get worse. Thanks to treatment that’s an innovative combination of
chemotherapy
and non-chemotherapy drugs, healthcare providers can treat and often
cure
acute promyelocytic leukemia.
How common is this condition?
APL is rare, affecting 30,000 people in the U.S. each year. Most people are in their 30s when they receive an APL diagnosis.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of acute promyelocytic leukemia?
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) symptoms develop when your bone marrow can’t make normal numbers of
red blood cells
, white blood cells and
platelets
. If you have low blood cell levels (
pancytopenia
), you may develop serious symptoms, including anemia, bleeding issues (
hemorrhage
) and
infections
.
Other APL symptoms are:
Fatigue from
anemia
, or low red blood cells.
Frequent infections because you have low levels of infection-fighting white blood cells.
Unintentional weight loss
because your
metabolism
speeds up and you burn energy from food.
Bleeding symptoms
In acute promyelocytic leukemia, you don’t have enough platelets or blood clotting factors. Platelets slow or stop bleeding. Blood clotting factors help make
clots
in your blood. APL bleeding symptoms include:
Advertisement
Bleeding from any site, including
bleeding gums
,
nosebleeds
or
heavy menstrual bleeding.
Bruising
from blood pooling under your skin.
Difficulty moving your arms and legs, headaches or vision issues from bleeding into your brain (
intracranial hemorrhage
).
Poop that looks black or has red streaks of blood. This happens if you have bleeding in your gut (
gastrointestinal bleeding
).
What causes acute promyelocytic leukemia?
This condition happens when two genes that drive blood cell development fuse to create the abnormal gene
PML-RARa
.
You don’t inherit this
genetic mutation
(change). It happens randomly during your lifetime. Experts don’t know what triggers the change.
The mutation keeps white blood cells from developing as they should. The immature white blood cells (promyelocytes) multiply uncontrollably, crowding out healthy blood cells and platelets.
What are complications of APL?
APL can be life-threatening, causing severe bleeding that quickly gets worse. Contact a healthcare provider or go to the emergency department if you have bleeding that you can’t control, like bleeding from a cut or injury or there’s lots of blood in the toilet after you poop or pee or bleeding gums.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is acute promyelocytic leukemia diagnosed?
Healthcare providers typically order the following tests to diagnose this condition:
Complete blood count (CBC)
: APL creates abnormal white blood cells. CBC tests show the number of blood cells and platelets in a blood sample.
Peripheral blood smear
: Providers may see high levels of granules or Auer rods inside promyelocytes, a specific type of white blood cell.
Bone marrow biopsy
: Providers order these to get samples of your bone marrow cells for analysis.
Flow cytometry
: In this test,
pathologists
examine the surface of abnormal cells, checking for specific protein patterns that confirm APL.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test
:
This test checks for the abnormal gene that causes APL.
Cytogenetics
:
Pathologists will examine abnormal cells for specific changes in
chromosomes
. Finding those changes is how providers confirm an APL diagnosis.
Healthcare providers use white blood cell counts to classify cases as being low- or high-risk APL. People with high-risk acute promyelocytic leukemia are more likely to experience relapse (
recurrent cancer
).
Management and Treatment
How is acute promyelocytic leukemia treated?
APL treatment is a combination of differentiation agents, chemotherapy and
targeted therapy
. This treatment combination, developed in the 1980s, transformed the condition from a fatal illness to a curable one.
Differentiation agents are non-chemotherapy treatments that help abnormal white blood cells mature (differentiate) into normal white blood cells. The non-chemotherapy treatment described below has increased the remission and cure rate to more than 95%.
Advertisement
Differentiation agents for APL are:
All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA), or
tretinoin
(Vesanoid
®
) — a form of vitamin A.
Arsenic trioxide
(ATO), a form of arsenic.
If your healthcare provider suspects you have APL, they’ll likely prescribe ATRA right away, even before tests confirm you have APL. Prompt treatment reduces the risk of life-threatening bleeding.
APL treatment phases
Treatment includes three phases: induction, consolidation and maintenance. Treatments vary, depending on risk:
Induction
: This phase focuses on eliminating enough leukemia cells to put APL into remission.
Remission
means you don’t have symptoms and tests don’t find signs of leukemia. Induction treatment uses a combination of a non-chemotherapy drug, chemotherapy and targeted therapy. You’ll need to stay in the hospital during induction, which usually lasts four to six weeks.
Consolidation
:
Your oncologist may call this post-remission therapy. Consolidation treatment works to keep acute promyelocytic leukemia in remission and eliminate any remaining leukemia cells. This treatment uses the same drugs as induction treatment. You may receive treatment for eight months, with treatment sessions every two months. You may have treatment for four weeks and then a four-week treatment break. Treatment may be taking pills or receiving medication through an intravenous (IV) line.
Maintenance
: This is ongoing treatment in lower doses than induction and consolidation. Typically, people receive maintenance therapy for a year.
Advertisement
Your
oncologist
may combine treatment with supportive therapy like
blood transfusions
.
Treatment complications
The most common and serious complication is
differentiation syndrome
. This is a group of severe reactions to APL drugs. The reactions typically develop during the first three weeks of induction or initial treatment. Symptoms may be mild or severe and include:
Cough
.
Excess fluid buildup around your heart and lungs (
pleural effusion
).
Kidney failure
(renal failure).
Low blood pressure (hypotension)
.
Low level of oxygen in your blood (
hypoxemia
).
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
.
Swelling (inflammation) of your arms, legs and neck.
Unexplained
fever
.
Unexplained weight gain.
If you experience differentiation syndrome, your provider might stop treatment. They may use other drugs like
hydroxyurea
to bring down your white blood cell levels.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have acute promyelocytic leukemia?
In general, the prognosis is good. While everyone’s situation is different, studies show between 90% and 95% of APL cases go into remission. APL can come back (recur) after treatment. Between 5% to 10% of people experience relapse, usually within the first three years after treatment, and need more or different treatment.
Survival rates
Acute promyelocytic leukemia is a rare disease, so what we know about
survival rates
comes from clinical trials involving people with low-risk and high-risk APL.
Advertisement
One analysis of clinical trials involving low-risk APL cases found that 99% of people were alive four years after treatment. Another analysis of research involving high-risk APL cases shows that 86% of people were alive after five years.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) can come back (recur), so it’s important that you make it to your follow-up appointments.
You’ll probably have a check-up every month to two months for the first year after your treatment. After the first year, you’ll probably see your provider every three to four months for the next two years. Follow-up appointments may include tests like CBCs, PCRs and bone marrow biopsy.
When should I go to the emergency room?
APL can come back after treatment, causing symptoms that can get worse very quickly. If you’re in remission from acute promyelocytic leukemia, go to the emergency room right away if you have:
Bleeding that you can’t control.
Sudden pain and swelling in your legs or lower belly.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a rare blood cancer that once was a fatal illness. Now, healthcare providers consider APL a curable disease, thanks to an innovative combination of chemotherapy and non-chemotherapy drugs.
But acute promyelocytic leukemia is still a serious illness — without prompt diagnosis and treatment, it can be life-threatening. Don’t hesitate to contact a healthcare provider anytime you have symptoms like bleeding that you can’t control so you can get help — and a diagnosis — as soon as possible.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A leukemia diagnosis can come as quite a shock. Cleveland Clinic’s blood cancer experts are here to guide you through it and help you move forward.
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/02/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials