Persistent Genital Arousal Disorder: Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Persistent Genital Arousal Disorder
Advertisement
Advertisement
Persistent Genital Arousal Disorder
Persistent genital arousal disorder (PGAD) is a rare condition that involves experiencing unwanted sensations of arousal in your genitals that don’t resolve with one or more orgasms. Left untreated, PGAD can take a toll on your body and mental health and reduce your quality of life. Don’t be embarrassed to reach out to your healthcare provider for help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sexual Health Concerns Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is persistent genital arousal disorder?
Persistent genital arousal disorder (PGAD) involves experiencing unpredictable, uncontrollable physical sensations associated with sexual arousal — but in the absence of desire. Sexual arousal is usually associated with pleasure, but this isn’t the case with PGAD. With PGAD, you experience arousal as unwanted physical sensations in your genitals. You can’t control when these changes begin, and
orgasm
doesn’t relieve them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Instead of making you feel sexual, PGAD may lead to feelings of frustration and embarrassment. It may even be debilitating without help from a healthcare provider.
PGAD wasn’t identified until 2001, and it’s not a common diagnosis. For this reason, researchers are still learning its causes and what treatments work best.
What's the difference between PGAD and hypersexuality?
The researchers who identified PGAD in 2001, Leiblum and Nathan, originally called it persistent sexual arousal syndrome (PSAS). The word “genital” replaced “sexual” because sexual implies desire, which doesn’t apply to PGAD. This is an important difference between PGAD and
hypersexuality
, or sex addiction.
Hypersexuality involves desiring sex to the point of excess. With PGAD, desire is removed from the physical experience of arousal.
Who does persistent genital arousal disorder affect?
PGAD has mostly been studied in
women
. Recent research suggests that it may also affect men. PGAD has been compared to
priapism
, a condition that involves having an unwanted erection for four hours or more.
How common is persistent genital arousal disorder?
It’s extremely rare. Researchers suggest that it may affect about 1% of women. It’s difficult to know for sure because it’s likely that many people who experience PGAD symptoms are too embarrassed to seek help.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of persistent genital arousal disorder?
PGAD involves feelings of intense genital arousal associated with increased blood flow and heightened tension in your
clitoris
, labia, perineum and anus. Symptoms may last for hours or even days and include:
Advertisement
Pain or discomfort in your genitals.
Tingling in your clitoris.
Vaginal contractions.
Vaginal lubrication.
Unpredictable orgasms.
You may experience orgasms that don’t relieve your symptoms, or you may experience momentary relief through an orgasm only to have your symptoms return.
What does PGAD feel like?
The sensations in your genitals associated with PGAD may be described as:
Pressure.
Fullness.
Pounding.
Pulsating.
Throbbing.
Burning.
Tingling.
Itching.
Pins and needles.
These sensations persist without relief. PGAD’s toll on your body can interfere with your day-to-day routine, causing stress,
anxiety
and
depression
. Since orgasms become associated with feelings of relief from pain instead of pleasurable sexual release, PGAD can keep you from enjoying sex or having a healthy sexual relationship.
Does PGAD feel good?
PGAD doesn’t feel good in the way that sexual arousal does. Sexual arousal feels good, in part because you desire the physical sensations. Desire is a key part of a
healthy sexual response
. Also, you can feel comforted that feelings of release and normalcy will follow the physical experience of heightened sexual tension.
PGAD is different in that you lack control over feelings of arousal, and you don’t know when your body will experience relief or return to its baseline.
What causes persistent genital arousal disorder?
Researchers don’t know for certain what causes PGAD. A combination of factors likely plays a role. The causes may be related to blood vessels and blood flow, nerves or behavioral health issues. Certain medications may trigger or worsen PGAD.
Studies have shown that PGAD may be associated with:
Pelvic varices:
Varicose veins in your pelvis.
Tarlov cysts
:
Cysts that form at the base of your spine.
Periclitoral masses:
An abscess on or near your clitoris that causes intense pain.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs):
People who have stopped taking SSRIs for depression have reported PGAD symptoms.
Stress, anxiety and depression have all been linked to PGAD. Still, it’s unclear how they relate to potential biological factors associated with PGAD.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is persistent genital arousal disorder diagnosed?
There are five criteria for a PGAD diagnosis. They include:
Feeling the physical sensations of sexual arousal (increased blood flow and pressure in your genitals) but without the complementary psychological component of desire.
Feeling the onset of symptoms because of a sexual trigger, a non-sexual trigger or no trigger.
Experiencing arousal symptoms in your genitals for several hours or days without relief.
Having symptoms that don’t resolve after one or even multiple orgasms.
Experiencing distress because of these unwanted symptoms.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for persistent genital arousal disorder?
There aren’t standard treatments for PGAD. Studies have demonstrated that the following have eased symptoms for some people with persistent genital arousal disorder:
Medications:
Antidepressants
, antipsychotics, mood stabilizers and drugs for nerve pain.
Behavioral health interventions:
Cognitive behavioral therapy
,
electroconvulsive therapy
, psychotherapy, distraction techniques and validation techniques.
Physical therapy interventions:
Pelvic floor physical therapy and massage.
Ultimately, the treatments for PGAD vary on a case-by-case basis. The condition is so new that researchers are still learning about which treatments and coping strategies work best. Your healthcare provider is your best resource for recommending strategies to manage your symptoms or connect you with a specialist, like a
sex therapist
, who can help.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sexual Health Concerns Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Prevention
How can I prevent persistent genital arousal disorder?
You can’t prevent PGAD. You can schedule a visit with your healthcare provider to discuss solutions for getting your symptoms under control.
Living With
When should I seek care?
You should seek help from your healthcare provider if you’re experiencing symptoms that keep you from having a healthy sex life or that cause distress. Getting help is especially important with PGAD when the experience of genital arousal can disrupt your life and harm your mental health.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
It may take some time to locate treatments that work best for you once you’re diagnosed with PGAD. Your care may require a collaborative approach that involves your provider and a behavioral health specialist, like a counselor or therapist. The good news is that although this diagnosis is new, more and more people are receiving the care needed to manage symptoms. Don’t let embarrassment prevent you from getting the help you need to cope with PGAD.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have sexual health concerns? Cleveland Clinic’s expert providers are here to listen and find the answers you need.
Sexual Health Concerns Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/15/2022.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment