Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia (CMML)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a blood cancer that causes high levels of abnormal white blood cells called monocytes. It can cause fatigue and reduce your number of healthy blood cells. In about 20% of cases, it progresses to acute myeloid leukemia. Treatments include stem cell transplants, chemotherapy and clinical trials.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia (CMML)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia (CMML)?
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a rare type of
blood cancer
. Having blood cancer means that there’s a problem with how your
bone marrow
— the spongy tissue inside your bones — makes blood cells. With CMML, your bone marrow makes too many abnormal
monocytes
, a type of
white blood cell
. These cells can crowd out cells you need, like
red blood cells
,
platelets
and healthy white blood cells.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Doctors classify this condition as a myeloproliferative neoplasm/myelodysplastic syndrome (MPN/MDS). Here’s what this means:
Myeloproliferative neoplasm
(MPN). Your bone marrow makes
too many
blood cells. Too many of one type of blood cell can cause problems with how your blood works.
Myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS). Your bone marrow makes
abnormal
blood cells. Instead of having mature, healthy blood cells, you may have too many immature
blast
cells.
CMML can range on a spectrum from slow-growing to aggressive. Your healthcare provider will explain potential treatment options that may slow its progression.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
CMML doesn’t always cause symptoms. The first sign of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia may be abnormal results on a
blood test
. When symptoms are noticeable, they usually develop gradually. CMML symptoms include:
Fatigue
or weakness (a sign of low red blood cells, or
anemia
)
Frequent infections (a sign of low white blood cells, or
neutropenia
)
Excessive
nosebleeds
or
bruising
easily (a sign of low platelets, or
thrombocytopenia
)
Enlarged spleen (
splenomegaly
)
Enlarged liver (
hepatomegaly
)
Unexplained weight loss
Night sweats
Bone pain
Fever
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia causes
Researchers don’t know what causes CMML. But they have identified several gene changes (
mutations
) associated with this condition. If you’re diagnosed, you’ll likely have more than one mutation. Some of the most common ones involve the following genes (with the most common listed first):
Advertisement
TET2
SRSF2
ASXL1
RAS
Risk factors
Risk factors for chronic myelomonocytic leukemia include:
Age
. Your risk increases as you get older. The median age of diagnosis is between 73 and 75. A median is a midpoint. This means half of people diagnosed are younger, and half are older.
Sex
. More
males
are diagnosed than females.
Cancer treatment
. About
1 in 10
people who develop CMML had previous
cancer treatments
like chemotherapy and radiation. Healthcare providers consider the risk of future cancers when they prescribe these treatments. They only suggest them when the benefits clearly outweigh the risks.
Complications of this condition
In about
2 out of 10
cases, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia transforms into
acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Ask your healthcare provider about your risk of developing AML based on your diagnosis and risk factors.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
Your healthcare provider will consider your symptoms and ask about your medical history. They’ll perform tests to check your blood cells. Tests may include:
Complete blood count
. A monocyte count that’s too high (
monocytosis
) may be a sign of CMML.
Peripheral blood smear
. Monocytes that look irregular or immature (blast cells) when viewed beneath a microscope may be a sign of CMML.
Bone marrow biopsy
. Your provider may need to take a sample of bone marrow and test it in a lab to check for abnormal monocytes.
Genetic testing
. Providers also check for gene mutations associated with other blood cancers. This can help them eliminate other conditions that involve similar symptoms and blood test results.
Staging
Healthcare providers determine how advanced CMML is (
cancer staging
) based on how many blast cells you have. The stages are:
CMML-1
. Less than 4 out of every 100 cells in your
blood
are blasts. Less than 9 out of every 100 cells in your bone marrow are blasts.
CMML-2
. Five to 19 out of every 100 cells in your blood are blasts. Ten to 19 out of every 100 cells in your bone marrow are blasts.
The stage helps your provider decide the most effective treatment.
Management and Treatment
How is chronic myelomonocytic leukemia treated?
First, you may need treatment to ensure you have enough healthy blood cells. You may need medications or regular
blood transfusions
to boost your blood cell counts. This may be a part of
palliative care
to help you manage symptoms.
Other treatments that target CMML directly include:
Allogeneic stem cell transplant
. This is the only treatment that can potentially
cure
CMML. But it’s not an option for most people. Also, it can cause life-threatening complications like
graft vs. host disease
.
Chemotherapy
. Chemo makes it harder for the monocytes to multiply out of control. This can provide symptom relief.
Drug types
include
hydroxyurea
and hypomethylating agents (HMA).
Clinical trials
. Your provider may recommend taking part in a clinical trial if other treatments aren’t helping. Current clinical trials are studying the effectiveness of newer CMML treatments. These include
targeted therapy
and
immunotherapy
.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You’ll see your healthcare provider regularly (usually every one to six months). It’s important not to skip appointments. During these visits, your provider will ask about your symptoms and run blood tests. They’ll assess how your treatment is working and make adjustments as needed.
In the meantime, contact your provider if you’re experiencing unexpected or severe treatment side effects. Your provider will let you know what signs to look out for based on the treatment you’re getting.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
The median life expectancy for people diagnosed with CMML is approximately between one to three years. Again, a “median” is a midpoint. This means that half of people have a shorter lifespan and half live longer. But lots of factors shape your likely outcome, or
prognosis
. These include:
Blood test results
. Your blood cell counts provide clues about your prognosis. Important values include your monocyte, blast cell and platelet counts. Your
hemoglobin
level is another important number that your healthcare provider will monitor.
Genetic mutations
. Some mutations, like mutations in the
ASXL1
gene, are associated with a worse prognosis.
Frequency of blood transfusions
. Your outcome is generally better if you don’t need repeat blood transfusions to restore your blood cells.
Advertisement
Your prognosis also depends on whether your condition progresses to AML. This is more likely to happen if you have CMML-2.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
One of the best things you can do if you have CMML is to take charge of your health in every way you can. Right now,
eating nutrient-rich foods
and
getting enough sleep
are essential. Balancing activity and rest are important, too. Connecting with others living with cancer is a good way to combat feelings of isolation that can come up. Speak to a therapist with expertise in working with people diagnosed with cancer.
Cancer can make a person feel helpless, but know that you’re still in charge of your life. And there are treatments available to help.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
There are no easy answers when it comes to living with CMML. Your outcome depends on lots of factors unique to you. Ask your healthcare provider to explain what these factors are and how they shape your prognosis. Understand what your treatment options are so that you’re confident that the care you choose aligns with your goals.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A leukemia diagnosis can come as quite a shock. Cleveland Clinic’s blood cancer experts are here to guide you through it and help you move forward.
Leukemia Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials