Air Embolism: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Air Embolism
Advertisement
Advertisement
Air Embolism
An air (gas) embolism happens when an air bubble gets into a vein or artery. It can lead to serious health issues that require emergency treatment. Certain medical procedures are the main cause of air embolisms. But overall, they’re rare.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is an Air Embolism?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is an Air Embolism?
An air embolism (gas embolism) happens when air gets into your blood vessels. It can block blood flow and be life-threatening. The air bubbles can also trigger
inflammation
, leading to tissue damage.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most air embolisms happen as a complication of medical procedures, like surgeries or vascular interventions. But they’re rare. Deep-sea divers can develop them, as well, when coming up rapidly to the surface. In this case, pressure changes cause lung damage.
There are two main types of gas embolisms:
Arterial gas embolism
: Air gets into your
arteries
. They’re rare but life-threatening.
Venous gas embolism
: Air gets into your
veins
. They’re more common than arterial ones, yet still rare. Most small venous air embolisms don’t cause symptoms or health issues. But large ones can.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of gas embolisms
The symptoms of an air embolism can vary depending on which part(s) of your body it affects and the cause.
But they’re all signs of a medical emergency. Get help as soon as possible.
Symptoms can include:
Irregular heartbeat
Sudden drop in blood pressure
Rapid, shallow breathing
Chest pain
Coughing up blood
Headache
Confusion or dizziness
Vision changes
Paralysis
in one area of your body
Loss of consciousness
Air embolism causes
Air embolisms mainly happen as a complication of medical procedures. But deep-sea diving and
blunt
and penetrating chest injuries can also cause them.
Some examples of procedures that can cause air embolisms include:
Advertisement
Central venous catheterization
(like PICC lines and ports)
Arterial catheterization (for constant blood pressure monitoring)
Lung biopsy or fluid removal from your lungs
C-section
or other gynecologic procedures
Cardiopulmonary bypass
Head and neck surgery, including brain surgery
Hemodialysis
Injection of contrast dye for CT scans
Mechanical ventilation
Risk factors
Surgeries that you get in a seated position put you at a greater risk for an air embolism. These are typically head (brain) and neck surgeries. It has to do with pressure differences between your heart and the area of the surgery, which is above your heart.
In some cases, a large venous air bubble can become an arterial air embolism if it passes through your heart. This is more likely to happen if you have atypical blood flow or openings in your heart, like:
Right-left
shunt
Atrial septal defect
Patent foramen ovale
Complications of this condition
Air embolisms that affect arteries in your heart or brain are especially dangerous. They can lead to complications like:
Cardiac arrest
Heart failure
Lack of blood flow to your heart muscle (
myocardial ischemia
)
Stroke
Temporary or permanent neurological issues, like vision changes, movement issues and seizures
If the air embolism isn’t treated or is too large, it can become fatal. Experts estimate that an air embolism is lethal when a volume of 3 to 5 mL of air per kg of weight enters your circulation.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
If you develop an air embolism, you’ll likely already be in a hospital because you had a procedure. Your healthcare team will assess your symptoms. They’ll check your
vital signs
and act quickly to start treatment and monitoring.
In some cases, a provider may use imaging tests during high-risk procedures to monitor for air embolisms.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Your body can typically get rid of a small venous air embolism. It’ll eventually reach your lungs, become trapped and go away when you breathe. But this isn’t the case for arterial air embolisms.
Air embolisms that cause symptoms need emergency treatment. Specific treatment varies depending on the embolism’s location and the cause. Treatment may include:
100% high-flow oxygen through a
nasal cannula
or
hyperbaric chamber
Moving your body into a specific position
Maintaining your airway and blood pressure
Your healthcare team may need to give you other lifesaving treatments. You may also need care for any complications that develop, like neurological issues.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have this condition?
The severity of complications from an air embolism depends on many factors, like:
The size of the air bubble
The type of gas (room air, carbon dioxide or nitrous oxide)
The position you were in when it happened
The body system(s) it affected
How quickly you get treatment
Advertisement
Your healthcare team can give you a better idea of what to expect.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
An air (gas) embolism is a medical emergency. Getting care quickly gives you the best chance of survival. Your provider may be able to treat it, but you’ll need time to recover. Take care of yourself and follow your provider’s instructions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you need stitches, a broken bone set or think your appendix might be causing your abdominal pain, Cleveland Clinic’s emergency medicine team is here to help.
Get Emergency Medicine Care
Find an Emergency Department
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment