Vertical Transmission: Infection, Examples & Diagnosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Vertical Transmission
Advertisement
Advertisement
Vertical Transmission
Vertical transmission is when a fetus or baby gets a disease through the placenta, at birth or through breastmilk. This can cause vision or hearing loss, enlarged organs, developmental delays and more. Examples of vertically transmitted diseases include TORCH infections like toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes, syphilis and parvovirus.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Overview
What is vertical transmission?
Vertical transmission is when a fetus or baby gets an infection during
pregnancy
or childbirth, or soon after birth through breastfeeding.
Germs
(pathogens) like
viruses
,
bacteria
and
parasites
can cause these infections.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It might seem like getting sick while pregnant is no big deal. But even if your symptoms are mild, the effects of an infection on a fetus or newborn can be serious. Vertical transmission can cause
miscarriage
,
stillbirth
and congenital (present-at-birth) conditions that last a lifetime.
Types of vertical transmission
Types of vertical transmission include:
In utero/transplacental.
This is when a germ moves through a pregnant
woman
’s bloodstream, across the
placenta
, to infect the fetus.
Intrapartum.
This is when your baby is infected during birth, while going through the birth canal.
Postpartum.
This is when your baby gets infected from
breastfeeding
— either through breast milk or blood from cracked nipples.
What’s the difference between vertical transmission and horizontal transmission?
Both vertical and horizontal transmission happen when a germ spreads from person to person.
Horizontal transmission is what we usually think of when something is contagious — you can get it from contact with another person through coughing, sneezing, sex or a shared item.
Vertical transmission is specifically when an infection spreads from a pregnant or breastfeeding woman to a fetus or baby.
Many vertically transmitted diseases can also spread horizontally.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of vertical transmission?
Symptoms of vertically transmitted infections in babies include:
Advertisement
Blindness
or vision loss
Hearing loss
Heart disease
Rash
or blisters
Seizures
Yellowish skin and eyes (
jaundice
)
Pink eye (
conjunctivitis
)
Small, widely spaced teeth (notched teeth)
Facial differences
Enlarged liver (
hepatomegaly
) and/or spleen (
splenomegaly
)
Small head size (
microcephaly
)
Delays or differences in motor skill development
Some babies have symptoms at birth. Others develop them later in childhood.
What infections can spread through vertical transmission?
Many viruses, bacteria and parasites can spread through vertical transmission. People often use the acronym “
TORCH
” to remember them:
T
oxoplasmosis
,
Treponema pallidum
(
syphilis
)
O
ther
R
ubella
C
ytomegalovirus
H
erpes simplex viruses
Infections that can fall under “Other” include:
Chagas disease
Chlamydia
COVID-19
Gonorrhea
Hepatitis viruses
HIV
Listeriosis
Parvovirus B19
Varicella-zoster virus
Zika virus
How does a pregnant woman get vertically transmitted infections?
Before passing them on to a fetus or baby, a pregnant or breastfeeding woman can get vertically transmitted diseases many ways, including through:
Oral, anal or vaginal sex
Respiratory droplets (coughing or sneezing)
Contact with cat poop
Eating or drinking something contaminated with a parasite
The bite of a kissing bug
A blood transfusion (this is rare, as providers screen donated blood for germs)
What are the complications of vertically transmitted diseases?
Vertical transmission can increase the likelihood of miscarriage or stillbirth. Severe swelling or fluid build-up can also happen inside the fetus (hydrops fetalis).
Diagnosis and Tests
How do providers diagnose vertically transmitted infections?
Providers can do
blood tests
during early pregnancy for certain
infectious diseases
that could infect the fetus. If your provider diagnoses you during pregnancy, they may recommend tests to see if the fetus is also infected. These include:
Amniocentesis
.
A provider uses a small needle to collect cells from the fluid surrounding the fetus.
Chorionic villus sampling
.
A provider collects samples of tissue from the placenta for testing.
Fetal blood sampling.
A provider uses a thin needle through your belly to get a sample of blood from the fetus.
In newborns and kids, providers can diagnose many vertically transmitted diseases with a blood test. If your provider is concerned about a TORCH infection (either because you have one or your child has symptoms), they’ll screen your baby at birth. Providers may also diagnose infections with urine (pee) tests or swab the inside of your child’s cheek to do a saliva (spit) test.
Management and Treatment
How are vertically transmitted diseases treated?
Treating vertically transmitted diseases depends on what kind of infection your child has and when they’re diagnosed. Sometimes, your provider can prescribe
antiviral
,
antibiotic
or
antiparasitic
treatment before or after birth.
Advertisement
Medications can sometimes lessen the risk of health problems but may not completely prevent them. And they can’t reverse any damage that’s already been done.
Speech
and
occupational therapy
can help children with congenital infections manage the effects of hearing loss and developmental issues.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child gets a vertically transmitted disease?
What happens if your child gets an illness through vertical transmission depends on many things, including when they got infected and what disease it is. Generally, the earlier in pregnancy a germ is passed to the fetus, the higher the likelihood of pregnancy loss or your baby being born with lifelong conditions.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Ask your pregnancy care provider about screening for infectious diseases early in pregnancy. Talk to them right away if you think you’ve been exposed to a
sexually transmitted infection
(STI) or if you get sick during pregnancy.
Prevention
Can vertical transmission be prevented?
If you have an infectious disease that could be transmitted during pregnancy or delivery, you may be able to treat it with antibiotics, antivirals or antiparasitic medications. This can reduce the risk of it spreading to the fetus or your baby. To avoid infection, you can also:
Wash your hands
frequently with soap and water.
Wear gloves for gardening or cleaning and wash your hands afterward.
Avoid crowded places or wear a mask.
This is especially important during
cold and flu season
and when COVID-19 cases are high.
Ask your provider about recommended
vaccinations
.
Vaccines can help protect you from some vertically transmitted diseases.
Practice
safe sex
.
Ask partners to get tested for
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
or use
condoms
during sex when you’re pregnant.
Avoid changing cat litter yourself when pregnant.
If you must change cat litter, wear disposable gloves and wash your hands thoroughly afterward.
Follow safe cooking habits.
This includes properly freezing and cooking meat and thoroughly washing or peeling fruits and vegetables.
Eat safe foods.
Don’t drink unpasteurized milk or untreated water. Don’t eat raw or undercooked clams, oysters or mussels.
Protect yourself from bug bites.
Use insect repellants and wear long sleeves and pants.
Plan ahead for travel.
Consider consulting with a travel medicine clinic if you’ll be traveling overseas while pregnant. They might have additional recommendations specific to your travel destination.
Advertisement
Consider being screened for Chagas disease if you’re pregnant or plan to become pregnant and you’ve been in an area where Chagas spreads.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Vertical transmission allows germs to spread from you to the fetus or your baby when you’re pregnant or breastfeeding. As it can cause serious, lifelong complications, it’s an important reason to take extra precautions to avoid getting sick while you’re pregnant or trying to get pregnant. Talk to your provider if you’re pregnant and think you’ve been exposed to an illness or have symptoms.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/08/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment