Involuntary Commitment: What It Is, How It Works & Criteria
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Involuntary Commitment
Advertisement
Advertisement
Involuntary Commitment
Involuntary commitment is a legal process to help someone get the care they need, even if they don’t want it. Involuntary commitment can be a challenging and emotional process, but it may save someone’s life.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
What is involuntary commitment?
Involuntary (civil) commitment is legally being admitted to a psychiatric unit for care of a severe
mental health condition
against your wishes.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your clinical team and the local county probate court work with you to determine how long you need to stay and to determine treatment recommendations. You can’t be forced to take psychiatric medications unless the court approves that treatment.
You may meet the criteria for involuntary commitment if you have an underlying psychiatric condition that poses an immediate risk of danger to yourself (suicidal) or others (homicidal). It may also prevent you from taking care of your basic needs.
If someone is requesting involuntary commitment, it isn’t a personal attack. No one is trying to imprison you. The goal is to keep you safe and prevent life-threatening complications that may happen if you don’t receive treatment.
What conditions does involuntary commitment help?
Some of the most common mental health conditions that involuntary commitment may help you manage include, but aren’t limited to, the following:
Mental health conditions
like
schizophrenia
Mood disorders
like
major depression
and
bipolar disorder
Drug-induced
psychosis
Suicidal ideation
Dementia
with associated psychiatric symptoms
These conditions don’t always require involuntary commitment. But they may if you’re in danger.
What are the criteria for involuntary commitment?
The criteria for civil commitment may look slightly different in each state. It sometimes varies depending on the county, too. It’s a civil legal process of the probate court. It’s guided by both state and federal law in the United States. The general criteria include:
Advertisement
You have a mental health condition that has serious symptoms. These can significantly impact your perception, mood, judgment and behavior.
Symptoms pose an immediate health and safety threat to yourself and/or others.
Symptoms prevent you from completing basic personal needs like eating meals, wearing clothing and accessing shelter.
You would benefit from treatment in a hospital for this mental health condition.
The legal system offers different criteria that vary by state and county, so care is as nonrestrictive as possible. For example, if outpatient services (going home after treatment) are available that meet your needs, you can receive that type of care rather than inpatient services (staying in a hospital).
How does involuntary commitment work
The process of involuntary commitment may look like this:
A concerned person contacts someone who can help get the civil commitment process started for you. This may be a healthcare or mental health provider,
social worker
, law enforcement officer or probate court.
Law enforcement might take you into custody to transport you to an emergency room to see a healthcare provider.
A healthcare provider will complete an evaluation to see whether you meet the criteria to be involuntarily committed.
If the healthcare provider agrees that you meet the criteria, you’ll be admitted to an inpatient psychiatric facility to receive treatment.
A court hearing is held to determine whether involuntary commitment is necessary for a longer amount of time (this varies by state).
Between steps three and four, you may be placed in a care setting for observation for up to 72 hours before a provider makes their official decision. This emergency hold may allow your symptoms time to stabilize. If you’re able to, you may have the option to choose whether you want to voluntarily admit yourself into treatment after 72 hours.
The process and timeline are slightly different for each person. It also varies based on the local civil code.
What are the consequences of involuntary commitment?
Involuntary commitment does have positive and negative aspects to it. For example, it may save your life and give you a second chance. But the process of forcibly getting you into care against your will might cause unnecessary trauma, fear and feeling helpless that may result in
post-traumatic stress disorder
.
Being involuntarily committed may:
Disrupt your routine
Make you feel betrayed
Set you back financially
Cause you to lose some personal independence while you’re hospitalized
Make you lose trust in the healthcare system or law enforcement
You may not realize the severity of your symptoms before admission. Some
studies
show that people realize how important involuntary commitment is after they receive the treatment they need to stay healthy.
Advertisement
How long is involuntary commitment supposed to last?
The amount of time you need care varies based on your needs. As a legal process, the probate court will regularly hold hearings to check in and see how things are going. For example, you may have a hearing after seven days, 14 days, 30 days or 60 days. You may need to stay in treatment longer if you’re still meeting the criteria for civil commitment (for example, you’re at risk of harming yourself or others).
Studies
show that the risk of
suicide
increases in the months after leaving treatment. It helps to build a support system and connect with local resources who can help you if you don’t feel well. You can also call or text
988
(U.S.). This is the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline. Someone is available to speak with you 24/7 if you’re in a rough spot.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may be experiencing a lot of emotions if someone is forcing you to do something you don’t want to do. You might feel like they’re treating you like a child or that no one is listening to you. These are very common feelings to have when going through the involuntary commitment process.
While this is frustrating and confusing, know that each step in the process is designed to keep you, and others, safe and healthy. Someone who wants you to stay alive made the difficult decision to ask for help. It might be challenging to see this while you’re going through the process but know that you’re surrounded by people who want to help you, not hurt you.
Advertisement
If you have any questions about how it works or what you can expect, don’t hesitate to reach out to your caregivers, social workers or any of the people on your care team.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
866.588.2264
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment