Malaria: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis, Treatment & Prevention
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Malaria
Advertisement
Advertisement
Malaria
Malaria is a potentially life-threatening illness caused by parasites. You get it through the bite of an infected mosquito. It’s most common in parts of the world that are hot and humid, like Africa and parts of Asia. It can cause flu-like symptoms that can progress to severe illness if not treated.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Malaria?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Malaria?
Malaria symptoms can start flu-like and become severe. It’s important to treat it as soon as possible.
Malaria is a disease you get from being bitten by a mosquito. Some mosquitoes carry tiny parasites. They can infect you with the parasites when they bite you. Malaria can cause severe illness and death if left untreated. Kids under 5 are more likely to get life-threatening illness. Malaria is most common in tropical areas where it’s hot and humid. Most cases happen in Africa. It’s rare in the U.S. See a healthcare provider right away if you live in or have traveled to an area where malaria spreads and you have symptoms. This is true even if you’ve taken medications to prevent malaria during your trip.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of malaria
Symptoms of malaria can be mild to severe. They often start as flu-like symptoms and can get worse. They include:
Fever
Chills
Headache
Muscle aches
Fatigue
Difficulty breathing
Diarrhea,
nausea
or
vomiting
Seizures
Yellowing of your skin or whites of your eyes (jaundice)
Dark or bloody pee
Malaria symptoms usually appear several days to a month after you’re infected. Some people don’t feel sick for a year or longer after the mosquito bite.
Malaria causes
Plasmodium parasites cause malaria. There are five types that can infect humans.
Plasmodium falciparum
(
P. falciparum
) and
Plasmodium vivax
(
P. vivax
) are the most common.
P. falciparum
often causes severe illness.
How do you get malaria?
A mosquito gets the parasitic infection when it bites someone who’s infected. The mosquito then bites you and spreads the infection. The parasite multiplies in your liver and spreads to your bloodstream. There, it can spread to other people if a mosquito bites you. Rarely, malaria can also spread through:
Pregnancy or childbirth (vertical transmission)
Blood transfusions
Organ donations
Sharing needles
Risk factors
You’re at a higher risk of getting malaria if you live in or travel to areas where it spreads, like parts of Africa. You’re at a higher risk of serious illness and death if you:
Advertisement
Are younger than 5
Are pregnant
Have a weakened immune system
Don’t have access to healthcare
What countries have malaria?
Malaria is most common in areas with warm temperatures and high humidity, including:
Africa
Central and South America
Dominican Republic, Haiti and other areas in the Caribbean
Islands in the Central and South Pacific Ocean (Oceania)
South and Southeast Asia
Complications of malaria
If left untreated, malaria can cause severe complications. These include:
Blocked blood vessels in your brain (cerebral malaria)
Coma
Organ failure
These complications can be fatal.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose malaria
Healthcare providers test a sample of your blood to diagnose malaria. They’ll look for Plasmodium parasites and identify what type of infection you have. Your provider will use this information to determine the right treatment. It’s important to tell your provider if you’ve traveled within the past year so they know to test for malaria.
Management and Treatment
How is malaria treated?
Healthcare providers treat malaria with medications that kill the parasite (antimalarial medications). The type of antimalarial medication your provider treats you with depends on:
Where you were infected — you’re more likely to get drug-resistant infections in certain parts of the world
The type of Plasmodium causing the infection
How sick you are
Whether you’re pregnant or breastfeeding
Your age
Medications can cure malaria, but it’s important to start treating it as soon as possible.
Antimalarial drugs
Antimalarial medications kill the Plasmodium parasites. You might receive them in an IV or take them by mouth. They include:
Artemether-lumefantrine
Atovaquone-proguanil
Chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine
Doxycycline, tetracycline or clindamycin
Mefloquine
Quinine
Primaquine
Tafenoquine
You might receive one or a combination of these. Take all medications as prescribed, even if you start to feel better.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
See a healthcare provider right away if you’ve traveled to or live in a country where malaria is common and you have symptoms. Early diagnosis gives you the best chance for a full recovery.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have malaria?
Antimalarial medications can cure malaria, especially if started early. You might need to stay at the hospital, at least to start your treatment. Treatment can last for about two weeks, but you might start feeling better in a few days. Let your provider know if you aren’t feeling better or if your symptoms get worse. Sometimes, even after treatment, malaria infections can come back (recur). This happens when the parasite isn’t completely killed by treatment. It can stay in your body without causing symptoms. You can start having symptoms again years after your initial infection and treatment. Medications like primaquine and tafenoquine make this less likely to happen. You can get malaria again, even if you’ve had it before.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can you prevent malaria?
There are a few ways to reduce your risk of getting and spreading malaria:
Preventive medications
: If you’re traveling to an area where malaria is common, your healthcare provider might prescribe antimalarial medications for you to take before, during and after your stay. If you get malaria while on an antimalarial drug, providers will give you a different medication to treat it.
Mosquito bite prevention
: Wear bug spray with DEET, cover as much skin as possible with clothing, sleep under mosquito netting and take other precautions to avoid getting bitten.
Vaccination
: Public health officials recommend vaccinating against malaria for children who live in areas where infections are common. They’re not currently recommended for travelers.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Malaria is a serious illness. But you can take steps to prevent it, and with early treatment, you can make a full recovery. It’s important to protect yourself from mosquito bites, especially if you’re traveling where malaria is common. Talk to your provider several weeks before traveling to see if they recommend antimalarial medications. This is especially important if you’re pregnant or traveling with young children. Let your provider know right away if you’ve traveled to an area where malaria is common and you have symptoms.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Have a virus, fungus or bacteria? Some of these “bugs” won’t go away on their own. Cleveland Clinic’s infectious disease experts are here to help.
Infectious Disease Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6503
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment