Hip Impingement (Femoroacetabular Impingement or FAI): Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hip Impingement (Femoroacetabular Impingement or FAI)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hip Impingement (Femoroacetabular Impingement or FAI)
Hip impingement is painful pinching or rubbing inside your hip joint. It happens when your hip’s natural shape creates extra friction that prevents it from moving as smoothly as it should. Treatments include physical therapy, pain medications and surgery to repair and reshape your hip bones.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hip Impingement?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Hip Impingement?
Healthcare providers classify hip impingement into three types.
Hip impingement is painful pinching that happens when the
bones
in your
hip
don’t fit together like they should. Healthcare providers also call it femoroacetabular impingement or FAI.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
FAI is painful. It can make it hard to walk or move. You might feel stiff or sore all the time on one side. Over time, the impingement can damage the
cartilage
that cushions your hip joint.
Visit a healthcare provider if you’re experiencing hip pain, stiffness or other symptoms that don’t get better in a week or two.
Types of FAI
Healthcare providers classify hip impingement as one of three types. Each type is based on why your hip doesn’t fit together like it should:
Cam impingement
: This happens when extra bone grows on the top of your
thigh bone
.
Pincer impingement
: This is extra bony growth in your hip socket.
Combined impingement
: This is when you have cam and pincer impingement at the same time.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of hip impingement
The most common femoroacetabular impingement symptoms include:
Hip pain
Stiffness
Limping or trouble moving
Some people with FAI never experience symptoms. You might notice worsening symptoms over time. This is especially true if impingement damages the cartilage in your hip joint.
What does femoroacetabular impingement feel like?
Hip impingement usually feels like a constant, dull ache in your hip. The pain might spread to your:
Groin
Butt
Thighs
It might feel like there’s a bruise deep inside your body that someone is constantly pressing on.
FAI pain typically gets worse during physical activities. You may notice it more during motions like:
Advertisement
Squatting
Lunging
Jumping
Lying on your side or sitting still for a long time can also make the pain worse. These activities or positions can make the pain feel sharp or stabbing.
Femoroacetabular impingement causes
FAI happens when the bones in your hip joint rub, catch or put extra pressure on each other. It’s usually because of a
bone spur
on your thigh bone or in your hip socket. Most people with unusually shaped joints are born with them. Bone spurs can develop throughout your life.
Risk factors
Anyone can be born with or develop hip impingement.
Males
are more likely to have cam impingement. Females are more likely to have pincer or combined impingement.
Athletes are more likely to experience symptoms. Especially if they play sports that put lots of pressure on their hips. This doesn’t mean that playing sports makes you more likely to develop impingement. But athletes are more likely to notice symptoms. That’s because they use their hips more often and more intensely than most people.
Complications of FAI
Hip impingement can damage your hip joint if it’s not treated. The most common complications include:
Worsening symptoms
:
This can make it harder to move or use your hip.
Labral tears
: The extra pressure and friction from FAI can gouge the cartilage lining in your hip socket. This can lead to a tear.
Osteoarthritis
: Impingement increases your risk of arthritis in that hip.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose femoroacetabular impingement
A healthcare provider will diagnose FAI with a
physical exam
and imaging tests. Tell your provider when you first noticed symptoms. Let them know if any movements, activities or positions make the symptoms better or worse.
Your provider will use imaging tests to take pictures of your hip. These tests may include:
X-ray
MRI
CT scan
Your provider may inject a small amount of local
anesthetic
into your hip to numb it. The medication might temporarily relieve symptoms. This can be a sign you have FAI. They may use other medications to manage hip impingement. But this is usually a good way to help diagnose it.
Hip impingement test
An FAI test will help your provider check for hip impingement. You’ll lie on your back, and your provider will lift your leg up toward your chest. Then, you’ll bend your knee so your leg forms an L shape. Your provider will twist your upper leg in, toward the center of your body.
These positions let your provider put light pressure in places you might have FAI. You might have hip impingement if you feel pain during these movements. The test may be uncomfortable. But it’s safe. Tell your provider if you feel any severe pain during the test.
Management and Treatment
What are FAI treatments?
Common femoroacetabular impingement treatments include:
Advertisement
NSAIDs
: Over-the-counter NSAIDs reduce inflammation and relieve pain.
Corticosteroids
: These are prescription anti-inflammatory medications. Your provider may give you a
cortisone shot
directly into your hip joint.
Physical therapy
: Physical therapy will help you strengthen the
muscles
around your hip. This can relieve pressure on your joint. It will also improve your mobility.
Activity modification
: You might need to avoid certain movements that make the pain worse. You’ll be able to stay active. But you might have to change how you exercise or train.
Surgery
: Your provider will suggest surgery if you have severe symptoms that affect your quality of life. You might need surgery if other treatments don’t work or if you have a hip labral tear.
Hip arthroscopy
is the most common surgery to repair hip impingement. Your surgeon will tell you what to expect.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you’re experiencing FAI symptoms for more than a few weeks. Tell your provider if the symptoms make it hard to move or use your hip.
Talk to your provider if treatments like NSAIDs or physical therapy aren’t working as well as they used to.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Will hip impingement go away?
FAI won’t go away unless you have surgery to correct the shape of your hip. But most people can manage symptoms with other treatments.
Advertisement
Talk to your provider about which treatments are right for you. Ask them when you should consider surgery.
Surgery to repair femoroacetabular impingement has a very high success rate. Many people have no long-term side effects. You might have to avoid or modify certain exercises or movements. But you should still be able to stay active and play sports.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Finding out you have hip impingement can be a relief — finally, you know why your hip’s been aching for so long. But it can also be frustrating — there’s nothing you could’ve done to prevent it, and it happened because of the way your hip bones naturally developed.
No matter what you’re feeling, FAI responds well to treatment. It might take a while to find a way to manage your symptoms, but your provider will help you tweak and modify things until something works. If you do end up needing surgery, remember that hip arthroscopy is minimally invasive and very successful.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/19/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment