Embryonal Carcinoma: Symptoms & Prognosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Embryonal Carcinoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Embryonal Carcinoma
Embryonal carcinoma is a rare form of testicular cancer. It’s a type of tumor that consists of abnormal germ cells — the cells that eventually mature into sperm. Common treatments include surgery to remove the tumor and chemotherapy.  Although it’s an aggressive cancer, the prognosis is good if you receive treatment before the cancer has spread.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Testicular Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is embryonal carcinoma?
Embryonal carcinoma is a rare, aggressive (fast-growing)
germ cell tumor
and form of
testicular cancer
. With this type of tumor, germ cells (cells that typically “
germ
inate” into fully mature sperm cells) multiply rapidly. They form a
malignant tumor
inside your
testicle
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers classify embryonal carcinomas as non-seminomatous germ cell tumors. Non-seminomas (like embryonal carcinoma) grow bigger and spread faster than tumors classified as seminomas.
How common is embryonal carcinoma?
Testicular cancer in all its forms, including germ cell tumors like embryonal carcinoma, is rare. Of all testicular cancer diagnoses, only 2% of germ cell tumors are pure embryonal carcinomas. But around 85% of all testicular mixed germ cell tumors contain embryonal carcinoma elements. Mixed germ cell tumors contain a mixture of non-seminoma tumor types.
In extremely rare cases, embryonal carcinoma can start in other organs, like your
ovaries
. Embryonal carcinoma that forms in the ovaries is a rare
ovarian germ cell tumor
. No matter where embryonal carcinoma starts, these tumors tend to grow and spread fast.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of embryonal carcinoma?
Symptoms of embryonal carcinoma include:
A
swollen testicle
.
A (
painful
or painless) mass or lump in your testicle.
Heaviness or discomfort in your
scrotum
.
Other symptoms may be signs that the cancer has spread beyond your testicle. These include:
Low back pain
.
Flank pain
.
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
.
Cough
or
coughing up blood (hemoptysis)
.
What causes embryonal carcinoma?
Embryonal carcinomas form when germ cells multiply out of control. Eventually, the cells form a mass, or
tumor
. These tumors tend to grow fast and spread beyond your testicle.
Advertisement
Researchers don’t know why these cells start behaving abnormally in the first place. But they believe the abnormal germ cells form early, during
embryonic development
.
Risk factors
Risk factors for embryonal carcinoma include:
Age
: Most people diagnosed are between 25 and 35.
Race
: Testicular germ cell tumors are more common among non-Hispanic whites in the United States and Europe.
Family history
: Your risk may be greater if a close biological relative also has a germ cell tumor.
Select medical conditions
: Conditions that may increase your risk include
undescended testicles (cryptorchidism)
and
Klinefelter syndrome
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is embryonal carcinoma diagnosed?
Your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll perform a
physical exam
to check for lumps in your testicle and swelling in the lymph nodes in your abdomen.
Swollen lymph nodes
may be a sign of cancer spread.
Tests used to diagnose embryonal carcinoma include:
Imaging tests
: Usually, the first imaging test you’ll need is an
ultrasound
of both testicles. If an ultrasound reveals signs of a tumor, you may need additional imaging tests to check for cancer spread. Tests may include a
CT scan
(computed tomography scan), an
X-ray
or an
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging).
Serum tumor marker tests
: Your provider will check your
blood
for signs of certain
tumor markers
linked to testicular cancer. These include
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)
and
human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)
. They’re sometimes present with embryonal carcinoma — but not always.
Inguinal
orchiectomy
and
biopsy
: A provider will need to examine the tumor cells beneath a microscope to confirm that it’s embryonal carcinoma. Your provider will need to remove the entire affected testicle. With testicular cancer, removing just a sample of tissue (as is usually the case in a biopsy) puts you at risk of the cancer cells spreading.
Stages of embryonal carcinoma
As part of your diagnosis, your provider will determine your
cancer stage
, or how advanced it is. Cancer stage is the best predictor of your prognosis. Early-stage embryonal carcinoma is often
curable
. But it spreads so fast that up to 40% of cancers have already
metastasized
(spread to distant parts of your body) by the time providers diagnose them.
The stages of embryonal carcinoma are:
Stage I
: The
cancer
is in your testicle only.
Stage II
: The cancer has spread to
lymph nodes
in the back of your abdomen (retroperitoneum).
Stage III
: The cancer has spread beyond the lymph nodes in your retroperitoneum or to distant organs. Embryonal carcinoma usually spreads to the
lungs
, but it may also spread to your
liver
,
brain
or
bones
.
Management and Treatment
How is embryonal carcinoma treated?
The most common treatments for embryonal carcinoma include surgery to remove the cancer and chemotherapy. Your treatment plan depends on lots of factors. These include your cancer stage, overall health and treatment preferences. Specific treatments include:
Radical inguinal orchiectomy
: Your healthcare provider will remove the affected testicle. They’ll seal nearby
blood vessels
and lymph tissue to prevent the possibility of cancer spreading.
Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection
(RPLND)
: Your healthcare provider may remove the lymph nodes in the back of your abdomen if embryonal carcinoma has spread there (or if there’s a chance of spread).
Chemotherapy
: Embryonal carcinoma usually responds well to chemotherapy. Chemotherapy treatment uses
drugs
to kill cancer cells. You may need chemotherapy after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells. Sometimes, with advanced-stage embryonal carcinoma, providers prescribe chemo before surgery.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Testicular Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for embryonal carcinoma?
The biggest indicator of your prognosis (outlook) is the tumor stage. According to a
recent study
tracking embryonal carcinoma
survival rates
, over 98% of people treated for Stage I cancer were alive five years later. Around 80% with Stage III embryonal carcinoma were alive five years later.
Even if you respond well to treatment, your healthcare provider will continue to monitor you in case the
cancer returns
. With embryonal carcinoma, there’s a 20% chance of recurrence if the cancer’s only in your testicle. The likelihood of recurrence increases to over 50% if the cancer is in your scrotum or lymph nodes.
Prevention
Can embryonal carcinoma be prevented?
You can’t prevent embryonal carcinoma. But you can improve your outlook by seeing your healthcare provider at the first sign of a change in your testicles. Not all changes mean cancer, but you should always have a provider check to be sure.
Living With
How do I take care of myself?
Share any concerns you may have about your treatment with your healthcare provider. For example, many people who learn they’ll need to have a testicle removed wonder what this will mean for their sexuality and fertility. But the remaining testicle will produce enough
testosterone
so you can get erect and ejaculate. You should still be able to have biological children.
Advertisement
If you’re concerned about your appearance, getting a prosthetic testicle may be an option.
Sperm banking
is also a possibility if you’re concerned about preserving your fertility.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
Questions to ask include:
What stage is my cancer?
What are my treatment options?
What outcomes should I expect after treatment?
How likely is it that treatment will get rid of the cancer for good?
Should I bank my sperm before treatment?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Although embryonal carcinoma is a more aggressive form of testicular cancer, it still typically responds well to treatments like surgery and chemotherapy. This is especially the case when it’s caught early. Your healthcare provider can advise you on treatment options based on your cancer stage. In the meantime, if you’re noticing changes to your testicle, see your provider as soon as possible to get checked.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Learning you have testicular cancer change your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts will craft a treatment plan that matches your needs.
Testicular Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/24/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials