Colectomy (Colon Resection Surgery): What It Is & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Colectomy (Bowel Resection Surgery)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Colectomy (Bowel Resection Surgery)
A colectomy (colon resection surgery) is treatment for conditions like colon cancer or severe inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). A colectomy may remove specific parts of your colon, all of it, or your colon and your rectum.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Colorectal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Colectomies are surgeries to treat conditions that damage your colon. The surgery may remove all or part of your colon.
What is a colectomy?
A colectomy is surgery to remove part or all of your colon in your
large intestine
. You may have a colectomy if you have a condition that damages your colon. The damage may affect your
gastrointestinal tract
so it can’t work like it should.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Healthcare providers may do colectomies to treat the following conditions:
Colon cancer
Diverticulitis
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Large bowel obstruction
Severe
inflammatory bowel disease
There are inherited disorders, like
Lynch syndrome
, that increase colon cancer risk. Familial adenomatous polyposis (
FAP
) is another example. If you have these conditions, a preventive colectomy may reduce your risk.
Colectomy types
A total colectomy removes your entire colon. A partial colectomy removes certain sections of your colon. There are different types of partial colectomies:
Hemicolectomy
removes one side of your colon
Proctocolectomy
removes your colon and rectum
Proctosigmoidectomy
removes the last part of your colon (sigmoid colon), which connects to your rectum. It may involve removing part of your rectum
Sigmoid colectomy (sigmoidectomy) removes your sigmoid colon
Treatment Details
How should I prepare for a colectomy?
A colectomy is major surgery. There’s a lot that goes into preparing for it. First, you’ll meet with your gastrointestinal surgeon. They’ll discuss the specific type of colectomy you’ll have and the method they’ll use.
Your healthcare team will do tests to confirm you’re able to have surgery. You may have tests like:
Blood tests
Colonoscopy
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Imaging tests like
CT scans
or
MRI scans
Advertisement
They’ll also explain what you should do during the few days before your surgery. General guidelines are:
Arrange for someone to take you home from the hospital after your surgery.
Start a
clear liquid diet
a few days before your surgery.
Use a
bowel prep
to clear out your intestines before surgery.
Don’t eat or drink anything after midnight the day of your surgery.
What happens during a colectomy?
Here’s what happens during a colectomy:
Your
anesthesiologist
gives you general
anesthesia
. You’re asleep during surgery.
Your surgeon makes one long incision (open colectomy) or several small incisions (
laparoscopic
colectomy or
robotic
colectomy) in your belly.
They divide your colon and remove the diseased or damaged part.
Your surgeon connects the healthy ends of your colon together. They’ll do a colostomy or ileostomy if they can’t reconnect the two sections of your colon.
They’ll use sutures to close your incision.
A colectomy may take between one and four hours to complete.
Anastomosis vs. ostomy
Having a colectomy may change the way poop leaves your body. Normally, digested food moves through your colon on its way to becoming poop. Removing part or all of your colon can disrupt that process.
Surgery to remove damaged sections of your colon divides it into two sections. Your surgeon may be able to connect the two sections (
anastomosis
). This lets poop continue to move through your colon.
But sometimes, that’s not possible. In that case, your surgeon will do an
ostomy
as part of your colectomy surgery.
What are the potential risks of a colectomy?
Like all major surgeries, colectomies may cause complications. Potential complications include:
Anastomotic leak
Excessing
bleeding
Infection
Injury to nearby organs
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule Colorectal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after a colectomy?
You’ll stay in the hospital for a few days up to a week. Your intestines can’t process food right after surgery, so you’ll be on a liquid or
soft diet
for few days. Your healthcare team will check the surgery site for any issues.
Your team will explain how to care for your
incision
. If you have an ostomy, your care team will explain how to care for it and how to adjust to life with an
ostomy bag
.
They’ll also explain what you can eat as your intestines recover from surgery. They may have suggestions for activities that you can do once you get home, like walking.
This is a lot of information to take in at any time, especially when you’re just starting to recover from surgery. You may want to have a family member or friend sit in on these conversations.
What is the recovery time?
Recovery at home may take up to six weeks. Many people get back to most of their usual routines within two weeks after surgery. But your recovery time may be different. Try to be extra gentle with yourself. Resist the urge to race back to your routine.
Advertisement
What can I eat after a colectomy?
In general, you should stick to low-fiber foods for the first month after surgery. Low-fiber foods are easier for your colon to process.
When should I call my healthcare provider?
Contact your surgeon if you have:
Belly pain
that gets worse over time
Fever
or other signs of infection like redness, pain or pus at the incision site
Issues pooping or you don’t poop
Pain around your belly that gets worse over time
Additional Common Questions
What is the life expectancy after you have a colectomy?
A colectomy is treatment for several conditions. Some of them, like colon cancer, can have an impact on how long you live. Other conditions, like diverticulitis, cause painful symptoms but aren’t life-threatening. And colectomy may be just one part of your treatment. You’re unique, and your
life expectancy
may be different from that of other people. Ask your healthcare provider about life expectancy. They know you and your situation. They’re your best source of accurate information.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A colectomy surgery may be a life-changing experience. The surgery may ease painful gut symptoms, be a potential cure or help you to live longer with colon cancer. In some cases, the surgery may mean having an ostomy that creates a new way for poop to move out of your body. You may worry the ostomy will affect your lifestyle. Your healthcare providers will understand this may be a big adjustment for you. They’ll be glad to answer your questions. They’ll recommend resources for managing changes a colectomy surgery may bring.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Some conditions like rectal and colon cancer, Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis may require colorectal surgery. Cleveland Clinic has the expert care you need.
Schedule Colorectal Surgery
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us