Metabolic Alkalosis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Metabolic Alkalosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Metabolic Alkalosis
Metabolic alkalosis is an imbalance in your body’s acid-base balance. This leads to high pH levels in your blood. Symptoms can be mild or severe and include muscle cramps, confusion and irregular heartbeat. Treatment involves getting your body’s acid-base level back in balance.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Metabolic Alkalosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Metabolic Alkalosis?
Metabolic alkalosis occurs when your
blood
is too alkaline (too basic) due to digestive or kidney issues. Alkaline is the opposite of acidic. Your blood’s acid-base balance is critical to your well-being. When the balance is off, even by a small amount, it can make you sick.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Things like excessive vomiting and taking
diuretics
can disrupt your blood’s acid-base balance. Severe forms of metabolic alkalosis can affect your
kidney
function. In mild cases, you might not have any symptoms.
Types of metabolic alkalosis
The two types are:
Chloride-responsive alkalosis
: This is when you lose too much acid. It happens from the loss of hydrogen ions, usually by vomiting or severe
dehydration
. Treatment with
IV fluids
containing saline solution or eating more salt can help with this type.
Chloride-resistant alkalosis
: This type usually happens from taking too much of certain medications or an underlying health condition. Eating more salt will not help this type. Instead, you’ll need to eat more
potassium
.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of metabolic alkalosis
You may not have any symptoms of metabolic alkalosis. If you do, they could include:
Diarrhea
Vomiting
Tingling or
numbness
Muscle cramping
Severe cases could cause symptoms like:
Confusion or disorientation
Agitation
Seizures
How does your body compensate for metabolic alkalosis?
Your body tries to compensate for metabolic alkalosis. Your lungs and kidneys respond to try to counteract the effects of the condition:
Lungs
: Your breathing slows down. This changes the concentration of bicarbonate ions in your blood.
Kidneys
: Your kidneys release bicarbonate ions through your pee to try to get rid of them.
Advertisement
Metabolic alkalosis causes
Metabolic alkalosis causes your body’s pH level to rise above a typical range. This happens because you have too much bicarbonate and not enough hydrogen in your blood. Bicarbonate is a compound that helps maintain pH levels and balance electrolyte levels.
Things that disrupt this balance and lead to metabolic acidosis are:
Losing stomach acid
: Recurrent vomiting or getting your stomach pumped can cause you to lose stomach acid. Loss of acid in your body means an increase in the alkalinity of your blood.
Taking too many antacids
:
Antacids
containing sodium bicarbonate can cause metabolic alkalosis in people with
kidney failure
.
Using diuretics or water pills
: Taking this medication too often can make your body release too much acid in your pee. This makes your blood more alkaline.
Taking laxatives
:
Laxatives
cause excessive diarrhea. You lose important electrolytes like potassium and chloride through your poop.
Dehydration
: You lose key electrolytes when you have dehydration. This increases your blood’s alkalinity.
Other causes of metabolic alkalosis include conditions like:
Genetic conditions that cause your kidneys to release excess electrolytes
High levels of the adrenal hormone aldosterone (
hyperaldosteronism
)
Low levels of chloride in your blood
Potassium deficiency (
hypokalemia
)
Heart, kidney or
liver failure
Risk factors
Certain factors put you at risk, including:
Needing to get your stomach pumped
Alcohol consumption to the point of vomiting
Taking laxatives to lose weight
Taking diuretics to reduce swelling or lose weight
Making yourself throw up after eating (bulimia nervosa)
Having
hyperemesis gravidarum
during pregnancy
Complications of metabolic alkalosis
While the condition is manageable, it can lead to complications. Some of the most common are:
Abnormal heart rhythm (
arrhythmia
) or heart failure
Reduced breathing rate or stopping breathing altogether
Kidney damage due to severe
electrolyte imbalance
Coma
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose metabolic alkalosis
Healthcare providers use a variety of tests that include:
Physical exam
to check your symptoms
Blood tests
to measure
blood gases
, acid-base balance and electrolyte levels
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
to check for an arrhythmia
Urinalysis
, which may help find the cause of the metabolic alkalosis
Management and Treatment
What is the treatment for metabolic alkalosis?
Your care depends on the cause and severity of your symptoms. Mild cases might not require treatment. Severe symptoms need immediate attention.
Metabolic alkalosis treatment uses an intravenous (IV) line to deliver fluid and other substances, such as:
Saline infusion
Potassium replacement
Magnesium replacement
Chloride infusion
Hydrochloric acid infusion
Advertisement
If excessive use of medications is the cause, stopping those medications is another possible treatment. Only do this if your provider tells you to.
Recovery time
Most people feel better and resume their everyday lives after completing treatment. But it can come back if low stomach acid, fluid or electrolyte levels affect the acid-base balance.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Many metabolic alkalosis symptoms are concerning and need prompt medical evaluation. If you’re experiencing an arrhythmia, seizures or confusion, seek care right away.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have metabolic alkalosis?
After treatment, your life will likely not be much different than it was before. Your healthcare provider may recommend ways to lower your risk of future episodes. This could include:
Decreasing the dose or discontinuing the use of antacids, laxatives or diuretics
Drinking lots of water throughout the day to keep hydrated
Taking a multivitamin or supplements to help maintain safe electrolyte levels
Another prevention method is to address the underlying cause. This may involve modifying treatments for other medical conditions. If you’re taking water pills to reduce strain on your heart, healthcare providers may reduce the dose. People who take antacids for
GERD
may need a different medication. Your provider will work with you to help treat the underlying cause.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When it comes to health, keeping your blood healthy may not be at the front of your mind. But even a slight change in your blood’s acid-base balance can cause issues throughout your body. It’s important to seek medical care if you have symptoms of metabolic alkalosis. While it’s usually not life-threatening, it can lead to complications when you delay treatment. Treatment with IV fluids helps many people make a full recovery. Addressing the underlying cause can lower your risk of future episodes.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have issues with your digestive system, you need a team of experts you can trust. Our gastroenterology specialists at Cleveland Clinic can help.
Digestive Care
Digestive Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/25/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us