Hyperpyrexia: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hyperpyrexia
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hyperpyrexia
Hyperpyrexia is a medical emergency that happens when your body temperature is higher than 106.7 degrees Fahrenheit (41.5 degrees Celsius). If you have a high temperature, contact emergency services immediately. Hyperpyrexia is life-threatening if untreated.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Hyperpyrexia?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Hyperpyrexia?
Hyperpyrexia is a high body temperature above 106.7 degrees Fahrenheit (41.5 degrees Celsius). This change to your body temperature happens because your brain tells it to go up.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Hyperpyrexia is an emergency and requires immediate medical attention.
The expected temperature of an adult human is 98.6 F (37 C). The temperature for a healthy person can range from 97.8 F to 99.1 F (36.55 C to 37.27). This range is the desired temperature on your body’s thermostat. It’s known as the “hypothalamic set point.” If you have hyperpyrexia, part of your brain changes the thermostat’s set point to increase your body temperature.
How does the hypothalamus affect hyperpyrexia?
The
hypothalamus
is an organ in your brain that regulates your temperature. If you have hyperpyrexia, your hypothalamus increases your body temperature above what’s expected.
A healthcare provider may refer to hyperpyrexia as a “hypothalamic fever.” This is because the part of your brain that manages your temperature isn’t working correctly.
What is the difference: hyperpyrexia vs. a fever vs. hyperthermia?
Hyperpyrexia is a body temperature above 106.7 F (41.5 C). It happens when your brain tells your hypothalamic set point to increase.
A
fever
is a body temperature above 100.4 F (38 C). Your hypothalamus increases your body temperature during a fever to fight off an illness or an infection.
Hyperthermia
is a body temperature higher than expected (99 or 100 F / 37.2 or 37.7 C). It happens when your body absorbs more heat than it can release. It doesn’t affect the temperature set point.
Advertisement
Also,
hypothermia
is the opposite of hyperthermia, when your body temperature drops below 95 F (35 C).
Symptoms and Causes
There are several possible causes of hyperpyrexia, when your body temperature dangerously increases above 106.7 F (41.5 C).
Hyperpyrexia symptoms
The main symptom of hyperpyrexia is a body temperature higher than 106.7 degrees F (41.5 C). If you have a high body temperature, visit the emergency room or contact 911 (or your local emergency services number). This condition is life-threatening without quick treatment.
A high body temperature can make you feel:
Dizzy
or lightheaded
Flushed
or pale
Nauseated
Sweaty
Thirsty
Tired
Weak
If your temperature stays high, you may have severe symptoms like:
Confusion
Dehydration
Fast heart rate
Loss of consciousness
Seizures
Stiff muscles or
muscle cramps
Hyperpyrexia causes
An increase in your body’s expected temperature (hypothalamic set point) causes hyperpyrexia. The temperature increase can happen due to:
A brain
hemorrhage
A negative reaction to
anesthesia
or medication (
SSRIs
or
antipsychotic medications
)
A
tumor
Addictive substances
An overactive thyroid (
thyroid storm
)
Brain trauma
Severe
bacterial
or
viral
infections (like
sepsis
or
COVID-19
)
Complications of hyperpyrexia
The condition can be deadly if it isn’t treated quickly. Hyperpyrexia can make it hard for your organs and body systems to work, including your:
Brain
Heart
Lungs
Gastrointestinal system
Liver
Kidneys
As a result, it can lead to:
Pressure or swelling on your brain (
intracranial pressure
)
Permanent brain damage
Coma
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose hyperpyrexia
As hyperpyrexia is an emergency, you’ll likely be diagnosed in the ER. A healthcare provider will check your temperature. They may check more than once and in different places on your body to make sure it’s correct. They’ll also ask about your symptoms and health history.
Testing, like
blood
and imaging tests, may help find the cause.
Management and Treatment
How is hyperpyrexia treated?
Treatment focuses on cooling down your body and treating the cause. To lower your body temperature, your care team may use the following:
Ice packs
A cool, damp cloth
A cool bath
Depending on the cause, additional treatment may include:
Taking fever reducers (antipyretics) like
ibuprofen
,
acetaminophen
or
NSAIDs
(if age appropriate)
Taking
antibiotics
or
antivirals
for an infection
Stopping anesthesia
Taking
corticosteroids
for a hemorrhage
Receiving fluids through an IV to prevent dehydration
Undergoing surgery to remove a tumor or severely damaged tissue from an infection or to treat the underlying cause
When should I go to the ER?
Visit the emergency room or contact 911 or your local emergency services number if you have a higher-than-normal body temperature. A body temperature above 99 or 100 degrees Fahrenheit is too warm (37.2 or 37.7 degrees Celsius). A temperature above 106.7 F (41.5 C) needs immediate medical attention.
Advertisement
What questions should I ask my doctor?
What caused a high body temperature?
What are the side effects of treatment?
Did hyperpyrexia cause any damage to my body?
How do I prevent hyperpyrexia from happening again?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for hyperpyrexia?
Hyperpyrexia is a medical emergency. If you have a temperature above 106.7 F (41.5 C), get help right away. It can cause permanent organ damage or be life-threatening if your body temperature doesn’t lower.
Quick treatment can lead to a positive outlook. Your provider will tell you what to expect and how to take care of yourself.
Prevention
Can hyperpyrexia be prevented?
You can’t prevent all causes. But you can reduce your risk by:
Letting your provider know if you have had a negative reaction to a medication or anesthesia before
Protecting yourself from injury or avoiding activities that could lead to an injury
Treating or managing any underlying health conditions
Avoiding any addictive substances
A note from Cleveland Clinic
When your body’s temperature climbs above 106.7 degrees Fahrenheit (41.5 degrees Celsius), it’s not just a high fever; it’s a red alert. This isn’t the kind of fever that responds to rest and fluids alone. It needs fast action.
If you or someone you care for suddenly feels dizzy, confused or just “off” with a very high temperature, don’t wait it out. Get emergency care. Treatment works best when it starts right away. Quick cooling measures can protect your brain and other organs from lasting damage.
Advertisement
It’s also worth talking with your provider if you’ve had serious reactions to medications or anesthesia in the past. Knowing your medical history may help prevent complications down the road.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 06/12/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider