Amniotic Band Syndrome: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Amniotic Band Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Amniotic Band Syndrome
Amniotic band syndrome (ABS) is a condition where bands of tissue in your uterus wrap around a developing fetus and restrict blood flow. ABS can cause a variety of congenital disorders, ranging from missing limbs to underdeveloped organs. Treatment usually includes surgery, prosthetics (artificial body parts) and rehabilitation.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is amniotic band syndrome?
Amniotic band syndrome (ABS) occurs when loose bands of tissue from the amniotic sac get wrapped around the fetus during
pregnancy
. These pieces of tissue are called amniotic bands, and they develop when the amnion (a layer of the amniotic sac) becomes damaged. This damage causes the amnion to “shed” bands of tissue which then can tangle around the fetus.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The bands can prevent
blood
from reaching the fetus’s body parts, affecting how they grow. It can also affect its internal organs and the umbilical cord. ABS can lead to
birth defects
(congenital disorders) or loss of limbs (
amputation
).
The severity of ABS depends on how tight the bands are and their location on the fetus’s body. Some infants are born with mild indentations on their skin, while others are born with missing limbs, fingers or toes. When loose bands restrict blood flow from the
placenta
, it could result in death.
Healthcare providers can detect ABS on a
prenatal ultrasound
, but most diagnoses happen at birth. ABS occurs in about 1 out of every 1,200 to 15,000 live births.
Other names for amniotic band syndrome are:
Amniotic band sequence
Constriction band/rings syndrome
Amniotic band disruption complex
Congenital constricting bands/rings
ADAM complex (amniotic deformities/adhesions/mutilations)
Streeter anomaly
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs of amniotic band syndrome?
The signs of ABS depend on where the bands attach and how tightly they’re wrapped around the fetus. Most cases (about 80%) involve damage to the hands or feet. But the bands can also tighten around the head, neck or abdomen.
Sometimes, ABS is mild and only restricts blood flow to the surface of the
skin
. This could result in a baby being born with constriction rings (skin indentations) or mild malformations of their limbs. Other times, the bands are so tightly wound and deep that they cut off circulation to an organ or body part entirely. This can lead to amputation, loss of blood supply or life-threatening complications.
Advertisement
Other symptoms of ABS are:
Missing fingers, toes or limbs.
Syndactyly
(webbing or fusion between fingers or toes).
Shortened or underdeveloped limbs.
Swelling
in the areas affected by the bands.
Clubfoot
.
Cleft lip and cleft palate
.
Bone deformities, including
scoliosis
.
Choanal atresia
(underdeveloped nasal passage).
Microphthalmia
(small or underdeveloped eyeballs).
What are the complications of ABS?
ABS can cause complications, some of which are lifelong. Some complications of ABS can be serious or life-threatening, such as:
Encephalocele
(openings in the skull)
Openings or defects in the abdomen or chest
Damage to vital body systems like the gastrointestinal (GI) or genitourinary system
Umbilical cord complications (when the band restricts blood supply to the fetus)
ABS often causes a
premature birth
, which can have its own risks. There’s also an increased risk of
miscarriage
or
stillbirth
.
Children with ABS may need physical or
occupational therapy
support for several years or until they adapt to the challenges of missing or underdeveloped limbs.
What causes amniotic band syndrome?
Most research shows that amniotic band syndrome has no clear cause other than damage that occurs to the amnion (the lining of the amniotic sac).
Causes of amniotic sac damage may include:
Prenatal tests
such as
chorionic villus sampling
(CVS) or
amniocentesis
. These tests puncture the amniotic sac with a needle to get a sample of fluid or tissue from the fetus. Damage from these tests is rare.
Open
fetal surgery
. This is for serious, life-threatening fetal conditions only.
But in some cases of ABS, the amniotic sac is intact and not the cause. So, other experts believe ABS is the result of circulation (blood flow) problems in the fetus. It’s possible that some fetuses have an
abnormal gene
that makes them more likely to have
poor circulation
.
What are the risk factors for amniotic band syndrome?
You may be more likely to have a fetus with ABS if you:
Have
pregnancy complications
Have
vascular Ehlers–Danlos syndrome
Smoke during pregnancy
Use drugs that aren’t prescribed to you or take certain medications during pregnancy
Diagnosis and Tests
How is amniotic band syndrome diagnosed?
A healthcare provider usually diagnoses ABS soon after birth when they examine your baby. Sometimes, a provider detects signs of ABS on a pregnancy ultrasound. An
ultrasound
can show lines from the tightened bands of tissue. More often, though, the ultrasound will show missing limbs or body parts that aren’t growing.
How early can you see amniotic band syndrome on an ultrasound?
Signs of ABS may be visible as early as 12 weeks into a pregnancy, but this is very hard to see. More often, your prenatal care provider notices signs of ABS at your
20-week anatomy scan
. If your pregnancy care provider suspects ABS, they may order additional imaging tests like an
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging).
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is amniotic band syndrome treated?
Treatment typically happens after your baby is born. The exact treatment depends on the location of the bands and how tight they were.
Mild cases of ABS may only need careful monitoring by a healthcare provider. But severe ABS that affects organ function needs immediate treatment.
Sometimes, surgery can correct issues such as club foot, cleft lip and palate or webbing. Infants or children with missing or shortened limbs may benefit from
prosthetics
(artificial body parts).
Physical therapy
and occupational therapy can help them use the prosthetic and improve their overall function.
In rare cases, a healthcare provider may remove amniotic banding with surgery when the fetus is still in your uterus (
fetoscopy
). The goal of surgery is to release the constrictive bands so they don’t cause further damage. This procedure carries serious health risks for the parent and fetus. It’s usually only for constriction bands that are life-threatening.
Can babies survive amniotic band syndrome?
Yes, most babies survive ABS. Survival depends on factors like the location of the bands and how tight the bands were.
Will the amniotic bands disappear?
No. In most cases, the indentations or
scars
from the amniotic bands don’t go away. This depends on how deeply the bands embedded themselves into the skin. Ask your healthcare provider about potential treatment options for scarring due to ABS.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for amniotic band syndrome?
The outlook for babies with mild ABS is good. Children with congenital (present at birth) limb conditions typically adapt well to prosthetics and rehabilitation. Babies with severe organ damage due to restricted blood flow through the umbilical cord usually don’t survive. About 1 in 70 stillbirths occur due to ABS.
Prevention
How can I prevent amniotic band syndrome?
There’s no way to prevent amniotic band syndrome. Healthcare providers believe that most cases are random.
Living With
What should I do if my child has amniotic band syndrome?
Children with ABS will need a strong support system and long-term care. Parents, family members and healthcare providers can help them as they adapt to the cosmetic and functional challenges of ABS. Your child may see a variety of specialists for ABS like
orthopedic surgeons
,
neurologists
and others (depending on which body parts are affected). Families and siblings may benefit from support groups.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
If your baby receives an amniotic band syndrome diagnosis, you probably have a lot of questions and concerns. First, know that your healthcare team is there to support you and take good care of you and your baby. Your exact situation will depend on how tight the bands are and where they’re located. This may mean you’ll have more frequent ultrasounds during pregnancy. Or your baby may need surgery at birth, long-term rehabilitation or prosthetics to restore function of their limbs. Don’t hesitate to talk to your pregnancy care provider or your child’s healthcare team about their diagnosis and what it means for your family.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your Ob/Gyn is there for you throughout many different parts of your life. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts can help you throughout your entire journey.
Find Your Ob/Gyn
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/08/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment