Tangier Disease: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tangier Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tangier Disease
Tangier disease is a rare genetic condition in which cholesterol builds up in different parts of your body, leading to symptoms like orange tonsils and an enlarged spleen. You also have very low levels of HDL (“good”) cholesterol, which can raise your risk of premature heart disease. Treatment can manage symptoms and help protect your heart.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Tangier Disease?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Tangier Disease?
Tangier disease is an extremely rare inherited condition that causes you to have very low levels of
HDL cholesterol
in your blood. This type of cholesterol complex is known as “good cholesterol” because it helps get rid of the “bad” cholesterol complexes (
LDL
) that clog your arteries. Having a very low HDL level may raise your risk of heart disease. Plus, extra cholesterol can build up in different places in your body — like your tonsils, spleen or liver — making them too big.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
This condition got its name from where it was discovered. In 1960, researchers identified the first case on Tangier Island, located in Chesapeake Bay. Other names for Tangier disease include:
Hypoalphalipoproteinemia
Familial alpha-lipoprotein deficiency
High-density lipoprotein deficiency, type 1 (HDLDT1)
High-density lipoprotein deficiency, Tangier type
Healthcare providers consider Tangier disease a type of lipoprotein metabolism disorder.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of Tangier disease
Symptoms vary based on where in your body cholesterol builds up. In general, signs and symptoms of Tangier disease include:
Enlarged tonsils, which may look bright orange or yellow-grey (this is a common early warning sign that typically appears by adolescence)
Enlarged spleen and/or liver
Problems with nerve function (peripheral neuropathy), which may involve muscle weakness or loss of sensation in your arms and hands
Swollen lymph nodes
in your neck, armpits and chest
Clouding of your
cornea
(corneal opacity)
High triglyceride levels
Low platelet count
Tangier disease causes
A
change
to your
ABCA1
gene causes Tangier disease. This gene tells your body how to make the ABCA1 protein, which helps cholesterol leave different cells in your body. This cholesterol should normally join up with special
proteins
called apolipoproteins to form HDL particles.
Advertisement
When you have Tangier disease, the
ABCA1
gene doesn’t work as it should. This means cholesterol has trouble leaving cells. As a result:
Cholesterol starts building up in your organs and tissues.
Your body can’t make enough HDL particles, leading to low HDL cholesterol in your blood.
How is Tangier disease inherited?
Tangier disease follows an
autosomal recessive
pattern of inheritance. This means you need to inherit an abnormal copy of the
ABCA1
gene from both of your biological parents to develop the disease.
If you inherit just one copy from one parent, you’re a carrier. You won’t develop the clinical symptoms, but you may have lower-than-normal HDL cholesterol levels. Because of this, experts sometimes consider Tangier disease to have an autosomal codominant inheritance pattern.
Complications of this condition
Tangier disease raises your risk of developing
coronary artery disease
earlier than expected — typically in your 50s or 60s. This may be due to the low level of HDL cholesterol in your blood. (Experts continue to study this link, though. That’s because existing medicines promoted to raise HDL so far haven’t been able to lower the risk of heart disease.)
HDL is often called the “good cholesterol” because it carries excess “bad cholesterol” (LDL) out of your blood. Without enough HDL to do this job, it may be easier for plaque to build up in your arteries (
atherosclerosis
).
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your healthcare provider can diagnose Tangier disease by doing a physical exam and blood tests. They look for typical signs like enlarged tonsils or spleen. Test results that suggest Tangier disease include:
HDL cholesterol below 25 mg/dL (milligram per deciliter) — this is commonly below 5 mg/dL
Apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) below 20 mg/dL
Genetic testing
that shows
ABCA1
gene variants
You may need more tests after receiving a diagnosis. These help your provider learn more about how Tangier disease is affecting your body. Possible tests include:
Ultrasound of your belly area to check your spleen and liver
Nerve conduction study
and
electromyography
to check nerve and muscle function
Eye exams to see if there’s any clouding of your cornea
Carotid ultrasound
and
CT angiogram
to look for plaque in major arteries
Management and Treatment
How is Tangier disease treated?
Treatment for Tangier disease focuses on managing your symptoms and reducing your risk of plaque buildup in your arteries. Some people may need to have surgery to remove an affected area, like their tonsils or spleen. Braces or
orthotics
may help if you have problems with nerve function and movement. There’s no cure for Tangier disease, but
gene therapy
may help in the future.
Advertisement
To help protect your arteries, you may need to:
Take medicine to manage blood pressure or cholesterol levels
Avoid tobacco
Eat
heart-healthy
foods
Get some physical activity (as your provider recommends)
If you have an enlarged spleen, your provider will advise you on the types of exercises that are safe for you. You may need to avoid contact sports that could make your spleen
rupture
.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see your healthcare provider regularly so they can respond quickly if your symptoms get worse. Follow the appointment schedule your provider gives you.
Your provider will do routine checkups of your:
Nervous system
Heart
Eyes
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for Tangier disease?
Most people with Tangier disease have a good prognosis (outlook). But it depends on the features of the disease that affect you and their severity. Your healthcare provider can help you understand what to expect long term, including any impact on your life expectancy.
Tangier disease is a lifelong condition. Early diagnosis and continued checkups can help you manage this disease.
Since Tangier disease is genetic and you’re born with it, there’s no way to prevent it. If you’re planning on having children, you may wish to speak with a genetic counselor. They can help you understand the chances of your child having this condition.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may not know anyone else with Tangier disease — or if you do, it might only be someone in your family. This can feel isolating. Even if you can’t connect with others who have this condition, you may find it helpful to talk with others who have another rare disease. You can share your experiences and have someone who understands how you feel. Search online or ask your healthcare provider to point you to support groups.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/07/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment