What Is Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatohepatitis?
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatohepatitis (MASH)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatohepatitis (MASH)
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) happens because you have excess fat cells in your liver. This condition once was called nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NASH). Excess fat cells cause chronic inflammation that can lead to worsening liver damage. MASH is often associated with having overweight, high blood lipids and high blood sugar.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis?
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) is a serious
liver disease
that develops when fat buildup in your
liver
causes inflammation. This condition was previously known as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Without treatment, MASH can lead to conditions like
cirrhosis
and
liver cancer
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
MASH is part of a broader group of liver diseases called
MASLD
(metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease).
Conditions like
obesity
, Type 2 diabetes and high cholesterol increase your risk of developing MASH. If you have these conditions, ask your healthcare provider if you should have tests that may show signs of MASH.
Symptoms and Causes
What are MASH symptoms?
You may not have symptoms of MASH until it severely damages your liver. The condition develops slowly over the years. When you do have symptoms, they may include:
Fatigue
Discomfort or pain in your
upper right belly
Unexplained weight loss
Muscle weakness
or muscle loss
Swollen belly
or legs
Yellowish tint to your eyes and skin (jaundice) as the condition worsens
Because early MASH often has no obvious symptoms, it’s important to get regular checkups — especially if you have risk factors like obesity, diabetes or high cholesterol.
What causes metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis?
MASH happens when too much fat builds up in the liver and causes inflammation. This is often linked to problems with how your body processes sugar and fat. Common causes and risk factors include:
Obesity
or
overweight
Type 2 diabetes
High cholesterol
High
triglycerides
High blood pressure
Insulin resistance
You may develop MASH if you don’t have overweight but have issues like high cholesterol or high blood pressure.
Advertisement
What are the complications of MASH?
Without treatment, MASH can cause serious and potentially life-threatening complications, including:
Liver fibrosis
. Scarring in your liver that gets worse over time and leads to cirrhosis.
Cirrhosis
. Severe scarring that affects how your liver works. This is often permanent.
Liver failure
. Liver failure may happen suddenly, so you need immediate medical treatment or a liver transplant.
Hepatocellular carcinoma
. MASH increases your risk of this common liver cancer.
Heart disease
. The condition increases your risk of heart attack, stroke and other conditions that affect your heart.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose MASH?
Diagnosing MASH involves several steps because it doesn’t cause symptoms right away. A healthcare provider will do a
physical exam
. They’ll ask if you have any conditions that increase your risk of developing MASH. They’ll do blood tests and imaging tests. They may do a liver biopsy.
Blood tests
Your provider will do
blood tests
to look for damage or inflammation in your liver. Tests may include:
CBC
BMP
Lipid panel
Hemoglobin A1C
Imaging tests
These tests provide images of your liver’s inside. Your provider will look for changes in your liver that could be signs of MASH. Imaging tests may include:
CT scan
Ultrasound
FibroScan
®
, a type of liver
elastography
Magnetic resonance elastography and proton density fat fraction (MRE-PDFF), which measures fat in your liver
Your provider may do a
liver biopsy
to get a small sample of your liver. A medical
pathologist
will cut the sample into tiny pieces. They’ll look at the sample under a microscope for signs of fat, inflammation and scarring. A liver biopsy is the most accurate way to diagnose MASH.
Your provider may do other tests to rule out other liver diseases that can cause your symptoms.
Management and Treatment
How is MASH treated?
MASH treatment focuses on improving your metabolic health and protecting your liver from further damage. Your treatment plan may include lifestyle changes, medication or bariatric surgery.
Lifestyle changes
Lifestyle changes
to manage MASH include losing weight by eating well and becoming more active. Suggested lifestyle changes may include:
Eating well
. Good food plans for managing MASH include the
Mediterranean diet
or low-carb diet.
Being active
. Build up to 150 to 300 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise per week.
Avoiding alcohol
. Even drinking a small amount of alcohol puts stress on your liver.
Medication
Your provider may prescribe medications that reduce MASH symptoms like scarring. Examples are:
Resmetiron (Rezdiffra
®
)
. This drug may slow down or reverse the scarring in your liver that MASH can cause. It’s the only drug with U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval to treat MASH with fibrosis stages 2 and 3.
GLP-1 agonists
. These drugs reduce inflammation and fat in your liver. Examples are
liraglutide
(Victoza
®
, Saxenda
®
)
semaglutide
(Ozempic
®
, Wegovy
®
) and
tirzepatide
(Mounjaro
®
, Zepbound
®
).
Advertisement
Your provider may prescribe other medications or supplements. For example, they may prescribe
pioglitazone
(Actoplus Met XR
®
), which treats diabetes. They may recommend a supplement like
vitamin E
.
Researchers are studying new medications for MASH in
clinical trials
. Ask your provider if joining a trial might be a good option for you.
Bariatric surgery
Bariatric surgery may be a treatment option if you have obesity and advanced liver disease. Surgeries like
gastric sleeve surgery
or
gastric bypass surgery
can:
Help you lose weight
Improve or even reverse liver damage from MASH
Dramatically reduce your risk of liver cirrhosis, liver cancer and needing a liver transplant
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is MASH curable?
MASH isn’t always curable. But early diagnosis and treatment may reverse the condition or keep it from getting worse.
What’s the life expectancy for someone with MASH?
Your
life expectancy
depends on how much damage MASH does to your liver. When caught early, many people live a normal lifespan with treatment. In more advanced stages, the risk of complications like liver failure, liver cancer or early death does increase — but treatment can still slow the disease and improve your quality of life. Starting care as soon as possible gives you the best chance for a better outcome.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Seek care if you have symptoms like fatigue, pain in your upper right belly or unexplained weight loss. These are symptoms of issues with your liver. Your healthcare provider will do tests to find out if MASH is the cause or if you have other liver issues. Certain conditions increase the chance you’ll develop MASH. If you have conditions like obesity or type 2 diabetes, your provider may do tests to check on your liver.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A diagnosis of metabolic-dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) can be overwhelming. If you have a condition like obesity, high blood pressure or high cholesterol, you may wonder if you’re responsible for your situation. But none of those conditions or MASH are your fault. Your healthcare team will focus on what’s happening now, not the past. They’ll explain the steps you can take to manage MASH. And they’ll be with you every step of the way.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Untreated hepatitis can cause liver damage or failure. Cleveland Clinic’s expert providers offer you the latest treatments and caring support.
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us