Acute Chest Syndrome: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Acute Chest Syndrome
Advertisement
Advertisement
Acute Chest Syndrome
Acute chest syndrome is a dangerous complication of sickle cell disease. It can cause chest pain, cough, fever, low oxygen levels and abnormal substances in your lungs. This syndrome is the leading cause of hospitalization and death in people with sickle cell disease. You need prompt diagnosis and treatment to survive.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sickle Cell Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Acute Chest Syndrome?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Acute Chest Syndrome?
Acute chest syndrome is a serious complication of
sickle cell disease
(SCD) where sickle cells get stuck in small blood vessels in your child’s lungs. This blockage creates a
vaso-occlusive crisis
— when oxygen-rich blood can’t reach body tissues.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The condition can get worse quickly and become fatal. It’s an emergency and the most common cause of death in people with sickle cell disease.
People with sickle cell disease have red blood cells with a crescent or sickle shape. These can’t pass through blood vessels easily. That means hemoglobin (a protein in red blood cells) can’t carry enough oxygen throughout your child’s body.
Acute chest syndrome is common in people with sickle cell disease, especially between ages 2 and 4. This syndrome can also happen again once you’ve had it. It happens more than once in 1 out of 2 people with SCD.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of acute chest syndrome
Acute chest syndrome symptoms may vary. They happen because of inflammation and blood vessel blockages in the lungs. People often have symptoms like:
Cough
Fever of 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius)
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
Low oxygen in your blood (
hypoxemia
)
Fast, shallow breathing (tachypnea)
Wheezing
Chest pain (adults only)
Acute pain (especially in an adult’s arms, legs and back) from blocked blood flow (vaso-occlusive crisis)
Fluid buildup in an adult’s lungs and chest (
pleural effusion
)
Acute chest syndrome causes
Scientists aren’t entirely sure what causes acute chest syndrome. But they believe it’s related to an
embolism
or infection in your child’s lungs. With an embolism, a blood clot, fat or a piece of dead bone marrow tissue can get stuck in a blood vessel and block blood flow. It may lead to acute chest syndrome, especially in adults.
Advertisement
Infections like viral or bacterial
pneumonia
can cause acute chest syndrome. This is the most common cause of the syndrome in children.
Risk factors
People with both SCD and
asthma
are
two to four times
more likely to have an episode of acute chest syndrome than people with only SCD.
Other risk factors include:
Age between 2 and 4 years
Low oxygen levels (like after surgery or trauma)
Low levels of fetal hemoglobin
Smoking or secondhand smoke
How to lower your child’s risk
If your child has sickle cell disease, talk to your healthcare team about ways to reduce their risk of acute chest syndrome. They may suggest:
Staying current with asthma treatments
Getting vaccinations for flu, pneumonia and COVID-19
Blowing into a bottle frequently to clear your child’s airways and reduce fluid buildup around their lungs
Getting regular physical activity to strengthen their lungs
Getting regular blood transfusions
Taking
hydroxyurea
or L-glutamine to reduce pain and avoid hospitalization
Complications of this condition
Without immediate treatment, people who develop acute chest syndrome may have complications, like:
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
, a life-threatening lung injury
Altered mental status
Kidney injury
Interstitial lung disease
Pulmonary hypertension
Liver dysfunction
Multi-organ failure
Respiratory failure
Severe pain
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose acute chest syndrome
Acute chest syndrome criteria include abnormal substances building up in your child’s lungs (lung infiltrates) and either chest pain, cough, wheezing, fever or low oxygen levels. A healthcare provider might grade their case as mild, moderate or severe.
A provider can make an acute chest syndrome diagnosis based on your child’s symptoms, exam, history and results from the following tests:
Pulse oximetry to check your child’s oxygen level
Arterial blood gases analysis to measure acidity (pH), oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood
Blood tests, including
complete blood count
(CBC), which evaluate red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets and look for infections
Chest X-ray
to look for infection or abnormal substances (infiltrates) in the lungs
Bronchoscopy to check for certain kinds of infections
CT angiogram
to look for a pulmonary embolism
Ultrasound of the legs to check blood flow
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Early treatment is essential to keep your child alive. Acute chest syndrome treatment may include medications and treatments, like:
Medications
for pain relief (
ketorolac
or
opioids
) or infections (antibiotics or antivirals)
Blood transfusion
, which replaces some of your child’s blood with donated blood or blood products
IV fluids
to prevent dehydration, which can worsen sickle cell disease and increase pain
Incentive spirometer
, a device that encourages your child to take deep breaths, which helps to keep parts of their lungs from collapsing
Supplemental
oxygen therapy
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Seek immediate medical attention at a hospital if your child has sickle cell disease and develops symptoms of acute chest syndrome. Tell the healthcare providers in the emergency room that your child has SCD. Ask for an X-ray right away to determine whether they have this syndrome so that providers can start treatment quickly. Diagnosing acute chest syndrome promptly can save your child’s life. It can also lessen the chance of another episode.
You may want to ask your provider:
How often should my child use the spirometer?
How often do they need blood transfusions to lower my risk of this syndrome?
Can you tell me what triggered acute chest syndrome?
When do they need a follow-up visit with you?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sickle Cell Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has acute chest syndrome?
Acute chest syndrome is usually more severe in adults than in children. A worse outcome may be more likely in adults with low platelet counts. But most people with this condition can recover if they get treatment quickly.
Even after successful treatment for acute chest syndrome, a person with SCD can have another episode in the future. Acute chest syndrome is one of the more common reasons for hospital stays in adults with sickle cell disease.
The
death rate
among adults with acute chest syndrome is about 4 out of 100. It’s about 1 in 100 for children.
Advertisement
Prevention
Can this be prevented?
Healthcare providers can prevent acute chest syndrome from developing during an SCD-related hospital stay. If your child is getting treatment for SCD in the hospital, their healthcare team should monitor and test them regularly. They can make sure they’re getting the medicines they need for pain and asthma, along with the oxygen and fluids they need. They’ll also want your child to do their part by breathing into a spirometer every two hours.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having sickle cell disease is hard enough. But when your child is having trouble breathing because of an SCD complication, you may start to panic. That’s when you need to get medical help immediately for symptoms of acute chest syndrome. You can help by sharing your child’s medical history so healthcare providers have the information they need to treat them.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic cares for people of all ages with sickle cell disease. We walk you through your diagnosis and treatment and offer education and support services.
Sickle Cell Disease Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/29/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
800.659.7822
Appointments & Locations
Talk to a Heart Nurse
Request an Appointment