Bug Bites & Stings: Symptoms & Treatment (First Aid)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bug Bites and Stings
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bug Bites and Stings
Bug bites and stings occur when insects (like bees and ants) or arachnids (like spiders and ticks) make tiny holes in your skin. The bug’s saliva or venom enters, causing itchiness and other symptoms. Antihistamines and hydrocortisone can ease itching. Seek emergency care for allergic reactions, severe spider bites and scorpion stings.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are Bug Bites and Stings?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Prevention
Living With
What Are Bug Bites and Stings?
Bug bites and stings are injuries that can range in severity from mild annoyances to life-threatening emergencies. How a bite or sting affects you depends on the bug in question and
your immune system’s
response. Most bites and stings are minor and treatable at home. But some can cause your immune system to overreact, leading to symptoms like
hives
, trouble breathing or
muscle spasms
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It’s not always easy to tell
which type of bug
has bitten or stung you. But when possible, identifying the type can help you and your healthcare provider plan treatment and watch for complications.
What are the different types of bug bites and stings?
Common types of bug bites and stings in the U.S. include:
Ant bites
, including those from potentially dangerous
fire ants
Bed bugs bites
Bee stings
Chigger bites
Flea bites
Fly bites, including those from black flies, deer flies,
horse flies
and sand flies
Mosquito bites
Scorpion stings
Spider bites
, including those from potentially dangerous
brown recluse spiders
and
black widow spiders
Tick bites
Wasp stings, including those from
yellow jackets
and hornets
Most of the bugs listed above are insects. That’s why people often use “insect bites” and “bug bites” to mean the same thing. But there are a few exceptions. Chiggers, scorpions, spiders and ticks aren’t insects. They’re arachnids. So, “bug bites” is a more general term that people casually use to cover everything.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs and symptoms of bug bites?
Signs and symptoms depend on the type of bite or sting. In general, you might experience these issues at the site of the bite or sting:
A raised bump or welt on your
skin
. The bump may be red or discolored. You may have multiple bumps that form a line or cluster.
Itchy
or irritated skin
. Bites and stings can be very itchy. You may also notice a mild tingling or burning sensation.
Minor swelling
. This means the area around the bite or sting looks a little puffy.
Pain or discomfort
. The pain may be sharp when the bite or sting first happens.
Advertisement
It’s common to have discomfort at the site of the bug bite or sting. But if you have symptoms in other parts of your body, seek medical care.
Severe symptoms
Black widow spider bites, brown recluse spider bites and scorpion stings may cause more severe symptoms. If you have any of the symptoms below after a suspected bite or sting, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately:
Abdominal pain or cramping
Excessive
saliva
and
drooling
Excessive sweating
Fast
pulse
Headache
Nausea
and
vomiting
Muscle pain, stiffness or spasms throughout your body
Numbness
all over your body
Sensitivity to light
Slurred speech
Trouble
breathing
or
swallowing
Allergic reaction to bug bites
An allergic reaction to a bug bite is when your immune system overreacts to the bug’s saliva or
venom
. Many allergic reactions are mild and only cause symptoms at the site of the bite or sting (providers call these localized symptoms).
But bug bites and stings can sometimes lead to
anaphylaxis
. This is a severe, life-threatening allergic reaction. Bees, wasps and fire ants are common culprits. Symptoms might start off mild but quickly progress to anaphylaxis.
Signs and symptoms of a bug bite allergy include:
Dizziness
or
fainting
Fast pulse
Hives
Muscle spasms
Nausea, vomiting or
diarrhea
Seizures
Swelling of the area where the bite/sting occurred
Swelling of your
tongue
or throat
Trouble breathing or swallowing
Wheezing
With an allergic reaction, the swelling around the bite or sting will be much larger than expected. It may expand to cover more than 4 inches (10 centimeters) from end to end.
Allergic reactions typically start within 15 minutes of a bite or sting. But they may occur up to six hours later (and, rarely, even after that). The most severe reactions often start right away. It’s possible (but uncommon) to have delayed allergic reaction symptoms. Providers call this
serum sickness
, and it can begin several days after a bite or sting.
If you’ve had a milder allergic reaction to a bug bite or sting in the past (for example, large swelling limited to the bite/sting area), you’re more likely to have a severe reaction in the future. Tell your provider about any reactions you’ve had so they can give you the best advice on prevention and first aid.
Why do bug bites itch?
Bug bites itch because of a chemical your body makes called
histamine
. When a bug bites you, its saliva enters your skin. Your immune system recognizes the saliva as a substance that doesn’t belong in your body. So, it sends histamine to the site to get rid of this invader.
Bug bites that itch include those from mosquitos, horseflies, bed bugs, fleas and chiggers.
Advertisement
How do bug bites and stings happen?
Bug bites and stings can happen any time you encounter an insect or arachnid. Working or playing outdoors makes run-ins with bugs much more likely. But bugs can also live in your home, especially in attics, basements and wood piles.
Ways people commonly get stung or bitten include:
Stepping on a bug while walking barefoot
Being in a forest, garden or overgrown field, especially when there’s high humidity
Disturbing a nest underground or in a tree, shrub or wall
What raises my risk?
You’re more likely to encounter bugs if you:
Live close to a lake, river, pond or marsh
Spend a lot of time in forests or grassy areas
Work on a farm or have regular contact with animals, especially dogs, cats or horses
Work as a gardener or beekeeper
What are the complications of bug bites and stings?
Some bugs, like mosquitos and ticks, carry diseases and can infect you through a bite or sting. These are called bug-borne diseases or vector-borne diseases. Examples include:
Babesiosis
Chikungunya
Dengue fever
Ehrlichiosis
Encephalitis
Lyme disease
Malaria
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Typhus
West Nile virus
Yellow fever
Zika virus
Each disease typically spreads in certain areas of the U.S. or around the world (they’re not everywhere). Your healthcare provider can tell you which diseases are local to your area. Before traveling, it’s a good idea to check which diseases are common there.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How are bug bites and stings diagnosed?
You might not need to see a provider for a diagnosis. But if you do, your provider may ask you questions like:
When did the bite or sting happen?
How many bites or stings did you get?
How soon did symptoms start?
What first aid or treatments have you done so far?
What bites or stings have you gotten in the past, and how did your body react to them?
If you have a serious reaction to a bug bite or sting, your provider may recommend
allergy testing
. They may also prescribe you an epinephrine auto-injector (
Epi-Pen®
) and tell you how to use it.
Management and Treatment
What should I know about bug bite treatment?
You can treat most bug bites and stings on your own. Exactly what you do depends on the bug in question and your symptoms. If your provider has prescribed you an EpiPen® to manage an allergy, use it as directed and then seek emergency care. You should also seek emergency care if you suspect a scorpion sting,
brown recluse spider or black widow spider bite
.
General first aid tips include:
Get the
stinger
out right away, if there is one.
Remove the bug. This might be as simple as shaking off your shirt. Or you might need to use tweezers to
remove a tick
.
Wash the area with soap and water. Any break in your skin can allow
bacteria
to get in. Cleansing the area lowers your risk of infection.
Apply a
cold compress
to the area to relieve swelling and pain.
Take over-the-counter medicines, like
NSAIDs
, to manage pain or discomfort. But ask your provider first to make sure they’re safe for you.
Advertisement
Treatments your provider may give you in certain situations include:
Antibiotics
or
antiparasitic medications
to treat infections
Antivenom injection
for a black widow spider bite or scorpion sting
IV fluids and medications to treat anaphylaxis
Venom immunotherapy (a long-term treatment) to lower your risk of anaphylaxis
How to stop bug bites from itching
Creams and lotions you apply to your skin can help ease itching. Options include:
Antihistamines
.
Hydrocortisone
.
Pure aloe vera.
The most important thing to know is that you should
not
scratch that itch. It’s tempting. But scratching your skin only makes it more likely that your skin will break open. And that raises your risk for infection.
What to do for a swollen bug bite
Applying a cold compress can help reduce mild swelling from a bug bite or sting. Wrap ice or an ice pack in a thin towel before putting it on your skin.
See a healthcare provider if the swelling:
Is severe or occurs with other symptoms like trouble breathing or swallowing.
Gradually expands to cover more of your skin.
Affects other areas of your body besides the bite/sting site.
How long do bug bites last?
Itching and mild swelling usually clear up within a few days. But some bites and stings need a week or two to fully heal. You might need longer to recover from a severe allergic reaction or insect-borne disease.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Prevention
How can I prevent bug bites and stings?
It’s not always possible to prevent all bites and stings. But here are some things you can do to lower your risk:
Wear bug spray in areas where you might encounter bugs — whether it’s on the job or while camping or hiking. Spray containing
DEET
helps fend off
mosquitos
, ticks, chiggers, flies and fleas.
Wear long-sleeved tops, pants and boots when in the woods or other areas with lots of bugs. Tuck your pants into your boots for added protection.
When traveling, check the bed for signs of bed bugs.
Don’t wear floral-scented products when spending time outdoors.
Cover foods at picnics or outdoor gatherings so bees aren’t attracted to the area.
Don’t swat at bees, which may make them defensive. Stay calm if one is near and it’ll likely leave you alone.
Check firewood for spiders before bringing it into your home.
Avoid walking barefoot outside.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
Contact a provider if you have any of the following:
Multiple bee or wasp stings
A bite or sting close to your eye
Severe itching or swelling
Open wounds due to itching
Symptoms that get worse or don’t start to go away after a few days
Signs of a skin infection (
cellulitis
), which include a reddish streak that extends from the affected area, blisters and
pus drainage
You should also see a provider if you have any symptoms of an insect-borne illness. These can develop within two weeks of a bite and include:
Body aches
Chills
Fever
Joint pain
Nausea and vomiting
Pain behind your eyes
Round rash around a bite that looks like a bull’s eye (a sign of Lyme disease)
Swollen lymph nodes
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Ouch! You know that feeling all too well. Bug bites and stings are a part of life, and it can be hard to fully avoid them. You might even shrug off bug encounters as a normal part of camping, hiking or picnicking.
But if you have an insect allergy or a history of severe reactions, that little nibble or jab can be dangerous. And even if you don’t have allergies, certain bugs carry the risk of potentially serious disease. Taking the time to learn more about the different types of bites and stings is well worth the effort. Talk to your provider about ways to protect yourself at home and when traveling.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/13/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider