Growth Spurt Ages
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Growth Spurt
Advertisement
Advertisement
Growth Spurt
Growth spurts are short periods of time when your child experiences quick physical growth in height and weight. Growth spurts are a normal part of your child’s development. They occur at different stages of childhood until they reach physical maturity.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is A Growth Spurt?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is A Growth Spurt?
Babies, children and teenagers have many growth spurts as they get older.
A growth spurt is a short period of time when your child’s height (length) and weight rapidly increase. Growth spurts affect babies, children and
adolescents
. Each child’s growth pattern is unique. Your child will grow at their own pace until they reach physical maturity.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Growth spurts are nothing to worry about. They’re a natural, healthy part of your
child’s development
. Before long, this time will pass. Your child will be a little taller and a little heavier. They’ll be on their way to becoming a full-grown adult.
When do babies have growth spurts?
Many baby growth spurts happen during your infant’s first year. They’ll likely happen quickly and suddenly. While every baby is different, typical infant growth spurts occur at:
2 to 3 weeks
6 weeks
3 months
6 months
9 months
In all, your baby will grow about 10 inches (25 centimeters) longer during their first year. They’ll triple their weight by the time they turn 1.
Baby growth spurts are the physical changes that occur as your infant ages. They’re different than
developmental milestones
. They may happen at the same time, but developmental milestones are the actions and skills that mark your child’s maturity at specific stages (like language development and fine motor skills).
Childhood growth spurt ages
Growth spurts continue at different stages of your child’s development based on their age. Toddler growth spurts are limited. Their height and weight usually increase at a consistent pace.
Between preschool and
puberty
, your child’s eating habits will change. This makes their growth slow and steady. By 5 years old, your child should double their height from birth. This growth continues with regular increases in height and weight each year until adolescence.
Advertisement
Adolescents will reach their growth spurts around the same time as puberty. This age varies depending on their
sex
. Females experience growth spurts between ages 9 and 15. Males experience growth spurts between ages 12 and 17. Adolescents will increase in height at an average of 3 to 4 inches (9 to 10 centimeters) each year during a growth spurt.
Symptoms and Causes
Growth spurt symptoms
Changes in your child’s height and weight are the most immediate signs that they’re experiencing a growth spurt. Other signs of a growth spurt may include:
Increase or
decrease in hunger
Fussiness or emotional outbursts
Changes in
sleep habits
Baby teeth appearing
and adult (permanent) teeth replacing baby teeth
Sexual development (
menstruation
, voice change, pubic and armpit hair growth)
What does a growth spurt feel like?
Growth spurts don’t feel like anything. You may notice eating or sleeping changes that make your baby fussier than normal. But that isn’t a sign of pain. Growth spurts don’t cause arm and leg pains like
growing pains
do. Any uneasiness during your child’s growth spurts is temporary.
Growth spurt causes
Genetics play a key role in growth spurts. Your child’s genes will determine
how tall they’ll grow
. Genes will also be a factor in how quickly your child will reach their greatest height.
In addition to their genetic makeup, environmental factors can affect your child’s growth. These can include:
Pregnancy complications
What they eat and their
access to healthy food
options
Exposure to harmful substances in the water or atmosphere
The amount of sleep they get
How much exercise they get
Diagnosis and Tests
The average height and weight of females and males from their first year to 18 years old.
How doctors diagnose a growth spurt
Your child’s healthcare provider will track your baby’s height and weight during their well checkups. They’ll use a scale, measuring tape or measuring table (stadiometer).
Growth charts
identify whether your child is growing on target according to their peers of the same age.
Since a growth spurt doesn’t cause any health problems, there’s no need to rush to the pediatrician’s office. Instead, your child’s provider will track changes in your child’s height and weight at their next checkup. They’ll let you know if they’re following the typical pattern of growth for their age.
Management and Treatment
How do I support my child during their growth spurt?
Babies younger than a year old express their growth spurts through fussiness and periods of increased hunger. For school-age children and adolescents, growth spurts trigger changes in appetite, sleep and behavior. During your child’s growth spurt, you can support them by:
Providing extra meals to satisfy their appetite
Encouraging regular bedtime and positive sleeping habits
Being patient with their changing emotions
Advertisement
When should my child see their healthcare provider?
Contact your child’s provider if all the following describe your baby:
They become fussy or express discomfort
Their symptoms are difficult to ease
Their symptoms last more than a week
They’re not showing any signs of illness
What questions should I ask my child’s healthcare provider?
Questions you may want to ask your child’s provider include:
If my child complains of pain in their arms and legs, does that relate to a growth spurt?
Is my child meeting growth expectations for their age?
If my child doesn’t reach their growth milestones at the same time as their peers, is it a sign of a
developmental delay
?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How long do growth spurts last?
Growth spurts don’t last long. In babies, they tend to be shorter — they may last up to three days. Growth spurts in adolescents may occur multiple times over a couple of years.
Prevention
Are growth spurts preventable?
No, and you don’t want to prevent them. They’re a natural part of the growth process. Your child will experience growth spurts at their own pace. They’ll happen when their body says it’s time to increase their height and weight.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Growth spurts happen in the blink of an eye and often spark the statement, “Look how big you’ve gotten!” at gatherings with your family and friends. Children grow at their own pace. Each child will develop when their body and genes tell them it’s time. If you notice your child isn’t meeting height or weight expectations for their age, talk with their healthcare provider.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 08/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us