Blood Donation: What It Is, Who Can Do It & Other FAQs
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
Blood Donation
Advertisement
Advertisement
Blood Donation
Blood donation is a procedure in which you give blood. Donating blood can help save lives through blood transfusions. Most people can donate blood as long as they’re in good health. But there are certain blood donation requirements and certain disqualifications. Blood donation is typically a quick way to help people in need.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is blood donation?
Blood donation is an important part of healthcare in the United States and around the world. The act of donating blood can help save lives. Each day, people in hospitals across the U.S. need lifesaving
blood transfusions
. Blood transfusions help treat people who:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Have had a traumatic injury
Need surgery
Are receiving care for cancer or
blood disorders
Have just given birth
Are premature babies
About 11 million people in the U.S. donate blood every year, and people receive more than 14 million units of blood through blood transfusions. One unit contains about 1 pint of blood.
How much blood do you donate?
You give 1 pint of blood each time you donate. You can donate blood up to six times each year. A healthy body can regenerate, or make more, blood in about four to six weeks. Donating 1 pint is a small amount of your body’s total blood supply. Typically, there are about 10 to 12 pints of blood in a person’s body.
Why donate blood?
Blood is essential for life. It contains components that transport oxygen throughout your body and also fight infection. There’s no artificial substitute for blood — only your body can make blood. Many people depend on lifesaving transfusions for severe medical conditions. Healthcare providers can use four separate components of your blood:
Red blood cells
.
Providers use red blood cells to treat people with anemia, or people who’ve lost a lot of blood due to traumatic injuries or surgery.
Plasma
.
Providers give plasma to people with rare diseases, serious infections or burns, and liver failure.
Platelets
.
Platelets clot blood when cuts and other wounds occur. Providers also use platelets in cancer treatment and organ transplants.
Cryoprecipitated antihemophilic factor (AHF).
Providers also use AHF for
clotting
factors (proteins that help your blood clot).
Advertisement
Who can donate blood?
There are some basic blood donation requirements you must meet to ensure the safety of both you and the people receiving your blood. Most people can donate blood as long as they’re in good health. If you have a cold or the flu on your scheduled day to give blood, you should cancel your appointment and reschedule once you’re feeling better.
In addition, other health concerns can temporarily prevent you from giving blood, such as:
Some medications
Low levels of
hemoglobin
(the protein in your body that carries oxygen to cells and carbon dioxide away)
Anemia
High or low blood pressure or heartbeat
Recent travel to a country with
malaria
risks
Recent blood transfusion
Other previous and current health concerns will permanently prevent you from giving blood. Blood donation disqualifications include:
HIV/AIDS
Certain types of
hepatitis
Certain cancers, such as leukemia, lymphoma and other
blood cancers
Foreign travel to certain places during certain time frames
How old do you have to be to donate blood?
In general, you must be at least 17 years old to donate blood. In some U.S. states, you can donate blood at 16 years old with a parent or guardian’s consent. There’s no upper age limit for blood donation.
How much do you have to weigh to donate blood?
For your safety, you must weigh at least 110 pounds to donate blood. Students 18 years old or younger may have to meet additional height and weight requirements. There’s no upper weight limit for blood donation.
Can people with diabetes donate blood?
If you have
diabetes
and insulin or oral medications help you manage it, you’re eligible to donate blood.
Can you donate blood if you have herpes?
If you have active herpes or a cold sore, you can’t donate until the lesions are dry and almost healed. But as long as you’re feeling healthy, you can donate blood if you have certain sexually transmitted infections like
genital herpes
. You can also donate with STIs such as chlamydia and HPV warts.
However, if you have syphilis or gonorrhea, you should wait to donate blood. Three months after you’ve completed treatment, it’s acceptable to donate.
Can you donate blood if you smoked weed?
The use of cannabis won’t disqualify you from donating blood. There are no data available that detail how long you should wait between smoking weed and donating blood. However, you shouldn’t go to a blood donation center if marijuana use makes it hard to remember or understand things.
Can you donate blood while pregnant?
Women
who are pregnant aren’t eligible to donate. You should wait six weeks after giving birth before donating blood.
Can you donate blood if you have a tattoo?
If you live in a state that doesn’t regulate tattoo facilities, you should wait three months after getting a new tattoo before donating blood. Check with your state’s department of health for more information.
Treatment Details
Before a blood donation, eat a nutritious meal with iron-rich foods.
Where do you donate blood?
Blood donation centers and blood drives are located across the United States and around the world. To find a place to donate blood, search online for “blood donation near me” or look on the American Red Cross’s website.
Advertisement
What do you eat before donating blood?
Before you donate blood, you should eat a nutritious meal that includes iron-rich foods. You’ll want to choose non-fatty foods such as lean proteins and complex carbohydrates. Foods you may want to eat include:
Lean meats
Cheese and yogurt
Bread
Cereal
Fruit
You should also drink two to three glasses of water before donating blood, including a glass 10 to 30 minutes before your appointment.
How long does it take to donate blood?
Donating blood is generally simple and quick. It takes a total of about one hour of your time. Although the actual donation time is about 10 minutes, there are some items you’ll need to take care of before and after the donation process.
What happens before blood donation?
When you arrive to donate blood, you’ll need to show an ID, like a driver’s license or passport. A person working at the blood donation center will ask you several health questions, including what types of medication you’re taking. This includes prescriptions and over-the-counter (OTC) medicines. The questions are personal. It’s important to read all the information carefully and answer all the questions honestly. Your answers are kept confidential.
A worker will also do a quick exam to ensure you’re healthy enough to give blood. A nurse or technician will take your temperature,
blood pressure
and pulse. The technician will also take a small sample of your blood with a finger stick to make sure your hemoglobin isn’t low.
Advertisement
What happens during blood donation?
During the actual blood donation, you’ll either be lying down or sitting in a chair. First, the nurse or technician will clean the area inside of your elbow with antiseptic. Next, they’ll insert a needle into a vein in your arm and draw the blood out of your body. One pint of blood is taken when you donate. It’s not usually painful, but you’ll feel a prick when the needle goes through your skin.
What happens after blood donation?
Afterward, a blood drive worker will give you a small snack and something to drink. They’ll ask you to remain seated for about 15 minutes to make sure you don’t experience any side effects or problems. You can leave after you’ve rested. The worker will send you home with instructions to take it easy, drink plenty of water and avoid strenuous exercise for the next day or so.
What does blood donation feel like?
Most people describe only feeling the needle pricking their skin as it enters, without other discomfort. Very few donors have other issues during or after donating.
After giving blood, some people may feel a little dizzy or weak. That’s why you must rest for several minutes before leaving. It’s also best to eat a snack and have a drink of water or juice right after you donate blood.
What happens to the donated blood?
A technician will test your donation for
blood type
and certain infectious diseases. Each pint of donated blood goes through specific laboratory tests for infectious diseases before a recipient can use it. If it doesn’t pass these tests, they can’t use your blood. The technician will safely throw away your blood, and someone will notify you.
Advertisement
After initial testing, your blood goes to a lab where a technician again tests it for blood type. Then, they’ll separate the components of your blood. Your blood will be ready to use one to two days after collection.
Who uses the donated blood?
Volunteer blood donations will go to people who need blood the most. Typical recipients are people who need:
Cancer treatment
Heart or orthopedic surgery
Organ transplant surgery
Surgery after accidents
You can also donate blood for use by a family member or friend who has the same blood type as you. This is called a directed donation.
Sometimes, a healthy person can donate blood before a nonemergency surgery. This blood is stored and available for surgery only for the person who donated it. This is especially helpful for people who have difficulty finding blood because of antibodies. This is called an autologous donation.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of donating blood?
Donating blood can save someone’s life. One pint of your blood can save up to three lives. There’s always a need for blood. Healthcare providers use blood every hour of every day at hospitals across the country and the world. They use blood during surgeries and for the treatment of injuries and chronic illnesses in people of all ages.
What are the side effects and risks of blood donation?
Most donors don’t experience discomfort after donating. You may feel lightheaded, tired or dizzy after giving blood, so you shouldn’t plan to do anything strenuous after donating. The blood donation center will give you information afterward on how to care for your bandage and other instructions.
Blood drive workers use sterile materials one time and safely discard them after use. This is for the safety of the donor, recipient and blood drive staff.
Recovery and Outlook
What happens after a blood donation?
After donating blood, you’ll be able to return to your routine soon. It’s best to follow the donation center’s instructions after your donation. It’s also important to immediately let the donation center know if you think of health information that you didn’t inform them of previously. You should also let them know if you develop other issues such as fever and muscle aches. If you’re a regular donor, talk with your healthcare provider about adding multivitamins to your diet. You want to make sure you’re not depleting your iron and other vitamins when giving blood.
How often can you donate blood?
Because a healthy body continues to make blood, new red blood cells will replace donated blood cells in about four to six weeks. It’s safe to donate blood every 56 days, up to six times a year. Your donation frequency may be shorter or longer depending on the type of blood component you’re donating.
Additional Common Questions
Do you get paid for donating blood?
No. You can’t donate blood for money. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is concerned that offering money for blood would encourage people to lie about their health. This could potentially jeopardize the safety of the blood supply.
But you can receive money for donating blood plasma. Plasma is the liquid portion of your blood that’s full of proteins and antibodies. Scientists use plasma to develop life-saving medicines. Plasma isn’t used for blood transfusions, so companies can pay donors.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Blood donation is a true gift you can give to others in need. Each day, blood donors help people of all ages access lifesaving care. People may use your blood to treat traumatic injuries and burn victims. Or they may use it during heart surgeries or organ transplants. Your blood can help people with cancer and other medical conditions. If you’re interested in donating blood, talk to a healthcare provider for more information.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/15/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider