Childhood Cancer
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Childhood Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Childhood Cancer
Childhood cancer is cancer in young children (infants to age 14) and teenagers (age 15 to 19). Types include leukemias, lymphomas, brain tumors and solid tumors. Childhood cancers are uncommon, but they can be treated and often cured. Overall, more than 80% of children and teenagers with cancer are alive five years after diagnosis.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Childhood Cancer (Pediatric Cancer)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Childhood Cancer (Pediatric Cancer)?
Childhood cancer describes a group of
cancers
that affect children ages 0 to 19. It includes pediatric cancers (affecting infants to children age 14) and adolescent cancers (affecting children age 15 to 19).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Approximately 15,000 children in the U.S. get diagnosed with cancer each year. Thanks to newer treatments tailored to their needs, more than 8 out of 10 kids are still alive five years later.
But childhood
cancer treatment
casts a long shadow. Your child will need lifelong care to keep tabs on the impact this disease can have on their health.
Types of childhood cancers
There are three groups of childhood cancers:
Leukemias
and
lymphomas
Brain
and
spinal cord tumors
Solid tumors
Leukemias and lymphomas
Leukemia and lymphoma are
blood cancers
. Leukemia is the most common type of childhood cancer. It starts in your child’s
bone marrow
(where blood cells get made). Lymphoma starts in
blood-forming cells
in your child’s
lymphatic system
. It’s the third most common type.
The main types of childhood leukemias are:
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(the most common childhood cancer diagnosis)
Acute myeloid leukemi
a
The most common childhood lymphomas are:
Hodgkin lymphoma
(especially nodular sclerosis and mixed cellularity Hodgkin lymphoma)
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(especially
Burkitt lymphoma
,
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
,
anaplastic large-cell lymphoma
and lymphoblastic lymphoma)
Brain and spinal cord tumors
Brain and spinal cord tumors are the third most common type of childhood cancer.
Pediatric brain cancers
affect over 5,000 kids in the U.S. each year. They happen when cells that are a normal part of your child’s
central nervous system
transform into cancer cells. Types include:
Advertisement
Choroid plexus carcinoma
Embryonal tumor
Ganglioglioma
Glioma
Medulloblastoma
Pineoblastoma
Solid tumors
Solid
tumors
develop when cancerous cells divide, multiply and form masses. They can develop throughout a child’s body. Solid tumor childhood cancers include:
Bone cancer
, including
osteosarcoma
and
Ewing sarcoma
Germ cell tumor
(may also be a type of brain tumor)
Hepatoblastoma
Neuroblastoma
Retinoblastoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Wilms tumor
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of childhood cancer
Childhood cancer symptoms can look like symptoms of common childhood illnesses. After all, most kids experience headaches, stomachaches, and bumps and bruises that don’t mean cancer. Still, any symptom that lasts or gets worse is something you should discuss with your child’s healthcare provider.
The Childhood Oncology Group uses the acronym CHILDCANCER to list potential childhood cancer symptoms:
C
: Continued,
unexplained weight loss
H
:
Headaches,
often with early-morning vomiting
I
: Increased swelling or persistent pain in your child’s
bones
,
joints
,
back
or legs
L
: Lump or mass, especially in your child’s neck, chest, armpits, belly or pelvis
D
: Development of excessive
bruising
, bleeding or a
rash
C
: Constant, frequent or persistent infections
A
: A whitish color behind the
pupil
of your child’s eye
N
:
Nausea
that persists, or vomiting without nausea
C
: Constant tiredness (
fatigue
) or noticeable paleness (
pallor
)
E
: Eye or vision changes that occur suddenly and persist
R
: Recurring or persistent
fevers
not associated with the
flu
or other common illnesses
Childhood cancer causes
Cancer happens when
genes
change (mutate) and create abnormal cells. The abnormal cancer cells make more copies that crowd out healthy cells. Without treatment, the cancer can spread (
metastatic cancer
).
In adults,
genetic mutations
usually happen with age and long-term exposure to
carcinogens
, like tobacco, ultraviolet light from the sun or workplace chemicals. That’s not typically the case with childhood cancer. Instead, mutations arise for reasons researchers are still trying to figure out. They may happen before or after your child’s born.
Cancer research
has allowed healthcare providers to identify mutations in some childhood cancers. The mutations are usually different from those found in the adult versions of the same cancers. This information about gene changes may help your child’s provider choose the most effective treatment plan for your child.
Risk factors
Doctors do know that some
inherited (genetic) disorders
increase cancer risk. In the U.S., approximately
8
to 10 out of every 100
children with cancer have an associated genetic disorder.
Genetic disorders that increase childhood cancer risk include:
Beckwith-Weidemann syndrome
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
Fanconi anemia (FA)
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Noonan syndrome
Von Hippel-Landau disease
Advertisement
It’s important to remember that not every child with these disorders develops cancer. But if your child has one of these conditions, their provider may recommend
cancer screenings
that detect cancer signs early.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose childhood cancers
Healthcare providers use several tests to diagnose cancer, including:
Blood tests
. Blood tests check for irregularities in your child’s blood cells that may be signs of cancer.
Imaging tests
. These tests allow your child’s provider to see images of your child’s organs or tissue. Examples include
CT scans
,
MRIs
,
PET scans
and
ultrasounds
.
Biopsy
. A biopsy obtains samples of fluid or tissue. A
pathologist
examines the samples under a microscope to check for cancer cells.
Bone marrow biopsy
and
bone marrow aspiration
. These tests obtain a sample of bone marrow (where blood cells are made) to check for cancer.
Lumbar puncture
. This test checks your child’s cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for cancer cells or
tumor markers
. CSF is the clear fluid that surrounds your child’s spine and brain.
Genetic tests
. These tests check for genetic mutations associated with specific childhood cancers. They may help your child’s provider choose the best treatments.
Management and Treatment
How are childhood cancers treated?
Childhood cancer treatments include:
Advertisement
Chemotherapy
. The most common childhood cancer treatment, chemotherapy uses
drugs
to kill cancer cells. Your child will get treatment in cycles. Cycles include treatment days and recovery days.
Radiation therapy
. This treatment uses a machine to deliver radiation that shrinks or destroys tumors. Or your child’s provider may implant a device that delivers radiation to a tumor.
Stem cell transplant
. This treatment may be an option if your child has leukemia or lymphoma. First, a provider uses high-dose chemotherapy to kill cancer cells. Then, your child will receive an infusion of healthy
blood-forming cells
from a donor.
Surgery
. Sometimes, surgeons are able to remove solid tumors completely. Other times, your child may need surgery alongside other treatments.
Immunotherapy
and
targeted therapy
. Immunotherapy helps your child’s
immune system
fight cancer better. Targeted therapy attacks cancer cell weaknesses that are related to specific gene mutations. As newer cancer therapies, these treatments may only be available in a clinical trial.
A
clinical trial
is a study that tests the effectiveness of new cancer treatments. They’re essential when it comes to fighting cancer. Your child’s provider may recommend taking part in one if other treatments haven’t helped enough. They may recommend getting both the clinical trial treatment and the standard treatment.
Advertisement
The goal is to give your child every opportunity to access the best care.
When should I seek care for my child?
Seek care for your child if:
They have cancer treatment side effects that are more intense than you expect
They’re in
remission
(no signs or symptoms of cancer) and you notice symptoms that may mean cancer is coming back
Rarely, cancer symptoms and treatment side effects are medical emergencies. Your child’s provider will explain what symptoms are medical issues that need immediate care.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
How curable is childhood cancer?
More than 8 out of 10 children with cancer in high-income countries with easy access to care are cured. That data is based on the five-year
survival rates
for the most common childhood cancers.
The term “
cure
” may also apply when childhood cancer goes into
remission
. For example, 9 out of 10 children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia attain remission (no more signs or symptoms of cancer).
It’s important to remember, though, that survival rates are estimates. They don’t reflect the unique factors that will impact your child’s experience. This is why it’s important to talk to your child’s healthcare provider about your child’s
prognosis
(likely future outcome). They’ll help you put this information into perspective.
What is the life expectancy of a childhood cancer survivor?
While childhood cancer is often curable, the impact of the disease may affect your child’s long-term health. According to a
recent study
, survivors of childhood cancer may have shorter lifespans than their peers. They’re more likely to experience health issues in adulthood. Issues include heart problems, hormone-related conditions and secondary cancers.
But not everyone’s risk is the same. Much depends on your child’s diagnosis and treatment. For example, stem cell transplants often cause late effects. Treatment with surgery and low-dose chemo is less likely to cause future issues.
Regardless, all childhood cancer survivors need long-term follow-up care. These follow-ups include regular tests to detect signs of late treatment effects.
Is there anything I can do to help my child?
Experts recommend being
open and honest
when you talk to your child about cancer. These will be tough conversations. But experts believe children with cancer benefit by knowing what’s wrong and what’s being done to help them. Older children and teenagers typically understand straightforward explanations. If your child is young, ask a
child life specialist
for ideas on talking about cancer to them.
As your child’s caregiver, be their full-time advocate. You know your child best. Take cues from them and be the support they need every step of the way.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Every year, thousands of parents and caregivers hear the words, “Your child has cancer.” Increasingly, they also hear, “We can treat your child’s cancer, and we may be able to cure it.” Thanks to newer treatments, more young children and teens are surviving cancer. That said, survivorship is another step on a lifelong care journey. Your child’s care team will advise you on the care your child will need during and after treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you’re diagnosed with cancer, you want expert and compassionate care right away. At Cleveland Clinic we personalize your treatment to match your needs.
Cancer Care
Cancer Care for Children
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials