Adenoiditis: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Adenoiditis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Adenoiditis
Adenoiditis is inflammation in your child’s adenoid glands. Their adenoids can swell in response to bacterial and viral infections, allergies and acid reflux. Adenoiditis often clears on its own or with antibiotics. If your child gets adenoiditis frequently, they may need surgery to remove their adenoid glands.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule an Adenoidectomy
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Adenoiditis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Adenoiditis?
Adenoiditis is inflammation (swelling) of your child’s
adenoid glands
. Adenoids are behind your child’s
nose
, in the back of their nasal cavity. A part of your child’s
immune system
, they trap and fight
germs
that can make your child sick.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But just because adenoids are germ-fighters doesn’t mean they can’t become irritated or infected. When they do, they become inflamed. They can enlarge to the point that they block your child’s nasal passages, making it harder for them to breathe through their nose.
Common cold symptoms like a sore throat or runny nose are signs of adenoiditis. They let you know that your child needs extra attention and care to heal and feel better.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of adenoiditis
Symptoms of adenoiditis include:
Fever
Mouth breathing
Nasal congestion
Nasal obstruction
Postnasal drip
Runny nose
Snoring
Sore throat
Trouble feeding (infants)
Adenoiditis causes
The most common cause of acute (short-term) adenoiditis follows a pattern. First, your child gets an
upper respiratory infection
from a
virus
. The infection leaves them vulnerable to a
bacterial infection
that follows. The infections cause inflammation in your child’s adenoid glands.
But back-to-back infections aren’t the only cause. Adenoiditis causes include:
Viruses
, including the ones that cause
colds
and the
flu
Bacteria
, including the ones that cause
bronchitis
,
ear infections
,
pneumonia
and
strep throat
Stomach acid
backflowing into your child’s throat and causing irritation (as is the case with a form of acid reflux called
LPR
)
Allergies
that irritate your child’s throat
Advertisement
Adenoiditis is less common in adults, but it can happen. It’s rare because adenoid tissue usually shrinks starting around age 7. Your adenoids are mostly gone by adulthood.
But your adenoids can swell for all the reasons above, depending on how much tissue remains. Enlarged adenoids can also happen in response to abnormal growths, including
cancer
. This is more likely to happen in adults.
Risk factors
Adenoiditis is most common in children from ages
3 to 7
. As most parents and caregivers know, kids in this age range get lots of upper respiratory infections.
Also, adenoids reach their peak size during these years. This means that inflammation in your child’s adenoids can block more of their nasal passages than if these glands were smaller.
How to lower your risk
The best way to lower your child’s risk of adenoiditis is to take steps to
prevent them from getting sick
. Teaching good hygiene and making sure they’re eating nutritious foods helps. It’s also a good idea to keep them away from
secondhand smoke
.
Complications of this condition
Complications can happen when enlarged, swollen adenoids block your child’s airway. When this happens, one complication can lead to another.
For example, a blocked airway makes it difficult for your child to breathe through their nose. To get enough air, your child may breathe through their mouth. Long-term mouth breathing increases your child’s risk of
cavities
and a
misaligned bite
. It can also affect how the bones develop in their face.
Difficulty breathing can cause
obstructive sleep apnea
, which prevents your child from getting enough
sleep
. This can keep them from focusing during the day. Over time, it can impact their ability to learn.
Enlarged adenoids can also block your child’s
eustachian tubes
. These tubes connect your child’s ears to the back of their nose. They relieve air pressure in your child’s ears. Blocked eustachian tubes can lead to frequent
ear infections
and even
hearing loss
.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
Your child’s
pediatrician
will diagnose adenoiditis by asking about their symptoms. Your child may need several tests to learn what’s causing adenoiditis:
A physical exam
. Their provider may use a small mirror, like the kind
dentists
use, to check for swollen adenoids.
Endoscopy
. Their provider may use a thin, flexible tube with a light and camera at the end to see your child’s adenoids up close. This procedure is called a
nasal endoscopy
.
Fluid sample tests
. Their provider may
test for bacteria
. A common test called a
throat culture
involves swabbing the back of your child’s throat to test for the bacteria that cause strep throat.
Allergy tests
. Your child may need
allergy testing
if their provider thinks an
allergic reaction
is causing inflamed adenoids.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is adenoiditis treated?
Adenoiditis related to a virus usually goes away once your child’s body fights the infection. They may not need treatment.
Other times, providers treat inflamed adenoids by addressing what’s causing the swelling. Your child may need:
Antibiotics
to treat bacterial infections (common ones include
amoxicillin
and
penicillin
)
Antihistamines
or
nasal steroid sprays
(like
Flonase
®) to calm an allergic response
Nasal irrigation
to flush out allergens or germs that may be causing issues
Medicines to fight acid reflux, like
proton pump inhibitors
(PPIs) and
H2 blockers
Surgery
For long-term adenoiditis that doesn’t get better with medicine, your child may need surgery. Surgery to remove adenoids is called an
adenoidectomy
. A specialist called an
otolaryngologist
(ear, nose and throat doctor) performs this procedure.
It’s normal to feel unsure about removing a part of your child’s immune system. But there’s no need to worry. Not having adenoids won’t make your child more likely to get infections. Instead, the other parts of your child’s immune system will just work harder to protect them from germs.
Recovery time
Adenoiditis gets better once the cause is addressed. It usually takes about a week for viruses to clear. Most children start to feel better within a few days after starting antibiotics. But you should make sure your child takes all of their medicine.
Advertisement
Children who get their adenoids removed usually need at least a week of recovery time at home.
When should I see my child’s healthcare provider?
Reach out to your child’s pediatrician if their symptoms aren’t improving within two days of starting an antibiotic. Let them know if your child is developing new or worsening symptoms. Contact their provider if your child has a fever that isn’t improving with fever-reducing medicines, too.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Schedule an Adenoidectomy
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if my child has this condition?
Many children get swollen adenoids when they get sick. But most colds and the flu get better with time. Some causes — like bacterial infections, acid reflux and allergies — get better with medicine. But if your child does need surgery, rest assured that this is a common procedure with excellent results.
A child can be perfectly healthy without their adenoids.
Is there anything I can do to help my child feel better?
Caring for a child with adenoiditis requires giving them lots of attention and love. To help them feel better, make sure they’re getting enough fluids and rest. There are several
sore throat remedies
you can try if their throat hurts.
It’s especially important to pay close attention to how they’re feeling. Check in often to ask how they’re doing. This reassures them. And it provides you with the information you need to give helpful updates to their pediatrician.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Most caregivers don’t think of the word “adenoiditis” when they notice symptoms in their child. Instead, inflamed adenoids are more likely to look like a cold or flu. Over time, it can look like frequent ear infections. But knowing when to reach out to your child’s pediatrician is more important than knowing the medical term. Most children eventually get better on their own. But if symptoms last longer than a week or are severe, call your child’s provider. They can help your child start to feel better.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Watching your child struggle to breathe and get a good night’s rest can be hard. Cleveland Clinic experts can treat their enlarged adenoids with an adenoidectomy.
Schedule an Adenoidectomy
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment