Renal Parenchymal Disease: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Renal Parenchymal Disease
Advertisement
Advertisement
Renal Parenchymal Disease
Renal parenchymal disease is conditions that damages functional parts of your kidneys. The most common causes are diabetes and high blood pressure. Later stage symptoms include changes in your pee or peeing habits, fatigue or swelling around your hands or feet. Treatment may include medications, lifestyle changes, dialysis or a kidney transplant.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What is renal parenchymal disease?
Renal parenchymal disease is a group of conditions that damage your
kidneys’
parenchyma (puh-RENG-kuh-muh). The parenchyma includes the parts of the kidney that helps them function. The two major parts of your renal parenchyma include the:
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Renal cortex
. This is the outer part of your kidneys, where your nephrons begin. Your nephrons are very small filters for your blood that have two parts. One part is a
blood vessel
(glomeruli) and the other is a tube (renal tubules). Your glomeruli are the first stage of blood filtration. Your renal tubules reabsorb water, nutrients and minerals and remove wastes when you urinate (pee). Your renal cortex also creates
erythropoietin
(EPO). EPO is a
hormone
that helps make
red blood cells
in your
bone marrow
.
Renal medulla
. This is the inner part of your kidneys. It contains most of your nephrons.
Healthcare providers describe any conditions that affect your renal cortex or renal medulla as renal parenchymal disease. Other names for renal parenchymal disease include:
Bilateral renal parenchyma diseases
Kidney parenchymal disease
Renal parenchyma of the kidney
What are the types of renal parenchymal disease?
When renal parenchymal disease starts suddenly, healthcare providers call it acute renal parenchymal disease. They call it chronic renal parenchymal disease when it develops slowly and lasts a long time.
Is renal parenchymal disease dangerous?
It depends on the cause. Mild cases of renal parenchymal disease may get better with treatment. Severe cases may cause
kidney failure
. Kidney failure is
fatal
without treatment.
Advertisement
Symptoms and Causes
What are the early warning signs of renal parenchymal disease?
The early stages of renal parenchymal disease don’t usually have warning signs. But as the disease gets worse and your kidneys stop working as well, you may develop symptoms, like:
Blood in your pee (
hematuria
)
Dry and itchy skin
Feeling very tired (
fatigue
)
Loss of appetite
Low red blood cell levels (
anemia
)
Nausea and vomiting
Peeing more than usual
Puffy eyes
Swelling in your hands, feet and ankles (
edema
)
What causes renal parenchymal disease?
The most common causes of chronic renal parenchymal disease include
high blood pressure
and
diabetes
. But other conditions that may cause chronic renal parenchymal disease include:
Autoimmune diseases
, including
lupus nephritis
Glomerulonephritis
Kidney cancer
Polycystic kidney disease
Sickle cell disease
Acute renal parenchymal disease causes may include:
Anaphylaxis
Bacterial infections
Kidney stones
Kidney tumors
Pulmonary embolism
Severe
dehydration
Viral infections
Some medications may also cause acute renal parenchymal disease, including:
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor blockers
(ARBs)
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs)
Who does renal parenchymal disease affect?
Anyone can get renal parenchymal disease. But you may have a greater risk if you have:
A family history of renal parenchymal disease
Diabetes
Heart disease
High blood pressure
You may also have a greater risk of developing renal parenchymal disease if you’re over 60 and regularly take over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription NSAIDs.
What are the complications of renal parenchymal disease?
Renal parenchymal disease complications may include:
A buildup of acids in your body fluids (
metabolic acidosis
)
High levels of phosphate (phosphorus) in your blood (
hyperphosphatemia
)
High levels of potassium in your blood (
hyperkalemia
)
Low red blood cell count
Painful buildup of uric acid in your joints (
gout
)
Weak bones (
osteoporosis
)
Weakened
immune system
Diagnosis and Tests
How is renal parenchymal disease diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will review your medical history, ask about your symptoms, ask what medications you’re taking and conduct a
physical exam
. If they suspect renal parenchymal disease, they’ll order tests to confirm their diagnosis, which may include:
Kidney function tests
. These include
blood tests
and pee tests (
urinalyses
). Blood tests measure your
estimated glomerular filtration rate
(eGFR) and serum creatinine level (
creatinine clearance test
). Pee tests look for protein (
proteinuria
) and blood in your pee.
Imaging tests
. These help providers take a detailed look at your kidneys’ size and structure. They may order an
ultrasound
,
MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) or
CT scan
(computed tomography scan).
Kidney biopsy
. A provider will take a small sample of your kidney tissue and study it in a lab. A kidney biopsy can reveal information that kidney function and imaging tests can’t identify.
Advertisement
Management and Treatment
How is renal parenchymal disease treated?
Renal parenchymal disease treatment depends on a number of factors, including:
The exact cause and severity of renal parenchymal disease
Your age and overall health
Your treatment options may include:
Avoiding NSAIDs and other medications that may make renal parenchymal disease worse
Avoiding tobacco, including
smoking
,
vaping
and chewing tobacco
Getting regular physical activity
Maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you
Taking medications to help manage blood pressure, cholesterol and diabetes
Working with a renal
dietitian
to come up with kidney-friendly eating patterns that limit protein, reduce blood cholesterol levels and limit salt (sodium) and potassium
Severe renal parenchymal disease may require:
Corticosteroids
Dialysis
Immunosuppressants
Kidney transplant
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have renal parenchymal disease?
You’ll need to work with your treatment team to slow kidney damage for as long as possible. This may include:
Maintaining kidney-healthy eating patterns
Monitoring your blood sugar and blood pressure
Regularly scheduling appointments with a kidney specialist (
nephrologist
) to monitor your kidney health
Taking your medications exactly as your provider prescribes them
What is the life expectancy of a person with renal parenchymal disease?
If you have renal parenchymal disease, your life expectancy depends on the severity of the disease, your age, sex and overall health. Your life expectancy is lowest if you have severe kidney damage. If you’re on dialysis, the average life expectancy is 5 to 10 years.
Advertisement
Talk to a healthcare provider. They can give you a better idea of what to expect according to these factors.
What is the life expectancy of someone with end-stage renal disease?
The average life expectancy of someone with end-stage renal disease is 5 to 10 years. But many people live longer than that with proper treatment or a kidney transplant. Many people live 20 to 30 years after a provider diagnoses them with end-stage renal disease.
Prevention
Can renal parenchymal disease be prevented?
You can’t prevent all causes of renal parenchymal disease. But you may be able to reduce your chances by:
Being active for at least 30 minutes five days a week
Limiting your alcohol consumption
Maintaining a healthy weight for you
Making regular visits to a healthcare provider if you have a high risk of renal parenchymal disease
Quitting smoking
Reducing your salt consumption
Taking NSAIDs only as directed
Living With
What foods should be avoided with renal parenchymal disease?
It’s important to talk to a renal dietitian if you have renal parenchymal disease. They’ll work with you to develop an eating plan that helps support your kidney health. You should avoid foods that have salt, protein, phosphorus and potassium. This may include:
Avocados
Bananas
Canned foods
Chips and pretzels
Citrus fruits and juices, including oranges
Dried fruits
Processed meats
Spinach
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Schedule regular appointments with a healthcare provider if you have diabetes, high blood pressure or another disease that may lead to renal parenchymal disease. Early detection and an understanding of your risks can help prevent kidney damage from getting worse.
Advertisement
When should I go to the ER?
Renal parenchymal disease symptoms typically don’t appear until kidney damage is severe. Reach out to a provider right away if you:
Develop frequent muscle cramps
Don’t have an appetite
Feel very tired
Have difficulty focusing or sleeping
Have itchy skin
Have hiccups that won’t go away
Have swelling in your hands, ankles or feet
Pee more or less than usual
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
It may be helpful to ask your provider:
How do you know I have renal parenchymal disease?
How severe is it?
What treatment do you recommend?
What can I do to help take care of my kidneys?
Can you recommend a renal dietitian?
Can you recommend a support group for people with renal parenchymal disease?
Additional Common Questions
Can you live 20 years with stage 3 kidney disease?
It depends on your age. But on average, if you’re
male
and have stage 3 kidney disease, your life expectancy is about 24 years. If you’re female and have stage 3 kidney disease, your life expectancy is about 28 years.
How long does it take to go from stage 4 kidney disease to stage 5?
One study
shows that, on average, people spend over four years in stage 4 kidney disease before it progresses to stage 5.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Renal parenchymal disease affects how your kidneys work. The goal of treatment is to manage the condition so you can maintain your kidney function for as long as possible. And many people live for years with renal parenchymal disease. But the diagnosis and regular treatment can be frustrating. You may feel frustrated or angry. Trusted family members and friends can help you process your feelings and overcome any difficulties. Support groups are also available. Talk to a healthcare provider if you have any questions.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
If you have a condition that’s affecting your kidneys, you want experts by your side. At Cleveland Clinic, we’ll work with you to craft a personalized treatment plan.
Get Kidney Care for an Adult
Get Kidney Care for a Child
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 11/13/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment