MALS (Median Arcuate Ligament Syndrome): Symptoms & Diagnosis
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Median Arcuate Ligament Syndrome (MALS)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Median Arcuate Ligament Syndrome (MALS)
Median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS) is a very rare disease in which the median arcuate ligament presses on your celiac artery and nearby nerves (celiac plexus). A common symptom is intense pain in your upper belly that usually happens after you eat. Treatment is surgery to separate the ligament from the celiac artery and celiac plexus.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
Median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS) can cause intense pain in your upper abdomen that starts after you eat.
What is median arcuate ligament syndrome?
Median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS) refers to a condition that happens when the median arcuate ligament in your chest presses against your
celiac artery
and nearby nerves (celiac plexus).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Your median arcuate ligament is shaped like an arch and goes around your aorta. Your aorta sends blood from your heart to the rest of your body, and your celiac artery is a major branch of your aorta.
Normally, your median arcuate ligament sits above your celiac artery. In MALS, your ligament is lower than usual. When it presses on your celiac artery, the pressure keeps blood from flowing through your celiac artery. It may also put pressure on nearby nerves.
When that happens, you develop pain in your upper abdomen that comes on after you eat. The pain may be so intense that you start avoiding food. Other names for MALS are:
Celiac artery compression syndrome
Celiac axis compression syndrome
Dunbar syndrome
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of median arcuate ligament syndrome?
Upper abdominal pain
that happens after you eat is the first symptom of MALS. The pain may be so intense that you’re afraid to eat for fear that food will trigger symptoms. Other symptoms are:
Bloated stomach
Diarrhea
Nausea
and
vomiting
Unexplained weight loss
of 20 pounds or more
What causes median arcuate ligament syndrome?
Experts don’t know the exact reason why it happens. Some researchers suggest people are born with a median arcuate ligament that’s not in the right place. Another theory is MALS is a complication of abdominal or spinal surgery or abdominal trauma.
Advertisement
What are the complications of median arcuate ligament syndrome?
Often people have the condition for months or years before receiving a MALS diagnosis. In the meantime, they’re living with
chronic pain
, which can lead to mental health issues like
depression
. They may also develop anxiety when tests don’t lead to diagnosis and treatment.
Diagnosis and Tests
How do healthcare providers diagnose median arcuate ligament syndrome?
If your healthcare provider thinks you may have MALS, they’ll review your medical history and perform a
physical exam
.
Many diseases cause pain in your upper abdomen, from appendicitis to gastroparesis to peptic ulcer disease. Your provider may order different blood tests and imaging tests to rule out more common conditions that may cause your symptoms.
Blood tests
Your provider may order one or more of the following
blood tests
:
Complete blood count (CBC)
Comprehensive metabolic panel
Liver function tests
SED rate test
or C-reactive protein (
CRP
) test to check for inflammation
Thyroid tests
, which may include blood tests and imaging tests
Imaging tests
Abdominal ultrasound
Small bowel follow-through test to check your
small intestine
Upper GI series
Procedures
Colonoscopy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)/upper endoscopy
Motility studies
to see how quickly food moves through your digestive system
If these tests rule out common conditions, your provider may refer you to a gastroenterologist for more tests, including:
Angiogram
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
Mesenteric duplex ultrasound, which checks how blood flows through your celiac artery or if the ligament is pressing on the celiac plexus
Management and Treatment
How is median arcuate syndrome treated?
Your healthcare provider may recommend a
celiac plexus block
to help ease stomach pain. They may recommend median arcuate ligament release, which is surgery to remove or release your ligament so it’s not pressing on your celiac artery. This procedure restores blood flow through your celiac artery and removes pressure on nearby nerves.
What healthcare providers treat median arcuate ligament syndrome?
MALS is an unusual disease that causes physical and mental health issues. So, you can expect to have a whole team of specialists working to help you find relief, including:
Gastroenterologists
General surgeons
Vascular surgeons
Pain management
specialists
Psychologists
Dietitians
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have median arcuate ligament syndrome?
Surgery often eases symptoms. But research shows median arcuate ligament syndrome can come back after surgery. You can’t keep that from happening. But knowing what changes in your body may mean MALS is back may help. Ask your healthcare provider about early changes. They’ll be glad to explain what may be signs of trouble.
Living With
When should I seek care?
MALS symptoms can come back after surgery. You should contact your care team if that happens.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You know something is going on in your gut. Misery, in the form of intense upper belly pain, follows every meal. But time after time, tests don’t pinpoint the problem, much less treatment. You may hear your symptoms have more to do with your mental health than physical health. For those reasons, you may feel relieved to learn the rare condition median arcuate ligament syndrome is responsible for your symptoms.
Better yet, there’s treatment to ease your pain, and your provider may recommend surgery. If the diagnosis is MALS, your healthcare team will recommend treatment and help you get back to enjoying meals and your life.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/21/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us