Sports Physical: What To Expect
Home
/
Health Library
/
Articles
/
Sports Physicals
Advertisement
Advertisement
Sports Physicals
Sports physicals are a safety measure that ensures your child can safely take part in activities or sports. Millions of children undergo these exams annually in the U.S. These exams don’t automatically disqualify your child if they find something. In many cases, follow-up treatment based on the findings can still allow your child to play.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What is a sports physical?
Additional Common Questions
What is a sports physical?
A sports physical is a medical exam that makes sure you’re healthy enough to safely play a sport. They’re mainly for children who want to play school sports. While they’re mainly for high school-level athletes, sports for younger children may also require them.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Also known as sport preparticipation physical exams (SPPEs), sports physicals are there to keep your child safe. They can help your child avoid minor issues like sprains or strains. They can also save lives, finding previously undetected conditions — including dangerous ones.
During the exam, your child’s provider will screen them for illnesses that could interfere with their playing. They’ll also look for signs of past injuries and advise you and your child on any possible future impacts.
If your child’s provider finds a reason that your child can’t safely play a sport, they may disqualify your child from playing. But finding a medical issue doesn’t mean your child’s provider will automatically disqualify them. Whenever possible, your child’s provider will try to find a way for your child to play safely.
What can I expect during a sports physical exam?
There are two main parts of a sports physical:
Medical history
Physical exam
Medical history
The medical history part of a sports physical includes asking questions about your child’s medical history. It’ll also include questions about their biological family medical history. Your child’s provider will specifically look for:
Alcohol, tobacco or drug use
Medications or
supplements
your child takes, plus their
vaccination
records
History of shortness of breath (
dyspnea
) or physical activity-related fatigue
Menstrual
history for
females
, and
genital
and
urinary system
check for males
Past diagnosis of a
heart murmur
or high blood pressure (
hypertension
)
Past diagnosis or possible instances of
asthma
,
allergies
or
anaphylaxis
, or activity-related
bronchospasm
Past exclusion from sports for a medical reason
Past sports-related injuries, like
fractures
or
concussions
, or
heat-related illness
Past surgeries or hospitalizations, or known long-term (chronic) health issues
Unexplained instances of fainting (
syncope
) or near-fainting (
presyncope
),
chest pain
or discomfort
Unexplained
seizures
or seizure-like issues
Advertisement
Physical exam
For the physical examination part, your child’s provider will likely check or look for the following:
Baseline
concussion test
results (especially for contact sports), in case a future comparison is needed
Current fitness level
Signs of
liver
or
spleen
enlargement (by feeling their abdomen)
Any signs of
connective tissue diseases
Limbs, back and neck for signs of any lingering injuries or damage, difficulty with movements or muscle weakness
Your child’s heart and
pulses
in different parts of their body to look for signs of circulation-related conditions
Measurements like height and weight
Potential body image issues (especially ones that could relate to
eating disorders
or other conditions)
Screening for contagious conditions like herpes simplex virus (
HSV
),
impetigo
or
MRSA
Vision and hearing
Vital signs like
heart rate
, breathing and
blood pressure
What can I expect after a sports physical exam?
After a sports physical, your child’s provider will do one of the following:
Clear your child to play without any restrictions
: This means they didn’t find anything of concern with your child’s health.
Clear your child to play with restrictions
: This means your child can play a sport but needs certain accommodations or treatments to keep them healthy while they play.
Tentatively withhold clearance
: Your child’s provider may want to run other tests or try treatments before deciding.
Disqualify your child
: This means your child’s provider won’t clear them to play because it isn’t safe. This could be for certain sports or for all sports. Your child’s provider will explain which.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Additional Common Questions
Where do I go to get my child a sports physical?
Your child can get a sports physical at their
pediatrician’s
office. Sometimes, schools will have an opportunity for multiple students to get their sports physicals at the same time.
When should I get my child a sports physical?
Experts recommend that your child get their sports physical about six to eight weeks before the sports season’s training starts. That allows enough time for follow-up testing and treatment, if necessary.
In the U.S., all 50 states legally require them for participation in high school sports that school year. Athletes also need follow-up sports physicals to keep playing next school year.
What is the difference between a sports physical and an annual physical?
A sports physical specifically looks for any condition or issue that could make it unsafe for your child to play a sport. An annual physical (or well-check) looks at overall health.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Sports physicals are beneficial for children playing any sport, not just full-contact ones. And while it’s rare for these exams to find something dangerous, they can be lifesaving when they do. One thing to keep in mind is that your child’s provider wants them to play and enjoy sports. That means they’ll do everything they can to find a way for your child to play safely.
And in the event that your child does need restrictions, their provider may be able to recommend alternative sports or activities. That way, your child can still find something they enjoy doing and stay safe inside and outside of their activities.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/30/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us