Craniosynostosis: Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Types
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Craniosynostosis
Advertisement
Advertisement
Craniosynostosis
Craniosynostosis happens when your baby’s skull bones close or fuse together too early. It affects the shape of your baby’s head. Many babies undergo surgery to treat this condition before they reach 1 year old. Helmet therapy can treat mild forms of the condition.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Developmental Delays Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Craniosynostosis?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is Craniosynostosis?
Craniosynostosis is a condition that affects your baby’s skull when one or more of the spaces between the skull bones close too soon. This is a congenital
birth defect
, or a present at birth condition, that affects the structure of part of your baby’s body.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A newborn’s skull consists of several bones that fit together like a puzzle. Usually, newborns have spaces called sutures between their skull bones. The sutures let the skull size increase to accommodate your baby’s growing
brain
. The sutures of the skull close (fuse) around the brain by age 3. With craniosynostosis, one or more of the skull bones harden too early and fuse together before the brain finishes growing.
In places where sutures fused too early, your baby’s head may stop growing. In other areas, where sutures didn’t fuse, your baby’s head will continue to grow. As a result, babies with craniosynostosis often have misshapen heads.
Craniosynostosis can cause increased pressure within the skull. This happens when your baby’s brain continues to grow when there’s no room for it within the skull. Intracranial pressure can limit brain growth and damage brain tissue, which leads to complications. Treatment is available to reduce your baby’s risk of complications.
What are the types of craniosynostosis?
There are different types of craniosynostosis based on where the sutures close:
Sagittal craniosynostosis
affects the suture on the top of the head. Babies with sagittal craniosynostosis have a long, narrow head (
scaphocephaly
). This causes a broad forehead. It’s the most common type.
Coronal craniosynostosis
affects one of the coronal sutures. This runs from both ears to the top of the head. Babies with this type may have a flat forehead and a broad head.
Lambdoid craniosynostosis
affects the suture along the back of the head. Babies with this type have a flat back of the head (
plagiocephaly
).
Metopic craniosynostosis
affects the suture that runs from the top of the nose to the top of the forehead. Babies with this type may have a triangular head, with a narrow ridge at the midline of the forehead.
Advertisement
How common is craniosynostosis?
Craniosynostosis isn’t common. It affects
about 1 in every 2,500 babies
in the United States.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of craniosynostosis
The main symptom of craniosynostosis is a misshapen skull. The human head is typically a round shape. This condition can cause areas of your baby’s head to appear:
Oblong
Triangular
Narrow
Flat
Additional signs may include:
No fontanelle (soft spot) on your baby’s head
Small, hard ridge of bone that you can feel on your baby’s head
Facial features look uneven or asymmetrical
Head size is smaller than expected for their age (circumference)
Some underlying health conditions can cause craniosynostosis with other symptoms that include:
Seizures
Problems with cognitive development
Low vision or
blindness
Craniosynostosis causes
Researchers aren’t sure of the exact cause of craniosynostosis. Sometimes, craniosynostosis occurs because of a random gene change (
variation
). The gene change can run in your biological family history, but it’s less common.
Providers found the following may contribute to craniosynostosis:
External pressure on a fetus’s head before birth
Growth abnormalities of the membranes around the skull and at the base of the skull
An underlying
genetic condition
What conditions cause craniosynostosis?
Craniosynostosis can happen as a symptom of a genetic condition, including:
Apert syndrome
Carpenter syndrome
Crouzon syndrome
Pfeiffer syndrome
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome
Craniosynostosis risk factors
Researchers found that the following may increase your risk of having a child with craniosynostosis:
Thyroid disease
:
Women
undergoing treatment for
thyroid disease
while pregnant
Medications
: Women taking fertility medication clomiphene citrate before or early during pregnancy
If you’re pregnant or planning on becoming pregnant, talk to a healthcare provider about ways to maintain good health during pregnancy.
Complications of craniosynostosis
Complications of craniosynostosis may include:
Increased pressure within your baby’s skull
Developmental delays
or
intellectual disability
Breathing difficulties
Some children may struggle with self-esteem and body image if they have facial asymmetry or a different shape to their head compared to their peers. Support groups, counseling and
psychotherapy
can help your child develop a positive self-image.
Diagnosis and Tests
How does a doctor diagnose craniosynostosis?
After your baby is born, their healthcare provider will perform a
physical exam
. They’ll diagnose craniosynostosis by feeling for soft spots on your baby’s head. They’ll look for ridges that signify fused
skull sutures
. Your baby’s provider will also measure their head circumference. Additional imaging tests, like an
X-ray
or
CT scan
, can confirm the diagnosis.
Advertisement
If not diagnosed at birth, your child’s provider may diagnose the condition during well-child visits, as your baby grows. You may notice that the size of your baby’s head isn’t growing at the same pace as the rest of their body, or your child misses developmental milestones for their age.
Let your child’s provider know about any concerns you have at a well-child visit. They’ll perform an exam to diagnose the condition.
Management and Treatment
How is craniosynostosis treated?
Craniosynostosis treatment varies depending on the type, severity and symptoms that affect your child. These may include:
Helmet therapy
. Babies with mild craniosynostosis may wear a special medical helmet. This helmet gently reshapes their skull over time.
Surgery
. Surgery can reshape your child’s skull, relieve increased intracranial pressure and allow your baby’s brain room to grow and develop. A surgeon will determine the type and timing of the surgery depending on the severity of the condition. Your baby might need surgery within their first year.
Supportive therapy
. Your child may need other supportive therapies, such as physical, occupational and
speech therapies
, to help them reach developmental milestones for their age.
What are the side effects of craniosynostosis surgery?
Side effects of surgery aren’t common, but may include:
Advertisement
Air bubbles enter your child’s bloodstream (
air embolism
)
Asymmetry
Bleeding (wound dehiscence), excessive blood loss (requiring blood transfusion)
Blood clot
Bone defects or irregularities
Cerebrospinal fluid leak
High body temperature (
hyperthermia
)
Infection
Needing a second surgery
Seizures
While rare, these complications may be life-threatening and could lead to early
death
.
It can be scary to see your child undergo surgery at such a young age. Know that your baby’s providers have your child’s best interests in mind. Your baby’s care team and surgeons are highly trained and experienced at what they do. They’ll carefully perform the procedure to decrease your baby’s risk of complications.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if your child shows signs of craniosynostosis, including:
A non-round or different-than-expected head shape
Delayed developmental milestones
Raised ridges on their head
If your child has craniosynostosis and they have a seizure or experience difficulty breathing, contact 911 or your local emergency services number immediately.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
You might ask your child’s healthcare provider:
What’s the most likely cause of the craniosynostosis?
What craniosynostosis treatment do you recommend?
What are the surgery risks?
What happens if we decide not to have surgery?
Does my baby’s head shape affect brain function?
What is the likelihood that I’ll have another child with the same condition?
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Developmental Delays Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the outlook for craniosynostosis?
Your child’s outlook (prognosis) varies depending on their overall health and how many sutures in their skull are closed. Most children who receive a timely diagnosis and undergo treatment have a good prognosis. Treatment within your baby’s first year minimizes developmental problems.
Your child’s outlook may be different if craniosynostosis is a symptom of an underlying genetic condition. A healthcare provider can give you the best information about your child’s situation.
What is the life expectancy of someone with craniosynostosis?
Most babies diagnosed with craniosynostosis have a normal life expectancy, especially if their healthcare provider diagnoses and treats the condition within the first few years of life. Each child’s life expectancy can vary based on the severity of the condition.
Prevention
Can craniosynostosis be prevented?
There’s no known way to prevent craniosynostosis.
Prenatal genetic testing
may show gene changes that could lead to this condition. A
genetic counselor
can help you understand your genetic risks before pregnancy and possible treatment options if your baby is born with this condition.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
As a new parent, it’s normal to feel anxious and scared when you learn that your baby has a health condition like craniosynostosis. But your baby’s care team will diagnose and create a treatment plan to prevent complications that can affect your child’s brain growth. With timely treatment, most children with craniosynostosis grow and develop in a healthy way. If you have any questions about how you can help your child, talk to their provider.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When your child doesn’t walk, talk or smile as soon as other kids, you may worry. Cleveland Clinic Children’s offers personalized treatment for developmental delays.
Developmental Delays Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/05/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us