Brenner Tumor: Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Brenner Tumor
Advertisement
Advertisement
Brenner Tumor
A Brenner tumor is a rare type of ovarian tumor. In most cases, healthcare providers find them by chance when you get testing for other reasons. Most Brenner tumors are noncancerous (benign). But they can be borderline or malignant. Surgery is the main treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Ovarian Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Brenner Tumor?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
What Is a Brenner Tumor?
A Brenner tumor (BT) is a rare
ovarian
tumor. Most cases are noncancerous (benign). They most commonly affect
women
in their 50s to 70s. But they can develop at any age.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Because these tumors are rare, scientists are still learning about them. This includes how best to diagnose and treat them.
Types
The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies Brenner tumors (BTs) into three types based
on how the cells look
under a microscope. They include:
Benign
: This type is noncancerous. Benign BTs are usually less than 2 centimeters (cm) in size. They’re the most common BT.
Borderline
: This type has features of both benign and malignant BTs. It has the potential to turn into cancer. On average, borderline BTs are about 12 cm in size.
Malignant
: This type is
cancerous
. It’s very rare. Less than 5% of all BT cases are malignant. They’re typically around 10 cm in size.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of a Brenner tumor
Most Brenner tumors don’t cause symptoms. Healthcare providers typically find them by chance when you get imaging tests for other reasons.
But BT symptoms can include:
A buildup of fluid in your abdomen (
ascites
)
A mass in your pelvis
Fullness, pain or pressure in your abdomen
These symptoms may have many other causes. It’s important to see a healthcare provider so they can find the problem.
Brenner tumor causes
Researchers don’t know the exact cause of Brenner tumors. In general, tumors form when cells grow uncontrollably. With BTs, researchers think this happens in small groups of cells near your
fallopian tubes
and ovaries called Walthard cell nests.
Advertisement
Loss of function of
CDKN2A
, a
tumor suppressor gene
, may cause benign BTs to turn into borderline BTs.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
In most cases, healthcare providers find a Brenner tumor by chance when you get imaging tests of your pelvis for other reasons.
If you have symptoms, your healthcare provider may recommend tests like:
Ultrasound
CT scan
MRI
To diagnose the type of Brenner tumor, you’ll need to have it surgically removed. Your surgeon will then send samples to a lab. A
pathologist
will look at the cells under a microscope to determine the type.
Management and Treatment
How is it treated?
Surgery is the main form of treatment for all types of Brenner tumors. Your surgeon will remove all or part of the tumor. Removing it usually resolves any symptoms. It’s also necessary to determine the type of tumor.
If the tumor is malignant, you may need other treatments. This may include
chemotherapy
or
radiation
, for example. Malignant BTs are very rare. So, healthcare providers don’t have a standardized treatment plan for them. Your healthcare team will walk you through your options.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A tumor diagnosis, especially a rare one, can cause a flood of different emotions. The volume of new information can be overwhelming. The good news is that Brenner tumors are often benign. Your healthcare provider will go over the next steps. Lean on them — and loved ones — for support.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
An ovarian cancer diagnosis can be shocking and life-changing. Cleveland Clinic cancer experts will help you get the treatment you need.
Ovarian Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/17/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6601
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment