Hepatitis A: What It Is, Symptoms & Transmission
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hepatitis A
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis A is a liver disease caused by the hepatitis A virus (HAV). It’s a very contagious disease. It spreads through close person-to-person contact or contaminated food or drink. It usually causes mild symptoms and goes away without treatment. But it can last several weeks to months.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Overview
What is hepatitis A?
Hepatitis A is a
viral infection
that affects your
liver
. It’s caused by the hepatitis A virus (HAV). The
virus
causes liver inflammation (
hepatitis
) with mild symptoms that last for up to two months. It usually goes away without treatment. But it’s very contagious and easy to spread to others when you’re infected.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of hepatitis A
Hepatitis A symptoms can include:
Diarrhea
Fatigue
Fever
Itchy skin
Joint pain
Light-colored poop and dark-colored pee
Loss of appetite
Nausea
and
vomiting
Abdominal pain
, especially in the upper right (where your liver is)
Yellow-colored skin or eyes (jaundice)
Not everyone has symptoms. Children under 6 may not show any signs of infection.
Hepatitis A symptoms appear between two to six weeks after infection. This is the incubation period, when the virus is replicating itself in your body. When the virus has replicated itself enough to register as a threat, your
immune system
launches an attack against it. This is what causes symptoms.
Hepatitis A transmission
If the HVA virus is what causes hepatitis A, “transmission” is how you get it. You can get hepatitis A from
food poisoning
or close personal contact with someone who has the virus. The virus lives in the blood and poop of people who have it. Transmission occurs when it passes from their body to yours.
This can happen if:
Somebody infected with the virus doesn’t wash their hands after using the bathroom
. They might then prepare food that you eat, touch surfaces that you touch or touch you.
You have close contact with somebody who has the virus
. It can be
transmitted through sex
or kissing if there’s
anal
contact or they have bleeding in their mouth (like
bleeding gums
).
You live or work in a place with poor sewage disposal
. If there are traces of poop in the local soil or water, the infection could contaminate raw produce, shellfish or tap water.
You share needles with someone who has the virus
. Sharing needles with someone exposes your blood to their blood and anything in it. Accidentally touching someone’s needle can, too.
Advertisement
Risk factors
You may be more likely to contract hepatitis A if you:
Are experiencing homelessness or living in a crowded place
Work in childcare, a hospital or a nursing home
Use intravenous drugs
Have
HIV
or another immune disease
How long are you contagious?
You’re contagious for two weeks before symptoms start, and up to three weeks after they go away. But if you never have symptoms, you might never know that you’re infected or contagious. After the virus leaves your body, it can still live on surfaces and in your environment for several months.
Complications
Hepatitis A doesn’t cause
chronic liver disease
or
lasting liver damage
, like other
hepatitis viruses
can. That’s because most people get better before the virus can damage their livers. But during infection, hepatitis A can rarely cause
acute liver failure
. This is more likely if you have a weaker immune system.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose hepatitis A
To diagnose hepatitis A, a healthcare provider will start by asking about your symptoms and physically examining you. They’ll look for physical signs of liver disease, like:
Jaundice
Enlarged liver
Enlarged spleen
To test for liver disease, they’ll take a
blood panel
to
check how your liver is functioning
. They can also test your blood for
antibodies
to different viruses. This will tell them which virus you have.
Management and Treatment
How is hepatitis A treated?
There’s no specific treatment for hepatitis A. Your healthcare provider may recommend that you:
Stay home
. You should stay home from school or work for at least a week after symptoms begin. After that, you can return if you feel better and your fever and jaundice have gone away.
Stay hydrated
. Sip liquids throughout the day. If you’re nauseous, try broths or clear soups. You can also try foods that are mostly liquid, like popsicles, flavored gelatin or ice cream.
Avoid substances that stress your liver
. Take a break from alcohol, smoking and recreational drugs. Check with your healthcare provider about supplements and medications.
Keep in touch with your provider
. They’ll want to check on you at times to make sure your condition is improving. If your symptoms are bad, they might want to check you more often.
What’s the recovery time from hepatitis A?
Symptoms of hepatitis A last for as long as it takes for your immune system to defeat the virus. Most people recover within two months. If you have a
weakened immune system
, the infection might last longer — up to six months. Sometimes, symptoms appear to be gone but then come back (relapse).
Is there a prophylactic treatment for hepatitis A?
Yes. If you’ve been exposed to the virus, you may be able to prevent infection by getting one of two treatments within two weeks of exposure. These include:
Advertisement
Getting the
hepatitis A vaccine
. If you haven’t been vaccinated yet, getting vaccinated within two weeks of exposure may protect you from getting the infection.
Getting an
immune globulin
injection
. Immune globulin is a medication that contains antibodies to the virus. Your provider may recommend this if you can’t have the vaccine.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you think you may have been infected, contact your provider as soon as possible for testing. You may be able to treat it proactively. If you can’t, it’s important to know that you’re contagious. If you’re recovering from hepatitis A infection, contact your provider if you feel like your symptoms aren’t improving.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have hepatitis A?
If you have hepatitis A, you may feel unwell for several weeks to months. Or you may never have symptoms. Your body will eventually clear the virus without treatment. Unlike other hepatitis viruses, hepatitis A doesn’t stay forever and doesn’t need a cure. But it’s very contagious while you have it.
Prevention
Can hepatitis A be prevented?
Yes, it can. Getting
vaccinated
against hepatitis A is the easiest way to prevent it. Healthcare providers recommend hepatitis A vaccinations for people over 12 months of age who:
May be exposed to the virus at home or work
Plan on
traveling
to a country that may have higher exposure
Have chronic liver disease
Advertisement
Good hygiene helps prevent many diseases at home or abroad. You can help protect yourself and others by
washing your hands often
and practicing
safe food prep
.
How do I avoid infecting other people?
If you have hepatitis A, you can help prevent its spread by:
Letting close contacts know you’re contagious.
Disinfecting your home with bleach-based cleaning products.
Not preparing and serving food to others.
Avoiding sex while you’re infected.
Living With
When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you know you have hepatitis A, contact your healthcare provider if your symptoms get worse or you feel as if your symptoms aren’t going away as quickly as you expected.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Under normal circumstances, hepatitis A isn’t a serious or life-threatening illness. But it can make you feel sick and tired for weeks or even months. And for people with weaker immune systems, it can be more serious. That’s why it’s important to try to prevent it from spreading — even if you feel well.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Untreated hepatitis can cause liver damage or failure. Cleveland Clinic’s expert providers offer you the latest treatments and caring support.
Hepatitis Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/31/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.7000
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Contact Us