Cystitis (Bladder Inflammation): Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Bladder Inflammation (Cystitis)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Bladder Inflammation (Cystitis)
Bladder infections can lead to inflammation of your bladder (cystitis). The most common cause of cystitis is an E. coli infection. The most common symptoms include pain or a burning feeling when you pee or peeing more than usual. Treatment includes antibiotics.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is a Bladder Infection (Cystitis)?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
What Is a Bladder Infection (Cystitis)?
Cystitis symptoms commonly affect your pee, including peeing more, discomfort when you pee and changes to the color or smell.
Cystitis is
inflammation
of your
urinary bladder
, usually because of a
bacterial infection
.
Bacteria
from the area between your genitals and
rectum
(
perineum
) can get into your
urethra
and travel up to your bladder. That leads to symptoms that affect how you pee.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Bladder infections are very common, especially in
females
. About
50% to 60% of females
will have cystitis at some point. And these infections may come back (recur) — between
30% and over 40%
of females who get a bladder infection will have another one later on.
Males are less likely to get cystitis. That’s because their urethras are longer — about 8 to 9 inches (about 20 centimeters). In females, they’re much shorter — about 1.5 inches (3 to 4 centimeters) long. Because of that, it’s harder for bacteria to reach the bladder in males.
Many people feel shy about bringing up cystitis symptoms. But bladder infections are the most common type of
urinary tract infection
(UTI). Each year in the U.S., UTIs lead to more than
10 million
visits to healthcare providers. You’re not alone. Providers treat them all the time, and you don’t need to feel embarrassed.
What are the different types of cystitis?
There are two main types of cystitis:
Uncomplicated cystitis
is mild. It usually goes away easily and doesn’t cause serious problems.
Complicated cystitis
is more serious. It can spread to your kidneys and may be harder to treat.
Symptoms and Causes
What are symptoms of cystitis?
Cystitis symptoms commonly include:
Peeing more often than usual (
frequent urination
)
: You may feel like you have to pee all the time, even if not much comes out. Some people also feel a sudden, strong need to pee and can’t hold it (
urge incontinence
).
Pain or burning when you pee (
dysuria
)
: It may burn or itch when you start or finish peeing.
Changes in your pee
: It might look darker or smell bad.
Advertisement
If the infection spreads to your kidneys (
pyelonephritis
), you might also have:
Fever
Chills
Nausea
and
vomiting
Flank pain
What triggers cystitis?
Bacteria cause most bladder infections. The most common one is
Escherichia coli
(
E. coli
). It gets into your urethra and multiplies in your bladder.
Other factors that may increase your risk of cystitis include:
Urinary system
problems you have at birth (
congenital urinary abnormalities
)
Pregnancy
Menopause
Using a
Foley catheter
Using a
vaginal diaphragm
Using
spermicides
Having sexual intercourse with more than one partner
Constipation
Diabetes
Multiple sclerosis
(MS)
You’re also more likely to get cystitis if you’ve had it before.
Are bladder infections contagious?
No, you can’t catch a bladder infection from someone else — even through sexual intercourse. But sex can sometimes let bacteria into your
urinary tract
and cause an infection.
To help lower your risk after sex, try these tips:
Use a water-based or silicone-based lubricant (lube).
Pee after sex.
Wash your hands
before and after using the bathroom and having sex.
What are the complications of cystitis?
If you don’t treat cystitis, it can spread to your kidneys. This type of infection is an upper urinary tract infection, and it’s harder to treat.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is bladder inflammation diagnosed?
Talk to a healthcare provider if you have symptoms of cystitis. Your provider will usually ask for a pee sample to help diagnose bladder inflammation.
They may run two tests:
Urinalysis
(pee test)
: Checks how your pee looks and what’s in it
Urine culture
: Finds out what type of bacteria caused cystitis
Does it show up on urinalysis?
Yes, providers often find cystitis with a pee test. But sometimes, your results may look normal, even if you still have symptoms.
If that happens, talk to your provider again. They may do more tests or send you to a
urologist
for a closer look.
Management and Treatment
What is the fastest way to get rid of cystitis?
Antibiotics
are the fastest way to treat cystitis. Your provider will choose the right one based on the kind of bacteria causing your infection.
You may need antibiotics for three to 14 days, depending on how bad the infection is. Be sure to take all your medicine, even if you start to feel better. If you stop too soon, the infection could come back and be harder to treat.
What antibiotics treat it?
Some common antibiotics that providers prescribe to treat cystitis include:
Nitrofurantoin
(Macrobid®, Macrodantin®, Urotoin®)
Sulfonamides (sulfa drugs)
Amoxicillin
(Amoxil®, Moxilin®, Sumox®)
Cephalosporins
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
(Bactrim®, Bacter-Aid DS®, Septra®)
Quinolones, such as
ciprofloxacin
(Cipro®)
How soon after treatment will I feel better?
You should start feeling better within a few days to a week after you start taking antibiotics.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Call your provider if you have symptoms of cystitis. If you’ve already started treatment but still don’t feel better after a week, contact them again. They may order another test or give you a different antibiotic.
Advertisement
During your appointment, you may wish to ask the following:
If I don’t have cystitis, what other conditions may be causing my symptoms?
How long should I take antibiotics?
Do I need to take my antibiotics at a particular time every day?
Are there any special directions for how to store my antibiotics?
When will I start to feel better?
Should I schedule a follow-up appointment?
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have bladder inflammation (cystitis)?
With proper diagnosis and treatment, the outlook for cystitis is good. Bladder inflammation often improves by staying hydrated and taking antibiotics. Be sure to finish your entire prescription. Stopping your medication early could lead to the infection coming back.
How do you calm it?
Antibiotics usually help within a few days to a week. While you heal,
avoid foods and drinks that can irritate your bladder
, like:
Alcohol
Citrus juices
Caffeinated drinks
Spicy foods
Prevention
How can I prevent bladder inflammation (cystitis)?
You can help prevent cystitis by adopting the following practices:
Drink plenty of water
: Drinking enough water helps you pee more, which flushes out
germs
from your body.
Don’t hold it in
: When you feel the urge to pee, go. Holding it too long gives bacteria a chance to grow.
Wipe front to back
: After using the toilet, always wipe from front to back. This helps stop germs from getting into your urinary area.
Pee after sexual intercourse
: This helps wash away any germs that might have gotten near your urethra.
Avoid spermicides and diaphragms
: These forms of birth control can disrupt healthy bacteria and raise your risk for a UTI.
Ask about vaginal estrogen
: If you’ve gone through menopause, a cream or ring with estrogen might help lower your risk of UTIs.
Cranberry pills
:
Cranberry supplements — not juice — may help prevent UTIs by keeping bacteria from sticking to your bladder.
Consider probiotics
:
Probiotics can support healthy bacteria in your body. They may be especially helpful
after menopause
.
Ask your provider about methenamine hippurate (Hiprex®, Urex®)
:
Urinary antiseptics like methenamine hippurate can stop bacteria from growing in your pee and help prevent recurrent UTIs.
Talk to your provider if you get frequent UTIs
: If UTIs keep coming back, your provider might suggest a low daily dose of antibiotics or pills to take after sex as a preventive measure.
Advertisement
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Peeing habits might not be something we typically talk about. But a burning feeling when you pee or other changes to your peeing habits mean it’s time to chat with a healthcare provider. You didn’t do anything wrong, and there’s no reason to feel embarrassed or ashamed. They can determine what’s causing your cystitis and prescribe the best treatment.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
It can be stressful (and painful) to have bladder disorders, like urinary incontinence or cystitis. But the urology providers at Cleveland Clinic are here for you.
Bladder Disorders Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 05/26/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment