Duodenal Cancer: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Duodenal Cancer
Advertisement
Advertisement
Duodenal Cancer
Duodenal cancer is cancer that occurs in the first part of your small intestine (duodenum). In its early stages, duodenal cancer often causes no symptoms. As the tumor grows, it may block proper digestion. You may have symptoms like nausea, abdominal pain or constipation. Your treatment plan varies based on how advanced the cancer is.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Colorectal Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Duodenal Cancer?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Additional Common Questions
What Is Duodenal Cancer?
Duodenal cancer is a rare tumor in your
duodenum
. This is the first part of your
small intestine
. Your duodenum helps turn partially digested food into nutrients your body needs. Duodenal cancer disrupts this process.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
There are different types of this disease. This article focuses on adenocarcinoma, the most common type. Surgery and other treatments may cure duodenal cancer, but it may come back.
Types
Cancer doctors (oncologists) classify this disease by the type of cells where tumors develop:
Adenocarcinoma
affects the cells that produce the chemicals, enzymes and other fluids that break down food.
Carcinoid or neuroendocrine tumors
are slow-growing tumors that often start in your gastrointestinal (GI) tract and can spread throughout your body.
Lymphoma starts in immune system cells that fight infection.
Sarcoma starts in your bones or soft tissues, like your muscles or blood vessels. The most common type of GI sarcoma is a
gastrointestinal stromal tumor
(GIST).
Symptoms and Causes
Duodenal cancer symptoms
This disease may not cause symptoms until the tumor grows large enough to block your small intestine. Your body can’t digest food when something blocks your small intestine. When that happens, you may have symptoms like:
Abdominal pain
Blood in your poop
Burning stomach pain (acid reflux)
Constipation
Nausea or vomiting
Unexplained weight loss
Duodenal cancer causes
Experts believe the disease starts in small growths (polyps) in your intestine lining. They don’t know why these polyps develop or why they become cancerous.
Advertisement
Risk factors
Certain factors may increase your risk:
Age
: Most cases affect people age 60 to 80.
Health conditions
: Celiac disease or Crohn’s disease may increase your risk.
Lifestyle habits
: Smoking, drinking alcohol and eating a high-salt diet are common risk factors.
Inherited disorders
: Having
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
,
Lynch syndrome
or cystic fibrosis increases your risk.
Race
: Black people have a higher risk.
Sex
: Duodenal cancer is slightly more common in
males
.
Complications
Duodenal cancer may lead to:
Metastatic cancer
: It can spread beyond your duodenum.
Cancer recurrence
: You may have duodenal cancer come back after treatment.
Colon cancer
: People with duodenal cancer can be at increased risk for developing colon cancer as well.
Anxiety and depression
: Having a rare disease like duodenal cancer may cause social isolation that leads to depression. The disease can come back, so not knowing if or when that may happen may cause anxiety.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose this condition
A healthcare provider will check your symptoms and health history. They’ll do a physical exam and tests, including:
Imaging tests
: CT scans or MRIs give providers a detailed view of your duodenum and small intestine.
Upper endoscopy
: This test uses a flexible tube with a camera to check your duodenum.
Biopsy
: A provider will take tissue samples during the endoscopy. A medical
pathologist
will check the samples for cancer.
Cancer staging
Cancer staging
helps your oncologist plan treatment. In this case, they’ll stage cancer by checking how far the disease spreads through tissue layers, muscles in your duodenum and beyond. The five cancer stages are:
Stage 0
: Abnormal cells are in a top layer of tissue.
Stage I
: Cancer has spread to deeper layers of tissue or muscle.
Stage II
: Cancer affects nearby organs or muscles.
Stage III
: Cancer is in nearby lymph nodes.
Stage IV
: Cancer has spread to distant areas of your body, like your liver or abdomen.
Management and Treatment
How is duodenal cancer treated?
Common treatments include:
Surgery
: A surgeon may remove all or part of your duodenum. They may do a
Whipple procedure
. This removes your duodenum, gallbladder and part of your pancreas.
Chemotherapy
: Oncologists may use this treatment after surgery to reduce the chances of the cancer coming back. They may also use it to treat cancer that has spread.
Radiation therapy
: This treatment targets any cancer cells left after surgery.
When should I seek care?
Symptoms, like abdominal pain that doesn’t go away, blood in your poop or losing weight, are reasons to talk to a healthcare provider. Duodenal cancer may not be the cause. But checking with a provider is the only way to find out what’s going on in your gut.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Colorectal Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What’s the survival rate for this condition?
Cancer survival rates
are estimates of how long people may live after a cancer diagnosis. As duodenal cancer is rare, most data refer to survival rates for small intestine cancer. The American Cancer Society provides information on five-year relative survival rates:
Localized cancer
:
86%, or more than 8 of 10 people who have cancer within the small intestine
Regional cancer
:
80%, or 8 of 10 people with cancer in nearby lymph nodes
Distant
:
47%, or nearly 5 of 10 people with cancer that’s spread outside the small intestine
Relative survival rates compare the survival rate of people with a specific type and stage of cancer with people who don’t have cancer.
Is there anything I can do to feel better?
Duodenal cancer symptoms can make you feel weak just when you need all of your strength to manage surgery and treatment side effects. And it can come back after successful treatment. Your healthcare team will be glad to recommend support, like:
Cancer rehabilitation
: Preventive rehabilitation is support before you start treatment. You may work with nutritionists, physical therapists and counselors so you’re in the best mental and physical shape possible.
Palliative care
: This is a healthcare team to help you manage cancer symptoms and treatment side effects. Just as important, this care provides emotional and spiritual support.
Cancer survivorship
: Duodenal cancer can come back after surgery and other cancer treatments. Living with uncertainty can be stressful. Cancer survivorship provides support to help you manage anxiety and stress.
Advertisement
Prevention
You can’t prevent duodenal cancer. But you may lower your risk by:
Improving your what you eat
: Eat lean protein instead of red meat. Fill your plate with vegetables, fruits and whole grains.
Avoiding tobacco products
: Don’t smoke or vape. If you need help quitting, contact a healthcare provider.
Limiting alcohol
: Stick to one drink daily for women or two for men.
Additional Common Questions
Can you live without a duodenum?
Sometimes, treatment for duodenal cancer involves surgery to remove your duodenum. You can live without this part of your small intestine. But the surgery may affect how you digest food. Your healthcare provider may prescribe nutritional supplements or IV nutrition to help you get the nutrition you need.
Is duodenal cancer the same as pancreatic cancer?
No. Duodenal cancer affects your small intestine.
Pancreatic cancer
develops in your pancreas, which is behind your stomach.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Having duodenal cancer may feel like you’re up against an emotional one-two punch: It’s rare, which makes it hard for anyone to predict how the disease will affect you. And it may come back, usually to a new spot in your body. You may feel like every change in your body, however small, could be a new tumor.
Dodging feelings like uncertainty and anxiety can be exhausting. It may help to know that your cancer care team will be in your corner now and in the future. They’ll keep track of changes in your body. They’ll also track new treatments in case duodenal cancer comes back. And they’ll be there for you, whether you need more treatment or are able to celebrate being free of cancer.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Colorectal cancer can turn your world upside down. At Cleveland Clinic, our experts will craft a treatment plan to help you get the best care possible.
Colorectal Cancer Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 10/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials