SGLT2 Inhibitors: What They Are, Uses & Side Effects
Home
/
Health Library
/
Medical Treatments
/
SGLT2 Inhibitors
Advertisement
Advertisement
SGLT2 Inhibitors
SGLT2 inhibitors are a treatment for Type 2 diabetes. They work by helping your body remove extra sugar through your pee. This helps manage blood sugar levels. They can also benefit people with chronic kidney disease and heart failure.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Diabetes Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Are SGLT2 Inhibitors?
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
What Are SGLT2 Inhibitors?
SGLT2 inhibitors are a class of medications that treat Type 2 diabetes. SGLT2 stands for sodium-glucose transport protein 2. They manage your blood sugar by helping your kidneys remove extra glucose through your pee.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
But the use of SGLT2 inhibitors goes beyond managing blood sugar. They also help improve kidney and heart health for people with
chronic kidney disease (CKD)
or
heart failure
. They can slow the progression of kidney disease and reduce the risk of needing
dialysis
. SGLT2 inhibitors also lower the risk of heart failure flare-ups.
How do SGLT2 inhibitors work?
SGLT2 is a protein in your kidneys that reabsorbs glucose. Typically, when glucose in your blood flows through your kidneys, some glucose goes back into your bloodstream. These medications block that process, so your kidneys don’t reabsorb glucose. Instead, it comes out in your pee. This means the glucose doesn’t get into your bloodstream and raise your blood sugar.
What drugs are SGLT2 inhibitors?
The most common examples of SGLT2 inhibitors are:
Bexagliflozin (Brenzavvy®)
Canagliflozin (Invokana®)
Dapagliflozin (Farxiga®)
Empagliflozin (Jardiance®)
Ertugliflozin (Steglatro®)
Treatment Details
How do you take SGLT2 inhibitors?
You take them once daily by mouth, usually in the morning.
Each medication comes in different dosages. Your healthcare provider often starts at a low dose, which they may increase over time. All SGLT2 inhibitors come in milligrams (mg). Examples include:
Bexagliflozin: 20 mg
Canagliflozin: 100 mg or 300 mg
Dapagliflozin: 5 mg or 10 mg
Empagliflozin: 10 mg or 25 mg
Ertugliflozin: 5 mg or 15 mg
Advertisement
What if I miss a dose?
If you miss a dose, you should take it as soon as you remember. But it can’t be too close to your next dose. Generally, if your next dose is six hours or fewer away, skip the dose. Don’t take two pills to make up for a missed dose.
If you’re unsure, talk to your healthcare provider or pharmacist.
Can you overdose on this medication?
Yes, you can take too much. This is why providers don’t recommend doubling up on pills. It can increase your risk of complications.
Always take your medications as prescribed by your healthcare provider. If you’re unsure how much you’re supposed to take, contact your provider.
What other medications can interact with SGLT2 inhibitors?
SGLT2 inhibitors can interact with other medications and cause side effects. Some of these medications include:
Diuretics
(can cause dehydration and low blood pressure)
Blood pressure medications
(can lower blood pressure too much)
SGLT2 inhibitors can be used with other diabetes medications like
metformin
or
GLP-1 agonists
. But it can be unsafe to take SGLT2 inhibitors with
insulin
or
sulfonylureas
. Your healthcare provider will need to monitor you closely to make sure your blood sugar doesn’t get too low.
Always tell your provider about all the medications you take.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Diabetes Care
Make an Appointment
Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits of SGLT2 inhibitors?
The main benefit is that they lower blood sugar levels in people with Type 2 diabetes. Other benefits could include:
Reduce
blood pressure
Weight loss (because you’re peeing out sugars, which are calories)
Improvement in Type 2 diabetes and kidney disease and/or heart failure
SGLT2 inhibitors aren’t a treatment option for Type 1 diabetes.
What are the side effects of SGLT2 inhibitors?
Side effects could include:
Peeing more
Dizziness
Vaginal yeast infections
What are the risks of SGLT2 inhibitors?
One major risk of SGLT2 inhibitors is low blood sugar. If your dose is too high or you take too much, your blood sugar can get too low. This can be life-threatening.
Other risks of SGLT2 inhibitors include:
Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
: Excess sugar in your pee can create an environment for bacteria to grow.
Dehydration
: The medication has a diuretic effect and can make you pee more. This can lead to dehydration.
Diabetes-related ketoacidosis
: Ketone levels can build up in your blood when your body breaks down fat (instead of sugar) for energy. If ketone levels get too high, it can cause ketoacidosis. This is a medical emergency. Symptoms include confusion, weakness, extreme thirst and very high blood sugar levels.
Low blood pressure
: Peeing more often could lead to low blood pressure.
Your healthcare provider can let you know more about the potential risks.
Can I drink alcohol with SGLT2 inhibitors?
You should be cautious if you drink alcohol while taking this medication. It can increase your risk of side effects like low blood sugar and dehydration. If you drink alcohol, drink only in moderation and monitor your blood sugar.
Advertisement
Can I take SGLT2 inhibitors if I’m pregnant?
No. You shouldn’t take this medication if you’re pregnant or thinking of becoming pregnant. Insulin or metformin may be an option for you during pregnancy. Talk to your healthcare provider about what they recommend.
Recovery and Outlook
When should I call my healthcare provider?
You should have regular appointments with your healthcare provider when taking SGLT2 inhibitors. They can make sure your treatment is working.
Call your provider if any of the following happen:
You have concerning side effects.
Your blood sugars are very high or low.
You’re thinking of stopping the medication.
You become pregnant or are thinking of becoming pregnant.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Managing Type 2 diabetes can be a challenge. It can be overwhelming to keep track of medications, check your blood sugar, watch what you eat and stay active. Some days may feel exhausting.
SGLT2 inhibitors are an option your provider may suggest to help lower your blood sugar. They’ll choose the one that fits your health needs best. It’s important to take it exactly as prescribed. Taking too much or too little can lead to problems. Regularly checking your blood sugar helps ensure the medicine is working appropriately.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Whether you’ve been living with diabetes for years or you’re newly diagnosed, you want experts you can trust. Our team at Cleveland Clinic is here to help.
Diabetes Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 07/31/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.6568
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Virtual Visits for Diabetes