What Is Porphyria? Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Porphyria
Advertisement
Advertisement
Porphyria
Porphyria refers to a group of disorders (often genetic) that affect your nervous system and/or skin. Acute porphyrias cause painful attacks that can last days or weeks. Cutaneous porphyrias make your skin sensitive to light and cause symptoms like pain, swelling and blisters. Treatment can help manage and prevent symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Porphyria?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Porphyria?
“Porphyria” (pronounced “por-FEER-ee-uh”) is an umbrella term for a group of
rare diseases
that affect how your body makes heme (pronounced “heem”). Heme is a building block for the
hemoglobin
in your blood. Heme carries oxygen to tissues throughout your body and gives
red blood cells
their color. Heme is also important for many other functions and processes in our cells.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Heme production is an eight-step process. It requires the right amount of eight different
enzymes
(one for each step), as well as chemicals called porphyrins and porphyrin precursors. When an enzyme isn’t doing what it’s supposed to, there’s a ripple effect. Porphyrins and precursors build up in your body’s cells, leading to symptoms and possible complications.
You might wonder why enzymes aren’t doing what they’re supposed to. Usually, this is due to a change in a gene that serves as a blueprint for one of the enzymes in the heme production pathway. Porphyria is often inherited. This means a
gene change
affecting heme production can be passed down within biological families, putting other family members at risk of also developing porphyria or being disease carriers.
Healthcare providers can help you diagnose, manage — and possibly prevent — symptoms to lessen the impact of these conditions on your life.
Types of porphyria
There are eight types of porphyria. Providers refer to these together as “the porphyrias.” Your provider will diagnose you with a specific type based on your symptoms and where in your body the excess chemicals build up.
In general, the porphyrias fall into two groups according to their symptoms:
Advertisement
Acute porphyrias (sometimes called
acute hepatic porphyrias
)
Cutaneous porphyrias
Acute porphyrias
These diseases cause severe attacks of
abdominal pain
and other symptoms. Some acute porphyrias also cause your
skin
to react to sunlight with blistering
rashes
.
Acute porphyrias include:
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP)
. This is the most common acute porphyria. This type can cause acute abdominal pain episodes but doesn’t cause sun sensitivity or skin blistering.
Hereditary coproporphyria
(HCP)
. Besides acute abdominal pain attacks, your skin may react to sunlight with blistering.
Variegate porphyria (VP)
. With this condition, you may have acute abdominal pain attacks and/or skin blistering, which is often worse with sun exposure.
ALAD-deficiency porphyria
. ALAD stands for an “enzyme called delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) dehydratase.” This is an extremely rare porphyria that usually presents in childhood.
Cutaneous porphyrias
These diseases cause skin symptoms that can include pain, discoloration, swelling and/or blistering with sun exposure. Depending on the underlying cause, people have either a blistering or a non-blistering cutaneous porphyria.
Blistering cutaneous porphyrias include:
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT)
. This is the most common type of porphyria.
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP)
. “Erythropoietic” refers to your bone marrow. This is a key spot where excess porphyrins build up in this form of the disease. This is a very rare type of porphyria.
Non-blistering cutaneous porphyrias include:
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) and X-linked porphyria (XLP)
. Together, these are called “the protoporphyrias.” This is because the chemical that builds up in this disease is called protoporphyrin. “X-linked” means there’s a genetic variation in the X chromosome.
Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria
. This is an extremely rare form of porphyria.
Symptoms and Causes
Porphyria symptoms
The specific symptoms you experience — and how long they last — depend on the type of porphyria you have. Symptoms range from mild to severe. Some people with porphyria have no symptoms. In some cases, symptoms can be life-threatening unless treated.
Symptoms of acute porphyria
An elevation of heme precursors called aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG) causes acute porphyrias. These substances affect how your
nervous system
works. Your nervous system controls everything from muscle movement to
digestion
. Porphyria disrupts nervous system activity, causing symptomatic “attacks.”
Possible symptoms during an acute porphyria attack include:
Abdominal pain, which may be severe
Nausea
and
vomiting
Constipation
Pain in your
chest
, back, arms and/or legs
Anxiety
Insomnia
Confusion, agitation, hallucinations or other
changes in mental function
Fatigue
Fast heart rate (
tachycardia
)
High blood pressure
Numbness, tingling or “pins and needles” sensations (
paresthesia
)
Muscle
weakness or
paralysis
, which may affect muscles that control breathing
Seizures
Dark or red
pee
, which changes color from the presence of porphyrins and other chemicals
Advertisement
If you have hereditary coproporphyria or variegate porphyria, your skin may be sensitive to sunlight. Sun exposure may cause you to develop a blistering rash, skin color changes and/or
scarring
.
How long does an acute porphyria attack last?
An attack might last for three to seven days. But it’s possible for it to last much longer — especially if untreated —and symptoms can take weeks to months to resolve. You might have one or just a few attacks throughout your life. But it’s also possible to have multiple attacks within a single year.
Long-term complications of acute porphyria include high blood pressure, kidney failure and in rare cases liver cancer.
Symptoms of non-blistering cutaneous porphyrias (EPP/XLP)
Cutaneous porphyrias cause skin symptoms when you’re exposed to sunlight. This includes direct exposure outside, as well as sunlight that comes at you through windows. Some types of artificial light can also cause symptoms. These types of porphyria don’t cause sudden, severe abdominal pain or the other symptoms typical of acute “attacks.”
You’ll likely feel tingling as the first sign of a reaction to the sun and develop what providers call a “phototoxic reaction” if you don’t get out of the sun. You’ll experience the following skin symptoms, especially on your face, hands and feet:
Advertisement
Itching
Tingling
Swelling
Severe pain of the affected area
Tiny purple, red or brown dots (
petechiae
)
These reactions are very painful and usually last two to five days. You need to stay inside and try to cool the affected areas (for example, with cold air from an air conditioner).
Symptoms of blistering cutaneous porphyrias
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT)
People with PCT can have the following symptoms:
Skin blistering, mostly on the backs of their hands
Scarring
Skin discoloration
Skin thickening
Fragile skin that rips with minimal trauma or friction
Excessive hair growth
(often on their face, like their temples or chin)
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP)
This severe type of porphyria starts showing symptoms shortly after birth or at a very young age. The first visible sign is usually red urine. Babies tend to have red-stained diapers, often prompting providers to test for a urinary tract infection.
Other CEP signs and symptoms include:
Severe skin blisters after minimal sun or fluorescent light exposure
Infection of blisters, leading to
bone
infections and bone loss
Loss of facial structures (ear and nose
cartilage
)
Gray-brown discoloration of teeth
Anemia
(low red blood cell count), in some cases requiring
blood transfusion
Enlargement of the spleen
Low platelet count
Porphyria causes
Changes in certain genes cause acute porphyria. But just because you inherit a gene change doesn’t mean you’ll develop symptoms of porphyria. Most people with gene changes associated with porphyria
don’t
develop symptoms. This means
genetic testing
isn’t sufficient to confirm a diagnosis. The only way to determine if your symptoms are caused by acute porphyria is to check ALA and PBG levels in your urine.
Advertisement
Experts think other factors, like
hormones
, medications and things you eat or drink, play an important role in causing acute attacks. If you’re born with a gene change linked with acute porphyria, these other things trigger attacks.
Known triggers include:
An increase in
female
sex hormones (for example, during the
luteal phase
of your
menstrual cycle
)
Certain medications (for example,
sedatives
and
birth control pills
)
Excessive
alcohol
consumption
Smoking
Limited carbohydrate intake (for example, if you’re
fasting
or following a certain eating plan)
Causes of porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT)
PCT occurs mostly in adults and is one type of porphyria that’s a bit different. It often has what providers call “acquired causes.” This means you can develop this condition even if you don’t inherit a gene change.
Usually, two or more risk factors combine to disrupt normal heme production. Such factors include:
Estrogen
use (for example, birth control pills or
hormone replacement therapy
)
Excessive alcohol consumption
Iron overload (hemochromatosis)
Hepatitis C infection
HIV infection
Smoking
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose these conditions
Healthcare providers diagnose porphyria by doing a
physical exam
and running lab tests. You may need one or more of the following tests:
Blood tests
Urine (pee) tests
Stool tests
Your provider will explain which tests you need and what each test can reveal. Your provider may recommend genetic testing for you and your biological family members. This can identify specific gene changes known to cause porphyria.
Management and Treatment
How is porphyria treated?
Treatment depends on the type of porphyria you have and how it affects you. Your provider will help you understand what’s best in your unique situation. Here’s an overview of what you might expect.
Treatments for acute porphyrias
If you have acute porphyria, you may need care at a hospital when an attack occurs. At the hospital, providers will do one or more of the following:
Give you medication (hemin infusion) to reduce ALA and PBG levels
Give you medications to manage
pain
, nausea and/or
seizures
Give you
IV fluids
Monitor your
electrolyte
levels and replenish as needed
Watch for any changes to your mental status
Your provider may prescribe a medication called
givosiran
to help prevent future attacks. This is an injection you receive every month to suppress the overproduction of ALA and PBG.
You may need to avoid the following trigger factors:
Certain medications
Fasting and certain methods of calorie restriction
Alcohol use
Tobacco
use
Sun exposure (if you have VP or HCP)
Treatments for cutaneous porphyrias
No matter the specific type of cutaneous porphyria you have, protecting your skin is vital to preventing symptoms. Sunscreen typically isn’t enough. Ideally, you should avoid being in the sun at all. If you must do so, wear
sun-protective clothing
. Your provider can advise you on what’s best. You may also need to avoid certain artificial lighting.
For EPP/XLP
Your provider may prescribe
afamelanotide
. This is a tiny implant your provider puts just under your skin in your abdominal area. The implant releases medicine that can help reduce painful symptoms of sun exposure. Your provider will also monitor your liver function regularly and make sure that your vitamin D level isn’t too low.
Gallstones occur more frequently in EPP/XLP. Some people with EPP/XLP can also develop liver abnormalities. In severe cases,
liver failure
may develop. This may require a
liver transplantation
, sometimes followed by a bone marrow transplantation.
For PCT
Your provider may prescribe:
Blood draws (phlebotomy)
. Having blood drawn at regular intervals removes excess iron from your body. This can help if iron overload is interfering with heme production.
Low-dose
hydroxychloroquine
. This medication can help get rid of excess porphyrins. They’ll come out in your pee.
For CEP
Strict protection from sun and fluorescent light exposure is extremely important to avoid skin blistering and complications. If skin blistering happens, antibiotic creams may be necessary. You may need oral or IV
antibiotics
if the infections are severe.
Your provider will monitor your hemoglobin level regularly to decide if a blood transfusion is necessary. In people who are severely affected, a bone marrow transplant may be necessary, which is the only way to cure the disease.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
When you have porphyria, follow-ups become a routine part of your life. Your healthcare provider will tell you when to come in for appointments. These are important for monitoring how the disease is affecting your body and catching signs of complications. You’ll likely need routine lab tests (blood and pee), along with other tests to check organ function.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have porphyria?
Your outlook depends on:
The type of porphyria you have
How severely you’re affected
Any complications that develop
Your healthcare provider can give you the most accurate sense of what you can expect going forward.
Porphyria might have a big impact on your day-to-day life. Severe symptoms can interrupt your routine and make it hard to work, take care of your family or enjoy hobbies. You might feel exhausted, physically and mentally.
Let your provider know how you’re feeling. They can suggest resources and support groups. Connecting with porphyria communities can help you learn more about your condition and ways to manage it.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Living with a rare disease like porphyria can be isolating, frustrating and downright scary. You might wish family and friends could understand how you’re feeling. Maybe you’re simply tired of having to explain porphyria to others and why you can’t do certain things.
Wherever you’re at, know you’re not alone. Even though porphyria is rare compared to many other diseases, there’s still a whole community waiting to support you. Connect with porphyria support groups online or ask your provider to put you in touch. Finding people who understand how you’re feeling can help make the ups and downs a lot easier to manage.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 03/03/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Questions
216.444.2538
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Find a Primary Care Provider