Tongue Problems: Types, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Tongue Problems
Advertisement
Advertisement
Tongue Problems
Tongue problems may include a tongue that’s painful, enlarged or swollen, oddly textured or an unusual color, like white, yellow, brown or black. Infection, inflammation and conditions you’re born with or develop later in life can all cause symptoms affecting your tongue. Most tongue problems are easy to diagnose and treat.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Additional Common Questions
Overview
What are tongue problems?
Your
tongue
is a powerful muscle that helps you chew and swallow food. It also enables you to speak. Problems with your tongue — including pain, swelling or trouble moving your tongue — can make these routine activities difficult. Other tongue problems, like a tongue that changes color or texture, can feel strange and upsetting when you don’t know the cause.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Most tongue problems aren’t serious. But sometimes, changes in your tongue signal a more serious condition. See a healthcare provider to get your tongue checked out if you’re having severe symptoms that last longer than a few weeks.
Can your tongue indicate health problems?
It can. How your tongue looks, feels, moves and functions can provide clues about your health. Often, the clues are pretty straightforward. For example, a painful tongue may be a sign that you drank a hot cup of coffee too fast. Other times, you’ll need to see a healthcare provider to determine the issue. For example, a swollen or enlarged tongue may mean an allergic reaction, a nutritional deficiency or a
tumor
, among other things.
If you’re unsure, see a healthcare provider. They can advise you on whether you need treatment or if you can manage the issue at home with lifestyle changes.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the symptoms of tongue problems?
Common symptoms that may affect your tongue include:
An enlarged or swollen tongue.
Trouble moving your tongue.
Complete or partial loss of taste.
Change in your tongue color (white, yellow, dark red, purple, brown or black).
Change in your tongue’s texture (smooth, covered in raised patches or hair-like growths).
Pain, soreness or a burning sensation throughout your tongue or in certain parts.
Advertisement
What common problems affect the tongue?
Tongue problems or changes in your tongue may be a sign of short-term or long-term (chronic) conditions. They range in severity from simple first-degree burns from eating hot foods to more serious conditions like oral cancer.
Enlarged or swollen tongue
Macroglossia
involves having an atypically large tongue. The cause is usually an underlying condition you’re born with (congenital) or acquired over time. Conditions that cause an enlarged tongue include:
Acromegaly
: A rare condition that causes your body to release too much growth hormone. As a result, you may have an oversized tongue.
Amyloidosis
: A protein disorder that prevents tissues and organs from working as they should. It can cause your tongue to enlarge and look rippled on the edges.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
: A growth disorder that affects your child’s physical development. It may cause your child’s tongue to appear too big in their mouth.
Down syndrome
: Down syndrome is a congenital condition that may affect your child’s mental and physical development. It may cause their tongue to appear larger than is typical.
Hunter syndrome
(mucopolysaccharidosis)
: A rare group of diseases that affects your child’s development. An enlarged tongue is a common symptom.
Hypothyroidism
: A common condition where your body doesn’t release enough
thyroid hormone
into your bloodstream. It’s a common cause of macroglossia in children.
Tumors
:
Lymphangiomas
and
hemangiomas
are benign (noncancerous) growths that can cause your tongue to get bigger.
Lymphoma
is a cancer that can cause an enlarged tongue.
Glossitis
involves having a swollen tongue because of inflammation. Causes include:
Infections.
Mouth injury.
Hormone
changes.
Nutritional deficiency.
Dry mouth (xerostomia)
.
Irritation from spicy food or tobacco.
An allergic reaction to food or medicine.
Trouble moving your tongue
You may have trouble moving your tongue if you have nerve damage affecting the tissue or a structural issue that limits movement. Causes include:
Dysarthria
: Nerve damage that leads to weakened or paralyzed speaking muscles, including your tongue.
Glossoptosis
: A congenital condition that causes your baby’s tongue to be set too far back in their mouth, affecting how their tongue moves. Glossoptosis may result from
cerebral palsy
, Down syndrome or
Pierre Robin syndrome
.
Tongue-tie (ankyloglossia)
: A congenital condition that causes your baby’s tongue to attach to the floor of their mouth, limiting movement.
Loss of taste or taste changes
Tongue problems include complete loss of taste (
ageusia
), partial loss of taste and a changing sense of taste.
Potential causes include:
Injury to your
taste buds
(as with a severe tongue burn).
Bacterial
,
viral
or fungal infections.
Medication side effects (like taste changes during
chemotherapy
).
Nerve damage.
Tongue color and texture changes
Various conditions get their names from the key symptom: changes in your tongue’s appearance. A white, yellow or black tongue is usually a sign of poor hygiene. Not caring for your tongue can cause bacteria and fungi to grow. In rare cases, color and texture changes signal an underlying medical condition.
Advertisement
White tongue
: A white film covers your tongue, or white patches appear scattered on your tongue. A white tongue is usually a sign of bacteria build-up. A white tongue may be a sign of
thrush
or
oral lichen planus
. Rarely, it’s a sign of
leukoplakia
, a condition that sometimes progresses to cancer.
Yellow tongue
: Dead skin cells build up on your tongue, causing the surface to look yellow.
Black hairy tongue
: Dead skin cells or bacteria get trapped on your tongue, causing the surface to look black or brown. It may appear like it’s covered in fuzz or fur. Causes of black hairy tongue other than poor hygiene (most common) include
radiation therapy
to your head and neck, tobacco and alcohol use, and dry mouth.
Geographic tongue
: Smooth red patches of skin appear on your tongue, surrounded by white borders. The red patches outlined in white resemble the borders on a map, which is why it’s called geographic. Geographic tongue isn’t contagious and is a harmless condition, but it can feel painful.
A red tongue may be a symptom of a variety of conditions, including:
Folic acid deficiency and
vitamin B-12 deficiency
: Your tongue may also feel swollen and sore.
Kawasaki disease
: Your tongue may also appear cracked. Or it may look red and bumpy, like a strawberry. This is called a
strawberry tongue
.
Pellagra
: Your tongue may also swell, and you may have mouth sores.
Pernicious anemia
: Anemia can cause your tongue to appear red and smooth instead of bumpy and swollen. It may also feel sore.
Scarlet fever
: Strawberry tongue is a common symptom of scarlet fever.
Advertisement
Red or white patches on your tongue or thickened areas that don’t go away may be a sign of
tongue cancer
.
Tongue Pain
Tongue pain, including soreness and burning, is one of the most common tongue problems. Usually, tongue pain results from infection and
inflammation
.
Common causes of tongue pain include:
Injury
: Consuming foods or drinks that are too hot can cause a painful,
burned tongue
.
Sores and mouth ulcers
:
Canker sores
,
cold sores (fever blisters)
and
mouth ulcers
can form on or around your tongue. They can feel painful and make eating difficult.
Dental issues
: Poor oral hygiene can cause tongue pain and lead to unsightly color changes (white, yellow or black hairy tongue). Poorly fitted
dentures
can cause mouth and tongue pain.
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
: A rare condition that affects the
nerve
that runs through a portion of your tongue. It can cause stabbing pain in the back of your tongue.
Burning mouth syndrome (burning tongue)
: A painful condition that causes your tongue and the roof of your mouth to feel as if they’re burning. You’re more likely to have burning mouth syndrome if you’re
postmenopausal
and over 60.
You may experience tongue pain alongside other symptoms affecting your tongue, like a swollen tongue or color changes — as with
anemia
, geographic tongue and glossitis.
Advertisement
Diagnosis and Tests
How are tongue problems diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will consider the changes in your tongue alongside other symptoms and information to diagnose the underlying issue. They may:
Ask about your symptoms.
They’ll ask how long you’ve noticed changes in your tongue and if the condition has worsened. They may ask if you’ve tried any remedies that have improved your symptoms.
Ask about your lifestyle and habits.
They may ask about your oral habits if they suspect your tongue problems relate to dental care.
Perform a
physical exam
.
They’ll examine your tongue. Often an exam is enough to make a diagnosis.
Order a
blood test
.
You may need a blood test if your provider suspects your tongue problems relate to anemia or a nutritional deficiency.
Perform a
biopsy
: Your provider may remove a tissue sample and test it in a lab if they suspect you have abnormal cells, as with cancer and precancerous conditions.
Your experience and the tests you receive depend on what’s most likely causing your tongue problems.
Management and Treatment
How are tongue problems treated?
The approach you’ll need to treat or manage your condition depends on what’s causing your symptoms. Treatments may include:
First-aid
: You may need basic first-aid to care for a burned tongue.
Speech therapy
: You may need help with your speech and swallowing if you have a nerve condition affecting your tongue.
Medicine
: You may need
anti-fungal
medicines or
antibiotics
if you have an infection.
Dentist visits
: You may need to visit your
dentist
if your tongue hurts because of issues with oral hygiene.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
When should I worry about my tongue?
Schedule a visit with a healthcare provider if you have severe pain or symptoms that don’t resolve within a few weeks. Most tongue problems improve over time. Symptoms that don’t improve may signal an underlying condition that requires treatment.
Prevention
How can I reduce my risk of developing tongue problems?
Not all conditions that cause tongue problems are preventable. Still, you can reduce your risk of infection and inflammation by practicing good
oral hygiene
. Brush twice daily and floss once each day. Scrape your tongue to remove bacteria. Get regular
dental cleanings
.
Avoid
smoking
and using tobacco products, which can cause painful ulcers and increase your risk of
oral cancer
.
Additional Common Questions
What does a diseased tongue look like?
Healthy tongues are uniformly pink and covered in tiny bumps. Diseased tongues may be dark red, white, yellow or even black. They may be covered in fuzzy growths instead of bumpy. They may appear smooth instead of bumpy.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Most of the time, you shouldn’t stress over changes in your tongue. Symptoms usually improve on their own in time. If symptoms persist or get worse, schedule a visit with your healthcare provider. Often, a physical exam is all it takes for a diagnosis. Your healthcare provider can recommend treatments based on what’s causing the issues with your tongue.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Find a Primary Care Provider
Schedule an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/14/2023.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.8500
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment