Nonverbal Learning Disability (NVLD/Nonverbal Learning Disorder)
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Nonverbal Learning Disability
Advertisement
Advertisement
Nonverbal Learning Disability
Nonverbal learning disability (NVLD) affects how your child takes in visual and spatial information and figures out what to do in response. Your child may have a hard time with tasks like doing complex math, using maps, interpreting body language and playing sports. Occupational therapy, social skills groups and other resources can help.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Overview
What is nonverbal learning disability?
Nonverbal learning disability (NVLD or NLD) is a condition that affects how your child interprets and uses visual and spatial information. With NVLD, your child may have trouble making sense of physical objects in the world around them or understanding the relationships between objects in a given space. They might also have a hard time picturing concepts in their mind or solving problems that involve mental imagery.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Such tasks require what healthcare providers call visuospatial skills. This is a technical way of saying your child’s brain has to understand whatever they see in a given moment — from a ball coming toward them to a friend’s look of surprise — and know what to do in response.
Depth perception
and hand-eye coordination are specific examples of visuospatial skills.
If your child has NVLD, their brain can’t quite make sense of visuals or recognize how to interact with them. This can lead to challenges in lots of different areas of your child’s life — from school to socializing. But therapies and support can help.
Developmental visuospatial disorder is another name for NVLD. Some researchers believe this name more accurately describes the condition. The term nonverbal learning disorder (rather than “disability”) also refers to this same condition.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the features of nonverbal learning disability?
Visuospatial difficulties (or what providers sometimes call deficits) are the main features of NVLD. But the ability to interact with visuals is central to so many things your child wants or needs to do. These include learning, socializing with peers, playing sports and getting from place to place.
That means the signs you may notice in your child might be all across the board — from trouble with complex math to social difficulties to clumsiness at the playground. Trouble processing visuals in space and time can have a ripple effect and show up in aspects of your child’s life that seem unrelated.
Advertisement
Your child may have difficulty with some of the following tasks:
Tying their shoelaces
Learning to ride a bike
Using scissors to cut out shapes
Doing puzzles
Completing a maze
Throwing or catching a ball
Remembering something they saw or drawing images from memory
Picturing what something looks like from a different angle
Following a map
Doing geometry or making sense of fractions
Interpreting facial expressions or body language
Understanding metaphoric (non-literal) language
Breaking down a project into smaller parts
This list isn’t exhaustive, but it captures some of the features researchers have identified.
Some studies show kids with NVLD typically have average or above-average verbal skills. This means they’re good at speaking and reading. But we need more research to know for sure if this is truly an attribute of NVLD.
What causes nonverbal learning disability?
Researchers don’t know exactly what causes NVLD, but they believe differences in
brain
structure and/or function play a role. This means NVLD is a neurodevelopmental disorder, or a condition that affects how your child’s brain works.
As research continues, we’ll learn more. Some studies involve taking pictures of the brains of people with and without NVLD to look for similarities and differences. Some studies compare people with NVLD with those who have other neurodevelopmental disorders, like
autism
or
ADHD
. Researchers want to learn areas of overlap as well as causes and other aspects unique to NVLD.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is NVLD diagnosed?
Healthcare providers diagnose nonverbal learning disability by talking to you about your child. They’ll ask about areas of difficulty and what you’re observing. They’ll also ask when you first noticed these signs. With your permission, providers may also speak with your child, their teachers or others.
There’s no set criteria for diagnosing NVLD. This is because NVLD isn’t an official diagnosis in the
DSM-5
(the book providers use to diagnose neurodevelopmental and
mental health
disorders). This condition might be included in future editions of the DSM. It takes lots of time and many steps for experts to add a condition to the DSM.
Even though NVLD isn’t yet an official medical diagnosis, providers will decide if your child fits the “NVLD profile.” This means they have the features of the condition and may benefit from resources and support.
Diagnosing co-occurring conditions
Providers may also look for signs of other neurodevelopmental conditions, like autism, specific
learning disorders
or ADHD. This is because some kids with NVLD also have one or more
co-occurring conditions
.
Your child’s provider will tell you exactly how they reach (or rule out) a given diagnosis. Typically, providers observe your child while they play or do other simple tasks. They may also interact with your child — for example, by talking with them or playing a game with them. You’ll be involved every step of the way, and your insights about your child will help guide the process.
Advertisement
Is nonverbal learning disorder on the autism spectrum?
No, NVLD isn’t the same as autism or part of the autism spectrum. NVLD is a separate condition defined by challenges with visual and spatial information. But some
autistic kids
have NVLD.
Management and Treatment
How is NVLD treated?
Healthcare providers tailor treatment to your child’s needs. They may recommend certain therapies, like
occupational therapy
, to help your child manage day-to-day tasks. Social skills groups may help your child navigate peer relationships and make sense of things like facial expressions or body language.
Providers also recommend therapies or treatments to help with any co-occurring conditions. These will depend on your child’s diagnoses and individual needs.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the outlook for children with NVLD?
Your child’s outlook depends on the extent of their visual difficulties and any co-occurring conditions. Therapies and resources are available to help your child manage
brain differences
and make the most of their strengths. Your pediatrician can tell you more about what’s best for your child and what to expect. They can also recommend support communities where you can connect with parents of children with NVLD and/or adults with NVLD.
Nonverbal learning disability (developmental visuospatial disorder) is a growing area of research. We’ll continue to learn more about NVLD and ways to support children and adults with this condition.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I seek medical care for my child?
Call your
pediatrician
any time you have a question or concern about your child’s
development
or any aspect of their well-being. You should also be sure to take your child to all their routine
well-checks
. These are where providers identify potential
developmental delays
or disabilities and can recommend ways to support your child.
What questions should I ask?
You can learn more by asking your pediatrician:
What can you tell me about nonverbal learning disability?
What signs should I look out for in my child?
What’s involved in getting an NVLD diagnosis?
How can I support my child’s needs?
What therapies and resources do you recommend?
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Nonverbal learning disability can affect many aspects of your child’s life, often in ways your child can’t fully describe. It can be hard to know what’s going on inside your child’s head if they shy away from a certain activity or suddenly have a drop in grades.
Child development is complex and dynamic, and there could be lots of reasons for such changes. But if your child seems to have a hard time with visually-oriented tasks, NVLD could be a possible explanation. Your pediatrician can tell you more and help you understand available resources to meet your child’s needs.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
As your child grows, you need healthcare providers by your side to guide you through each step. Cleveland Clinic Children’s is there with care you can trust.
Find a Pediatric Primary Care Provider
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Schedule a Pediatric Primary Care Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 12/04/2024.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Call Appointment Center
866.320.4573
Questions
216.444.2200
Request an Appointment
Contact Us