Fibrous Papule of the Nose: Causes, Treatment & Removal
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Fibrous Papule of the Nose
Advertisement
Advertisement
Fibrous Papule of the Nose
A fibrous papule of the nose is a small, firm bump that doesn’t cause symptoms. It’s harmless and noncancerous. These typically last for months to years. A dermatologist can remove it if you don’t like how it looks.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
A fibrous papule of the nose is a small, firm bump on your skin that’s harmless.
What is a fibrous papule of the nose?
A fibrous papule of the nose is a firm bump that sticks out of the
skin
on or around your nose. This type of growth can measure up to 5 millimeters (mm) in diameter.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
A fibrous papule contains
blood vessels
, connective tissue cells (fibroblasts) and
collagen
.
Healthcare providers may use the term “tumor” to describe a fibrous papule. But it’s not cancerous and it won’t lead to cancer. It isn’t a sign of anything serious. Your provider may also refer to a fibrous papule as a solitary angiofibroma.
A provider can remove a fibrous papule if you don’t like how it looks.
Symptoms and Causes
What does a fibrous papule of the nose look and feel like?
Features of a fibrous papule include a bump on your nose that’s:
Smooth, shiny, firm and dome-shaped
Less than 5 mm
The same color as your natural skin tone or white to red to brown
What are the symptoms of a fibrous papule of the nose?
A fibrous papule of the nose doesn’t cause symptoms (asymptomatic). You may experience mild pain, swelling or bleeding if you scratch or irritate your skin where the papule is.
Sometimes, the appearance of a fibrous papule may make you feel self-conscious, as it’s on a very noticeable part of your body.
Why do people get fibrous papules?
An overgrowth of expanded (dilated) blood vessels, fibroblast cells and collagen causes a fibrous papule on your nose to form. The reason overgrowths happen is unknown.
Who is at risk of a fibrous papule of the nose?
A fibrous papule can affect anyone at any age. It most often affects adolescents during
puberty
.
You may be at a higher risk of developing multiple fibrous papules on your skin if you have one of the following
genetic conditions
:
Advertisement
Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome
Multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 1 (MEN1)
Tuberous sclerosis
Management and Treatment
How do I get rid of fibrous papules of the nose?
Fibrous papules are benign (noncancerous) and harmless, so they don’t need treatment.
But if you don’t like how a fibrous papule of the nose looks, you can talk to your healthcare provider about getting it removed. Fibrous papule removal may include:
Removal by biopsy
. Your provider will take off the entire papule to perform a diagnostic test.
Excision
. Your provider will cut the papule off your skin with a scalpel.
Cryotherapy
. Your provider will use extremely cold temperatures to freeze the papule off.
Laser or
light therapy
. Your provider will use medical-grade lasers or lights to remove the papule.
Electrosurgery
. Using electric currents, your provider will cut the papule from your skin.
Usually, after you have a fibrous papule removed, it won’t return. They may come back if you have an underlying condition that causes them as a symptom.
Will salicylic acid remove a fibrous papule?
No.
Salicylic acid
isn’t an effective way to remove a fibrous papule. A fibrous papule isn’t the same as a
pimple
that you might use salicylic acid to clear up. The components of a fibrous papule are different from those of a pimple. This makes the salicylic acid ineffective.
Talk to a healthcare provider or a dermatologist if you’re interested in getting clearer skin.
Can I remove a fibrous papule of the nose at home?
No. You should see a healthcare provider if you want to remove a fibrous papule. If you attempt to remove it, you may risk
infection
or
scarring
. The papule may also grow back if it isn’t properly removed.
What you can do at home is take care of your skin by following a
daily skin care routine
. This could involve using a cleanser to clean your skin and a moisturizer to prevent dry skin. If you’re unsure what skin care products to use, speak with a dermatologist.
Do fibrous papules of the nose go away on their own?
It’s common for papules to reduce in size or go away on their own without treatment. This won’t happen overnight and it could take several months to years. If you want your papule removed sooner, talk to a healthcare provider.
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have a fibrous papule of the nose?
A fibrous papule of the nose is harmless. It won’t
become cancerous
. It doesn’t affect your physical health. But the appearance of a fibrous papule may affect how you feel about the way you look, including your mental health, self-esteem and self-confidence.
Sometimes, fibrous papules go away on their own. Or you can talk to a healthcare provider about removing it if you don’t like how it looks. It isn’t common for papules to return after removal.
Advertisement
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Visit a healthcare provider if you notice changes to your skin. Your doctor will check to make sure changes aren’t concerning skin cancer.
Let them know if you have a papule you want removed. The reason why you want it removed may be a personal decision, but make sure it’s your decision and not influenced by someone else’s opinion of you.
Fibrous papules are asymptomatic. If you feel any symptoms like pain or swelling, visit a provider.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?
What type of removal do you recommend?
Is this papule benign?
What type of skin care products should I use?
Are there skin care instructions that I need to follow after papule removal?
Additional Common Questions
What is the difference between basal cell carcinoma and fibrous papules of the nose?
A fibrous papule of the nose can look similar to
basal cell carcinoma
. The main difference is that a fibrous papule isn’t cancerous (it’s benign) and basal cell carcinoma is a type of skin cancer that will require treatment.
Both conditions can cause a firm bump on your skin. You’ll experience symptoms with basal cell carcinoma, like itchy skin, a bump that keeps growing or skin sores. You won’t have any symptoms other than a papule on your nose with a fibrous papule.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
You may wonder why you have a bump on your nose that isn’t going away. A fibrous papule isn’t the same as acne, so it won’t resolve with the same at-home treatments. Your nose is a very prominent feature of your face, so you may not like the way this bump looks on your skin. A healthcare provider can remove this papule for you.
Advertisement
But don’t worry, it’s harmless. You don’t need to have a provider remove a fibrous papule unless you don’t like how it looks. Let your provider know if you have any questions about how to keep your skin clear.
Advertisement
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/16/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.5725
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment