Aneurysmal Bone Cyst (ABC): What It Is, Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Aneurysmal Bone Cyst (ABC)
Advertisement
Advertisement
Aneurysmal Bone Cyst (ABC)
Aneurysmal bone cysts (ABCs) are rare, noncancerous bone tumors that can develop in the long bones of your arms and legs and your spine. The tumor may look like a lump. This condition typically affects children and young adults aged 20 and younger. The tumors can grow quickly and become large. Treatment includes surgery to remove the tumor.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is an Aneurysmal Bone Cyst?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is an Aneurysmal Bone Cyst?
Aneurysmal bone cysts are benign (noncancerous) tumors filled with blood.
An aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) is a
benign (noncancerous) tumor
in your
bones
. The tumor contains tiny cysts filled with blood. Aneurysmal (pronounced “an-yuh-riz-mahl”) refers to a bulge in your blood vessel wall. Cyst refers to fluid-filled cavities.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Aneurysmal bone cysts are rare. They make up just a small percentage of all bone tumors, which are rare themselves. The condition usually affects children and young adults under 20.
The tumors can develop in any bone. But the most common locations are in your:
Femur
(thighbone)
Tibia
(shin bone)
Humerus
(upper arm bone)
Vertebrae (bones) in your
spine
Bones in your
pelvis
Types of aneurysmal bone cysts
There are two types of aneurysmal bone cysts: primary and secondary. A primary cyst develops on its own. A secondary cyst is when you have a different type of bone tumor that leads to an aneurysmal bone cyst.
Bone conditions and
bone cancer
that can cause secondary aneurysmal bone cysts include:
Fibrous dysplasia
Giant cell tumor
Osteoblastoma
Chondrosarcoma
Osteosarcoma
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of aneurysmal bone cysts
Common symptoms are changes in your arm, leg, pelvis or spine. Those changes may include:
A lump that you can see and feel.
Pain that may get worse very quickly.
Swelling around the lump.
An ABC on your spine that presses on your spinal
nerves
may cause:
Numbness
Paresthesia
(tingling sensation)
Muscle weakness
Paralysis
Aneurysmal bone cyst causes
Experts don’t know the exact cause. Possible causes could be:
Issues with
blood vessels
in your bones
Variations
in the genes that control how your cells grow and divide
Advertisement
Complications of aneurysmal bone cysts
The condition may keep your child’s bones from growing as they should. That may mean your child’s arm or leg bones may be shorter than their other arm or leg.
An aneurysmal bone cyst can cause a
bone fracture
if the tumor grows large enough to weaken your bones.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose aneurysmal bone cysts
A healthcare provider will do a
physical examination
. They’ll examine any noticeable lumps on your bones. They may do imaging tests like:
Bone scans
CT scans
MRI scans
X-rays
Your provider may do a
biopsy
to get tissue samples from the tumor. A medical
pathologist
will look at the tissue under a microscope. They’ll check for signs that the tumor is cancerous.
Management and Treatment
Treatment for aneurysmal bone cysts
The most common treatment is curettage. In curettage, an
orthopaedic surgeon
makes an incision in the area where the tumor is located. They open the tumor and remove the cysts and the lining of the tumor. They may use
bone graft
from a donor or another area of your body to refill the area where the tumor was.
Nonsurgical treatments include:
Arterial
embolization
to block the blood vessels that feed the tumor
Doxycycline
injection to shrink the tumor and keep it from growing
Medications to strengthen your bones, like
denosumab
(Prolia®)
Radiation therapy
to destroy tumor cells
Sclerotherapy
(injected medication) that makes the tumor collapse
ABC recovery time
Recovery time for you or your child will depend on the treatment your provider uses. For example, it may take three to six months for your bone to heal after curettage. Ask your provider what you can expect as you or your child recover from surgery.
When should I see my healthcare provider?
An aneurysmal bone cyst can come back (recur) after treatment. You should contact your provider if you notice changes like a new lump or pain in the area where you had treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What is the prognosis for people with aneurysmal bone cyst?
Aneurysmal bone cysts are highly treatable. But they come back in 1 in 5 people. Recurrence is most common within the first year after treatment.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Lumps are common. You or your child can get one from bumping into a door or running into any hard object. But a lump that doesn’t go away and gets bigger may be a symptom of an aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC). This is a rare disease that affects kids and young adults. You may be relieved to learn that an ABC isn’t a type of bone cancer. But the condition can lead to serious issues like a broken bone. Talk to a healthcare provider if you or your child have a lump that lingers or grows.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
From sudden injuries to chronic conditions, Cleveland Clinic’s orthopaedic providers can guide you through testing, treatment and beyond.
Get Orthopaedic Care
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/20/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Appointments
216.444.2606
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment