Blood In Urine (Hematuria): Causes, Diagnosis & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Hematuria
Advertisement
Advertisement
Hematuria
Many things can cause blood in your urine, including urinary tract infections, vigorous exercise and chronic kidney disease. But you shouldn’t ignore it. Healthcare providers can diagnose the cause and recommend the best treatment.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood in a Child's Urine Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
Overview
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
Prevention
Living With
Additional Common Questions
Overview
Microscopic hematuria can only be seen with a microscope. Gross hematuria is obvious by the red color of your pee.
What is blood in urine (hematuria)?
Hematuria (hee-muh-TOOR-ee-uh) is the medical name for the presence of
blood
cells in your urine (pee).
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
It’s pretty common for blood to be in your pee. But you may not even know it because it doesn’t always turn your pee pink or red. Sometimes, there’s only a small amount of blood in your pee that you can’t see — healthcare providers discover it during a urine test.
But if you notice your pee looks pink or red or you have other hematuria symptoms, it might be a sign that something is wrong. You should reach out to a healthcare provider.
What are the types of hematuria?
Healthcare providers label blood in pee as:
Gross hematuria
. This is when there’s enough blood in your pee that it’s visible to the naked eye. It can turn toilet water a pale pink or bright red color.
Microscopic hematuria
. If you have microscopic hematuria (
microhematuria
), you have blood in your pee, but the amount is too small for you to see with your naked eye. You need a microscope to see it.
Dipstick hematuria
. Dipstick hematuria occurs when oxidation (exposure to oxygen) of a dipstick causes a color change. Dipsticks are thin strips of plastic or paper with patches of chemicals. The chemicals change colors if you have certain substances in your pee.
Dipstick tests have relatively high false-positive rates. A false-positive rate is when the dipstick test says you have blood in your pee, but you don’t. Providers need to confirm dipstick hematuria with a microscopic
urinalysis
.
Advertisement
How common is blood in urine?
Hematuria is common. Medical experts estimate that more than 20% of people who receive an evaluation from a
urologist
have blood in their pee. Microscopic hematuria affects an estimated 2% to 31% of people. Microscopic hematuria is more common than gross hematuria.
Symptoms and Causes
What are the signs and symptoms of hematuria?
Many times, there are no symptoms except blood in your pee. When this happens, a healthcare provider may say you’re “asymptomatic.”
If you have other symptoms, they may include:
Peeing more than usual (
frequent urination
)
Pain or burning when you pee (
dysuria
)
A strong need to pee right away (
urinary urgency
)
You may have other associated symptoms, too, including:
Nausea
and
vomiting
Fever
Chills
Lower back pain
Abdominal pain
Pain on either side of your lower back, just above your hips (
flank pain
)
Having blood in your pee doesn’t always mean you have a condition. But it can be an important warning sign that something is wrong with your body. Don’t ignore it. Contact a healthcare provider as soon as you find blood in your pee.
What is the main cause of hematuria?
There are many different causes of hematuria. Some conditions are more serious than others. Serious conditions may include:
Urinary stone disease
. This term describes masses of minerals or other substances that form in your
urinary system
. This includes
kidney stones
,
bladder stones
and
ureteral stones
.
Urinary tract infection
(UTI)
. This is a
bacterial infection
in any part of your urinary system.
Kidney infection
(pyelonephritis)
. This is an infection that spreads to your
kidney(s)
.
Bladder inflammation
(cystitis)
. This is when
inflammation
affects your
urinary bladder
. It may have infectious or noninfectious causes.
Certain
cancer
s can also cause blood to appear in your pee.
Other conditions that may lead to blood in your pee include:
Enlarged
prostate
(
benign prostatic hypertrophy
or BPH)
. BPH causes your prostate to grow. Your prostate is a gland that produces
semen
.
Injury to your urinary system
. Examples include blunt trauma (like a fall, automobile collision or sports injury) or a penetrating injury (like a knife wound or gunshot wound).
Menstruation
. You may see blood in your pee when you have your period.
Endometriosis
. This causes tissue that’s similar to your
uterine
lining (where blood and tissue come from during menstruation) to grow outside of your uterus.
Chronic kidney disease
(CKD)
. CKD affects how well your kidneys work. It’s a long-term (chronic) condition.
Sickle cell disease
. This is a condition you inherit from your biological parents that affects your
red blood cells
.
What cancers cause hematuria?
Different types of cancer can cause blood to appear in your pee. These include:
Bladder cancer
Kidney cancer
Ureteral cancer
Urethral cancer
Prostate cancer
Is hematuria contagious?
No, hematuria isn’t contagious. But a common cause of hematuria is UTIs. Healthcare providers don’t consider UTIs contagious. But sometimes, you can spread the
bacteria
that cause UTIs to a partner during sexual intercourse.
Advertisement
Who does hematuria affect?
Anyone of any age can have blood in their pee. But you may be more likely to have hematuria if you:
Have a UTI
Have a
congenital urinary abnormality
Are 50 or older
Have a biological family history of conditions that affect your urinary system, such as CKD or kidney stones
Take certain medications, including
anticoagulants
(blood thinners),
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) and
antibiotics
Smoke
Don’t drink enough fluids (
dehydration
)
Encounter certain chemicals and/or radiation at work
Work around metals, fumes, dyes or rubbers
Play contact sports, including hockey, soccer, boxing and football
Run long distances or exercise a lot (exercise-induced hematuria)
Have vigorous sexual intercourse
What complications are related to blood in urine?
You may experience side effects of hematuria treatments, including medications and procedures. They vary by treatment, and a healthcare provider will review any possible side effects with you.
But untreated hematuria can lead to bigger problems, especially if the cause is serious. A provider should treat any condition that causes blood in your pee. Early detection of a serious condition leads to early treatment. Your chances of successful treatment increase the sooner you get treatment.
Diagnosis and Tests
How is hematuria diagnosed?
A healthcare provider will review your medical history, ask you questions about any other symptoms and perform a
physical examination
, which may include a
pelvic exam
or
digital rectal exam
. They may also recommend additional tests to help confirm a hematuria diagnosis.
Advertisement
What tests will be done to diagnose hematuria?
A healthcare provider may recommend the following tests to help diagnose hematuria:
Urinalysis
. You pee in a special cup and a provider looks at its appearance and checks it for signs of conditions that cause hematuria.
Urine culture
. You pee in a special cup and a provider checks it for signs of infection.
Urine cytology
. You pee in a special cup and a provider checks for any abnormal-appearing cells.
Cystoscopy
. A provider inserts a small camera (cystoscope) through your
urethra
into your bladder to examine your urethra and bladder.
Imaging tests
. Noninvasive imaging tests — including an
ultrasound
,
CT scan
and
MRI
— produce images of your urinary system and other organs and structures.
Management and Treatment
What is the best treatment for hematuria?
Hematuria treatment depends on its cause. A healthcare provider will use the information they collect from your medical history, physical exam and any test results to find the best treatment.
Medications to treat causes of blood in urine
Depending on the cause, a healthcare provider may recommend the following medications to treat hematuria:
Cause
Medication
Infections
Antibiotics can treat an infection.
Enlarged prostate
Providers typically use alpha-blockers and 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors, including finasteride (Proscar®) and dutasteride (Avodart®).
Cancer
Treatment will be appropriate to the staging and your goals of care. It may include surveillance, surgery, radiation therapy, immunotherapy, chemotherapy, hormone therapy or a combination of these options.
Sickle Cell Disease
A provider may prescribe disease-modifying agents like hydroxyurea, pain medications, antibiotics and drugs that prevent blood cells from dying or forming into sickles.
Chronic kidney disease
A provider may prescribe different types of medications, including diuretics, blood pressure medication (antihyperintensives), cholesterol-lowering drugs (antihyperlipidemics) and erythropoietin to build red blood cells if you have anemia.
Endometriosis
Hormone-related medications, including hormonal birth control, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonists or agonists and danazol (Danocrine®).
Cause
Infections
Medication
Antibiotics can treat an infection.
Enlarged prostate
Medication
Providers typically use alpha-blockers and 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors, including finasteride (Proscar®) and dutasteride (Avodart®).
Cancer
Medication
Treatment will be appropriate to the staging and your goals of care. It may include surveillance, surgery, radiation therapy, immunotherapy, chemotherapy, hormone therapy or a combination of these options.
Sickle Cell Disease
Medication
A provider may prescribe disease-modifying agents like hydroxyurea, pain medications, antibiotics and drugs that prevent blood cells from dying or forming into sickles.
Chronic kidney disease
Medication
A provider may prescribe different types of medications, including diuretics, blood pressure medication (antihyperintensives), cholesterol-lowering drugs (antihyperlipidemics) and erythropoietin to build red blood cells if you have anemia.
Endometriosis
Medication
Hormone-related medications, including hormonal birth control, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonists or agonists and danazol (Danocrine®).
Are there other ways to treat causes of blood in urine?
It depends on the cause of hematuria.
When an enlarged prostate causes blood in your pee and medications don’t treat it, a healthcare provider may suggest surgery. There are many different types of surgery to remove prostate tissue and stop prostate bleeding. A healthcare provider will review your options.
Advertisement
For cancers, you may need multidisciplinary care. Multidisciplinary care is when you have a group of healthcare providers who specialize in different diseases or conditions that affect different parts of your body. This may include:
Urologists or urologic
oncologists
Medical oncologists
Radiation oncologists
Nephrologists
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood in a Child's Urine Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
Is hematuria life-threatening?
Hematuria usually isn’t life-threatening. But sometimes, the cause of hematuria is serious. If you notice blood in your pee, schedule a visit with a healthcare provider so they can determine the cause.
What can I expect if I have hematuria?
Your outlook depends on what’s causing hematuria. But in general, your outlook is good. Hematuria may go away without treatment. Or it may go away pretty easily with treatment. A healthcare provider will tell you what to expect according to your specific cause.
Prevention
Can hematuria be prevented?
You can’t prevent all causes of hematuria. But you can help prevent some causes by:
Drinking plenty of water every day
Peeing before and after having sexual intercourse
Always wiping your
anus
(butthole) from front to back after you poop, if you have a
vagina
Maintaining a weight that’s healthy for you
Limiting foods that are high in sugar, sodium (salt) and animal proteins
Quitting smoking
Limiting your exposure to hazardous materials or chemicals
Can drinking water stop blood in urine?
You may decrease your chances of certain conditions that cause hematuria by drinking enough fluids — preferably, water. Water is good for your urinary system and your body.
If you don’t drink enough water, your pee may be darker in color. If you’re extremely dehydrated, you could possibly have bloody pee.
Living With
When should I see a healthcare provider?
Contact a healthcare provider if the water in your toilet looks pink or red after you pee.
But some types of hematuria aren’t obvious. In those cases, it’s important to talk to a healthcare provider if you have symptoms that relate to hematuria, like:
Changes to your peeing habits
Signs of infection
Pain in your abdomen, lower back or flanks
If any of your symptoms are severe, you should visit
urgent care
.
What questions should I ask a healthcare provider?
You may wish to ask a healthcare provider the following questions:
What type of hematuria do I have?
What tests do you recommend to diagnose hematuria?
What’s causing blood in my pee?
Do I need treatment?
If I need treatment, what do you recommend?
What should I do if I get blood in my pee again?
Additional Common Questions
Can foods or drinks cause hematuria?
No, foods and drinks can’t cause hematuria. But certain foods can make you think you’re peeing blood because your pee looks pink, red or dark brown. These include:
Beets
Rhubarb
Blackberries
Fava beans
A note from Cleveland Clinic
There’s no need to panic if you notice your pee is pink or red. You may have blood in your pee if you have your period. Or maybe you recently ate a lot of beets. But it’s still a good idea to give a healthcare provider a call. It’s better to catch any cause of hematuria early, even if the cause isn’t serious. A provider will work with you to find out what’s causing blood in your pee and recommend the best possible treatment.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
When you see blood in your child’s urine, it’s time to call the doctor. Cleveland Clinic’s pediatric hematuria experts are here to help.
Blood in a Child's Urine Treatment
Find a Pediatric Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/14/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Urology
216.444.5600
Kidney Medicine
216.444.6771
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment