Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcoma: Symptoms & Treatment
Home
/
Health Library
/
Diseases & Conditions
/
Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcoma
Advertisement
Advertisement
Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcoma
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) is a rare type of soft tissue cancer that spreads quickly. Symptoms aren’t always obvious, but they may include a lump, pain, swelling or unexplained weight loss. Surgery is the first line of defense. But you may also need other cancer treatments like chemotherapy. Early detection and treatment are key.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Contents
Arrow Down
What Is Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcoma?
Symptoms and Causes
Diagnosis and Tests
Management and Treatment
Outlook / Prognosis
What Is Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcoma?
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) is a type of
soft tissue sarcoma
. It usually starts in the soft tissues of your arms or legs, or the back part of your belly (retroperitoneum). Rarely, UPS can affect your
bones
. It’s typically aggressive, so it can spread to other areas of your body — usually to your
lungs
or
lymph nodes
.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
Policy
The original name for UPS was malignant fibrous histiocytoma. That’s because researchers thought this type of cancer formed in specialized immune cells called histiocytes. But later research suggested that it likely starts in mesenchymal cells that form connective tissue. The term “undifferentiated” refers to the fact that the cancer cells are very disorganized.
“Pleomorphic” means that the cells vary in size, shape or nuclei (the structure in a cell that contains chromosomes). In other words, UPS cells grow very haphazardly.
Overall, UPS is rare, affecting
fewer than 5,000 people
in the U.S. But it’s one of the three most common soft tissue sarcomas, along with
liposarcoma
and
leiomyosarcoma
.
Symptoms and Causes
Symptoms of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma symptoms might include:
A growing lump
A painless
lump
or mass that may or may not move when you touch it
Numbness
or tingling if a lump or mass is pushing on or arising from a nerve
Swelling
in an arm or leg
UPS doesn’t always cause noticeable symptoms. It’s most often painless, doesn’t have any skin changes over the top and doesn’t typically cause symptoms like fever, weight loss or general malaise.
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma causes
Experts aren’t sure what causes undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. They know it happens when healthy cells develop
changes in their DNA
, but they don’t know what causes those changes.
Advertisement
Risk factors
A risk factor is something that increases your chances of getting a condition. Known risk factors for UPS include:
Being
male
(white males have the highest risk)
Being over the age of 50
Certain diseases like
neurofibromatosis
or
Paget’s disease of bone
Certain
genetic disorders
like
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Exposure to certain chemicals like
arsenic
or vinyl chloride
History of
radiation therapy
to the affected area
Occupational radiation exposure
Most people who develop UPS don’t have any known risk factors.
Diagnosis and Tests
How doctors diagnose undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma
Your healthcare provider will start by reviewing your health and biological family history. They’ll also ask questions about your symptoms, like when they started and whether they’ve changed over time. They’ll also do:
A
physical exam
. They’ll check the size of the lump and feel its location and how hard it is.
Imaging tests
. These typically include
X-rays
, an
ultrasound
and/or an
MRI
.
Biopsy
. Your provider will take a small sample of tissue and send it to a
pathologist
for testing. This involves looking at the sample under a microscope.
Management and Treatment
How is UPS treated?
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma treatment depends on the size of the
tumor
and whether the cancer has spread. The main treatment for early-stage UPS is typically surgery to remove the growth, most often combined with radiation therapy. But you might need additional
cancer treatments
, too.
Surgery
Surgery for undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma involves removing the tumor. The goal is to remove the entire sarcoma and a little bit of the healthy tissue around it (known as “the margin”). Your surgeon does this to improve the chances of removing all the cancer cells. If cancer cells are at the edge of the removed tumor, there’s a risk that some may be left in your body as well.
If UPS affects your arms or legs, your surgeon will try to remove the cancer and preserve as much function as possible. But in some cases,
amputation
may be necessary. Ask your
oncologist
what type of treatment they recommend for your situation.
Additional cancer treatments
Oncologists may also use additional treatments before or after surgery. These treatments rarely shrink the tumor, but they can help make the tumors safer to remove at surgery or treat any remaining cancer cells after surgery:
Chemotherapy
Immunotherapy
Radiation therapy
Your treatment plan is unique to you. Ask your oncologist about your options. You’ll likely have a multidisciplinary team, including a surgeon, a
radiation oncologist
and a medical oncologist. Each specialist has a specific role, but they all work together to treat you. They can help you determine what’s best in your situation.
Advertisement
When should I see my healthcare provider?
You should see a healthcare provider right away any time you notice a growing lump or mass — especially if it occurs with pain, swelling or limited range of motion.
If you already know you have UPS, tell your oncologist right away if you develop any new or worsening symptoms.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Outlook / Prognosis
What can I expect if I have undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma?
Life expectancy varies depending on the size and stage of the
sarcoma
. The five-year survival rate for high-grade UPS is about
60%
. That means that around 60% of people diagnosed with this condition are still alive five years later. The 10-year survival rate is
48%
.
Survival rates
are just estimates. They can’t tell you how long you’ll live or what kind of treatment will work for you. To learn more about UPS survival rates and how they affect you, talk to your oncology team.
Is undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma curable?
It’s possible to
cure
UPS, especially during the early stages. There still may be treatment options in later stages, which can prolong your quality of life. Like any type of
cancer
, early detection and treatment increase your chances for successful outcomes.
A note from Cleveland Clinic
A cancer diagnosis can take a toll on every area of your life. When it’s a rare cancer, like undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS), you might feel especially alone, like no one else really understands what you’re going through. It might help to join a support group. Talking with others who are going through similar experiences can help you process your emotions. Your healthcare team is also there to help. They can discuss treatment options with you and give you resources to empower you and inform your healthcare decisions.
Advertisement
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Sarcomas are a rare form of cancer affecting your bones and soft tissues. Our specialists use the latest treatments to care for these types of tumors.
Sarcoma Treatment
Find a Doctor and Specialists
Make an Appointment
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 02/24/2025.
Learn more about the
Health Library
and our
editorial process
.
References
Advertisement
Advertisement
Ad
Cancer Answer Line
866.223.8100
Appointments & Locations
Request an Appointment
Search Clinical Trials