Solriamfetol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Solriamfetol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619040.html
Solriamfetol
pronounced as (sol" ri am' fe tol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Solriamfetol is used to treat excessive daytime sleepiness caused by narcolepsy (a condition that causes excessive daytime sleepiness). Solriamfetol is also used along with breathing devices or other treatments to prevent excessive daytime sleepiness caused by obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS; a sleep disorder in which the patient briefly stops breathing or breathes shallowly many times during sleep and therefore doesn't get enough restful sleep). Solriamfetol is in a class of medications called wakefulness promoting agents. It works by increasing the amounts of certain natural substances in the brain that controls sleep and wakefulness.
How should this medicine be used?
Solriamfetol comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food as soon as you wake up in the morning. Take solriamfetol at the same time every day. Do not take solriamfetol within 9 hours before you plan to go to bed because it may cause difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep. Do not change the time of day that you take solriamfetol without talking to your doctor. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take solriamfetol exactly as directed.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of solriamfetol and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 3 days.
Solriamfetol may be habit-forming. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or take it for a longer period of time than prescribed by your doctor.
Solriamfetol may decrease your sleepiness, but it will not cure your sleep disorder. Continue to take solriamfetol even if you feel well-rested. Do not stop taking solriamfetol without talking to your doctor.
Solriamfetol should not be used in place of getting enough sleep. Follow your doctor's advice about good sleep habits. Continue to use any breathing devices or other treatments that your doctor has prescribed to treat your condition, especially if you have OSAHS.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking solriamfetol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to solriamfetol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in solriamfetol tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, including isocarboxazid (Marplan), phenelzine (Nardil), Rasagiline (Azilect), Safinamide (Xadago), selegiline (Emsam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate).
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, use or have ever used street drugs, or have overused prescription medications, especially stimulants. Also tell your doctor if you have ever had high blood pressure; a stroke; high cholesterol; chest pain, an irregular heartbeat, a heart attack, or other heart problems; a mental illness such as depression, bipolar disorder (mood that changes from depressed to abnormally excited), mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood), or psychosis (difficulty thinking clearly, communicating, understanding reality, and behaving appropriately); diabetes, or kidney problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking solriamfetol, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Solriamfetol may cause reduced weight, agitation, and trouble sleeping in breastfed infants, Talk to your doctor about the best way to feed your infant if you are taking solriamfetol.
you should know that solriamfetol may cause an increase in your blood pressure. Your doctor may check your blood pressure before starting treatment and regularly while you are taking this medication.
you should know that solriamfetol may not completely relieve the sleepiness caused by your disorder. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you. If you avoided driving and other dangerous activities because of your sleep disorder, do not start performing these activities again without talking to your doctor even if you feel more alert.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is too late in your waking day (within 9 hours of your planned bedtime), skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. If you take solriamfetol too late in your waking day, you may find it harder to go to sleep. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Solriamfetol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
dizziness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
nausea
diarrhea
constipation
loss of appetite
stomach pain
sweating
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
chest pain
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
shortness of breath
slow or difficult speech
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
changes in vision or blurred vision
increased tiredness
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
frenzied, abnormally excited mood
anxiety
irritability
agitation
aggressive behavior
hallucinating (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
rash or hives
Solriamfetol may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Store solriamfetol in a safe place so that no one else can take it accidentally or on purpose. Keep track of how many tablets are left so you will know if any are missing.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Selling or giving away solriamfetol is against the law. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sunosi
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page