Cefdinir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cefdinir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a698001.html
Cefdinir
pronounced as (sef' di ner)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cefdinir is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria such as bronchitis (infection of the airway tubes leading to the lungs); pneumonia; and infections of the skin, ears, sinuses, throat, and tonsils.. Cefdinir is in a class of medications called cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as cefdinir will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Cefdinir comes as a capsule and suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food every 12 or 24 hours for 5 to 10 days, depending on the condition being treated. Take cefdinir at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take cefdinir exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the suspension well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with cefdinir. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Continue to take cefdinir even if you feel better. If you stop taking cefdinir too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cefdinir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cefdinir or any other cephalosporin antibiotic such as cefaclor , cefadroxil cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefditoren (Spectracef), cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefotetan, cefoxitin (Mefoxin), cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftaroline (Teflaro), ceftazidime (Fortaz, Tazicef, in Avycaz), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Zinacef) or cephalexin (Keflex); penicillin antibiotics; or any other medications. Also tell your doctor if you are allergic to any of the ingredients in cefdinir capsules, or suspension. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking cefdinir. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking antacids containing magnesium or aluminum, iron supplements, or multivitamins that contain iron, take them 2 hours before or 2 hours after cefdinir.
you should know that cefdinir may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking cefdinir. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had gastrointestinal disease (GI; affecting the stomach or intestines), especially colitis (condition that causes swelling in the lining of the colon [large intestine]), . or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking cefdinir, call your doctor.
If you have diabetes, you should know that cefdinir suspension solution contains sucrose (sugar).
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating foods that have had iron added to them, such as iron fortified breakfast cereal, while taking this medication. However, babies may be fed iron fortified infant formula while they are taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cefdinir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting
nausea
stomach pain
diarrhea
headache
vaginal itching
reddish colored stools
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
hives
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips or eyes
difficulty breathing or swallowing
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps, or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
a return of fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the capsules and suspension at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of any unused suspension after 10 days.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
stomach pain
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to cefdinir.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking cefdinir.
If you are diabetic and test your urine for sugar, use Clinistix or TesTape (but not Clinitest) to test your urine while taking this medication. If you test your urine for ketones, you should know that cefdinir may interfere with the results of this type of test. Talk to your doctor about how you should monitor your diabetes while you are taking cefdinir.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable..
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Omnicef
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page