Revakinagene Taroretcel-lwey Implant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Revakinagene Taroretcel-lwey Implant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625063.html
Revakinagene Taroretcel-lwey Implant
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Revakinagene taroretcel-lwey is used to treat idiopathic macular telangiectasia type 2 (MacTel) (an eye disease of the retina). Revakinagene taroretcel-lwey is in a class of medications called gene therapy. It works by providing a protein that helps to protect light-sensing cells (photoreceptors) in the retina.
How should this medicine be used?
Revakinagene taroretcel-lwey comes as an implant to be inserted into the eye by an eye surgeon. It is implanted as a one-time outpatient surgical procedure. If the implant needs to be removed, another surgical procedure will be necessary.
For one week after your procedure to place the implant(s):
avoid heavy lifting (more than 20 pounds [9 kg]),
close your eyes while showering to keep water from getting in your eye(s),
wear glasses or protective eyewear during the day and an eye shield at night.
Your doctor will also prescribe eye drops to use for a month to prevent infection in your eye(s) that received the implant(s).
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving revakinagene taroretcel-lwey,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take before receiving revakinagene taroretcel-lwey implant. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have an infection in or around the eye(s). Your doctor will probably tell you not to receive a revakinagene taroretcel-lwey implant.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
you should know not to drive or use machinery until the eye shield is removed and your doctor confirms your vision is acceptable.
you should know that after the implant is placed, your eyes may have difficulty adapting to dark lighting or nighttime after being in a brightly lit place. Use a flashlight or other lighting devices to help you see in the dark. Wearing sunglasses may help to transition from bright light to dark surroundings.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Revakinagene taroretcel-lwey may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms, or those in the SPECIAL PRECAUTINS section, are severe or do not go away:
pain, discomfort, irritation, redness, dryness in the eye
seeing black spots (floaters) in your vision
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
flashing lights, sensitivity to light
loss of vision or range of vision
worsening eye pain, redness in the white of the eye, a sudden sensation that something is in the eye, discharge from the eye
Revakinagene taroretcel-lwey implants may cause cataracts. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Revakinagene taroretcel-lwey may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
If you are having Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) after your implant, be sure to tell the healthcare provider that you have a revakinagene taroretcel-lwey implant. Show them the card that you received after your surgery with the details.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Encelto
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page