Bumetanide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bumetanide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a684051.html
Bumetanide
pronounced as (byoo met' a nide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Bumetanide is a strong diuretic ('water pill') and may cause dehydration and electrolyte imbalance. It is important that you take it exactly as told by your doctor. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: rapid, excessive weight loss; decreased urination; dry mouth; thirst; nausea; vomiting; weakness; drowsiness; confusion; muscle pain or cramps; or rapid or pounding heartbeats.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bumetanide is used to treat edema (fluid retention; excess fluid held in body tissues) caused by various medical problems, including heart, kidney, and liver disease. Bumetanide is in a class of medications called diuretics ('water pills'). It works by causing the kidneys to get rid of unneeded water and salt from the body into the urine.
How should this medicine be used?
Bumetanide comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken once a day. When used to treat edema, a second or third dose may be given every 4 to 5 hours depending on the amount of swelling. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take bumetanide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Bumetanide controls edema but does not cure it. Continue to take bumetanide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking bumetanide without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Bumetanide is also sometimes used to treat high blood pressure. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medicine is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking bumetanide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bumetanide, sulfonamide medications, any other medications, or any ingredients in bumetanide tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the patient information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking bumetanide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have kidney disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take bumetanide.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, or heart, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. Do not breast-feed while taking this medicine. If you become pregnant while taking bumetanide, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking bumetanide.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
If your doctor prescribes a low-salt or low-sodium diet, or to eat or drink increased amounts of potassium-rich foods (e.g., bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice) in your diet, follow these instructions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
frequent urination
dizziness
upset stomach
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you have any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment::
ringing in ears
loss of hearing
unusual bleeding or bruising
severe rash with peeling skin
difficulty breathing or swallowing
hives
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
weakness
dizziness
confusion
extreme tiredness
loss of appetite
vomiting
stomach cramps
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking bumetanide.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bumex
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
10/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page