Naldemedine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Naldemedine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617031.html
Naldemedine
pronounced as (nal dem' e deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Naldemedine is used to treat constipation caused by opioid (narcotic) pain medications in adults with chronic (ongoing) pain that is not caused by cancer. Naldemedine is in a class of medications called peripherally acting mu-opioid receptor antagonists. It works by protecting the bowel from the effects of opioid (narcotic) medications.
How should this medicine be used?
Naldemedine comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day, with or without food. Take naldemedine at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take naldemedine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Tell your doctor if you stop taking opioid medications. If you stop taking opioid medications, you should stop taking naldemedine as well.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with naldemedine and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking naldemedine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to naldemedine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in naldemedine tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any of the following: amiodarone (Cordarone); aprepitant (Emend); atazanavir (Reyataz, in Evotaz); captopril (Capoten, in Capozide); carbamazepine (Tegretol); clarithromycin (Biaxin, in PrevPac); cyclosporine (Gengraf, Neoral, Sandimmune); diltiazem (Cardizem, Dilacor, Tiazac); efavirenz (in Atripla, Sustiva); erythromycin (E.E.S., E-Mycin, Erythrocin); fluconazole (Diflucan); itraconazole (Onmel, Sporonax); ketoconazole (Nizoral); other opioid antagonists such as methylnaltrexone (Relistor), naloxegol (Movantik), naloxone (Evzio, in Bunavail, in Suboxone, in Zubsolv), or naltrexone (Revia, in Contrave, in Embeda, Vivitrol); phenytoin (Dilantin, Phenytek); quinidine; rifampin (Rifadin, in Rifamate, Rifater, Rimactane); ritonavir (Norvir, in Kaletra, in Technivie, in Viekira); saquinavir (Invirase): or verapamil (Calan, Covera, Isoptin, Verelan). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects. Many other medications may also interact with naldemedine, so be sure to tell your doctor about all the medications you are taking, even those that do not appear on this list.
tell your doctor what herbal products you are taking, especially quercetin and St. John's wort.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a gastrointestinal obstruction (a blockage in your bowel). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take naldemedine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had stomach or bowel problems including stomach ulcer (sores in the lining of the stomach), cancer of the stomach or bowel, Crohn's disease (a condition in which the body attacks the lining of the digestive tract, causing pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fever), diverticulitis (small pouches in the lining of the large intestine that can become inflamed), or Ogilvie's syndrome (a condition in which there is a bulge in the bowel), or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking naldemedine, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Naldemedine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting
diarrhea
nausea
stomach pain
sweating
chills
feeling cold
flushing
fever
watery eyes
runny nose
sneezing
anxiety
irritability
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
fast heartbeat
yawning
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking naldemedine and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
severe, persistent, or worsening stomach pain
difficulty breathing
rash
Naldemedine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Store naldemedine in a safe place so that no one else can take it accidentally or on purpose. Keep track of how many tablets are left so you will know if any are missing.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
chills
sweating
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
dizziness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
This prescription is not refillable. Be sure to schedule appointments with your doctor on a regular basis so that you do not run out of medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Symproic
®
Other names
Naldemedine Tosylate
Last Revised -
07/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page