Elafibranor: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Elafibranor
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624039.html
Elafibranor
pronounced as (el″ a fib′ ra nor)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Elafibranor is used alone or in combination with ursodiol to treat primary biliary cholangitis (PBC; a type of liver disease that destroys bile ducts, which allows bile to stay in the liver and cause damage) in people who cannot take ursodiol or in people who were not treated successfully with ursodiol alone. Elafibranor is in a class of medications called peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) agonists. It works by decreasing the production of bile acids and increasing movement of bile acids out of the liver, resulting in decreased toxic levels of bile acids that accumulate in the liver.
How should this medicine be used?
Elafibranor comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food. Take elafibranor at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take elafibranor exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with elafibranor. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking elafibranor,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to elafibranor, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in elafibranor tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking a bile acid resin such as cholestyramine, colesevelam, or colestipol, take it at least 4 hours after or 4 hours before you take elafibranor.
tell your doctor if you have cirrhosis of the liver. Your doctor may tell you not to take elafibranor.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had osteoporosis (a condition in which the bones become thin and weak and break easily), muscle aches or weakness, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You will need to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment with elafibranor. Elafibranor may interfere with the action of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, or injections), so you should not use these as your only method of birth control during your treatment. You must use a non-hormonal birth control such as a barrier method (device that blocks sperm from entering the uterus such as a condom or a diaphragm) during your treatment and for 3 weeks after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use. If you become pregnant, call your doctor immediately. Elafibranor may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while you are taking elafibranor and for 3 weeks after the final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Elafibranor may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
stomach pain
nausea
vomiting
constipation
heartburn
weight loss or gain
dry mouth
joint pain
fever and chills
weakness
lightheadedness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms,,call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
new or worsening fatigue; loss of appetite; or swelling of legs of feet
swelling in and around the stomach area; black, tarry, or bloody stools; coughing up or vomiting blood; confusion, slurred speech, anxiety, mood swings, or changes in personality
rash; itching; swelling of the face, eyes, mouth, throat, tongue, or lips; or difficulty breathing or swallowing
dark-colored urine; unexplained muscle pain, tenderness, or weakness; or tiredness
fracture of the bone or severe bone pain
Taking elafibranor may increase the risk that you will experience a bone fracture. Talk to your doctor about the risk of taking this medication and about ways to keep your bones healthy during your treatment.
Elafibranor may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before starting therapy and regularly during therapy to check your body's response to elafibranor. Your doctor will also check you for muscle weakness or pain before starting therapy and regularly during therapy.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Iqirvo
®
Last Revised -
08/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page