Trifarotene Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Trifarotene Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620004.html
Trifarotene Topical
pronounced as (trye far' oh teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Trifarotene is used to treat acne in adults and children 9 years of age and older. Trifarotene is in a class of medications called retinoids. It works by promoting peeling of affected skin areas, unclogging pores, and preventing new pimples from forming under the skin.
How should this medicine be used?
Trifarotene comes as a cream to apply to the skin. It is usually applied once daily at bedtime. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use trifarotene exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Trifarotene cream is only for use on the skin of your face (forehead, nose, each cheek, and chin) or upper trunk (upper back, shoulders and chest). Do not let trifarotene get into your eyes, ears, mouth, corners along your nose, or vaginal area. Do not apply on areas of sunburn, cuts, abrasions, or eczema.
Trifarotene cream comes in a pump bottle with instructions for use. Read these instructions and follow them carefully. Gently clean the affected area and pat it dry before application. Apply a thin layer of the cream to the affected skin on the face, chest, shoulders, or back. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how to use trifarotene cream.
Do not use trifarotene cream along with nonmedicated or medicated cosmetics, abrasive products, or cleansers with alcohol (e.g., shaving lotions, astringents, and perfumes).
Your skin may become dry or irritated during the first 4 weeks of your treatment. If your skin stings, burns, or becomes irritated at any time during your treatment, talk to your doctor. Your doctor may tell you to use a moisturizer to help with dryness or tell you to apply it less often.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using trifarotene,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to trifarotene, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in trifarotene cream. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had eczema (a skin disease).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using trifarotene, call your doctor. If you are breastfeeding while using trifarotene, apply the smallest amount to the skin and do not apply it directly to the nipple and areola (the colored area around each nipple).
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight or ultraviolet light (tanning beds and sunlamps) and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen with an SPF of 15 or higher. Trifarotene may make your skin sensitive to sunlight or ultraviolet light.
do not use hot wax to remove unwanted hair from the area that you are treating with trifarotene during your treatment with this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra cream to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Trifarotene may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dryness, pain, burning, stinging, peeling, redness, itching, or flaky skin at the treatment area
Trifarotene may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows trifarotene, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aklief
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page