Sulfinpyrazone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sulfinpyrazone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682339.html
Sulfinpyrazone
pronounced as (sul fin peer' a zone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Sulfinpyrazone is no longer available in the United States. If you are currently using sulfinpyrazone, you should call your doctor to discuss switching to another treatment.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sulfinpyrazone is used to treat gouty arthritis. It works by lowering the amount of uric acid in your blood, preventing gout attacks. The drug helps prevent attacks but will not treat an attack once it has started.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Sulfinpyrazone comes as a tablet and capsule to take by mouth. Sulfinpyrazone usually is taken twice a day. Take with food or milk. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take sulfinpyrazone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Sulfinpyrazone helps control gout but does not cure it. Continue to take sulfinpyrazone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking sulfinpyrazone without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Sulfinpyrazone may be used after a heart attack. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this drug for your condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking sulfinpyrazone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to sulfinpyrazone or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking sulfinpyrazone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
the following nonprescription products may interact with sulfapyrazone: aspirin; niacin (Nicobid, Slow Niacin). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking sulfinpyrazone. Do not start any of these medications while taking sulfapyrazone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had peptic ulcer disease, kidney disease, or any blood disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking sulfinpyrazone, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking sulfinpyrazone.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug. Also, alcohol may increase the amount of uric acid in your blood. Do not drink alcohol while taking sulfinpyrazone before checking with your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Sulfinpyrazone helps your body get rid of uric acid through your urine. This process may cause kidney stones. To help prevent kidney stones, be sure to drink 10 to 12 glasses (8 ounces [240 milliliters] each) of fluid each day or drink enough water to keep your urine a light yellow color.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sulfinpyrazone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
joint pain, redness, or swelling
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
difficulty breathing
tightness in the chest
skin rash
unusual bruising or bleeding
fever
sore throat
mouth sores
swollen or painful glands
painful urination
change in the amount of urine
lower back or side pain
blood in urine or stool
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to sulfinpyrazone.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Anturane
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page