Nimodipine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nimodipine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a689010.html
Nimodipine
pronounced as (nye moe' di peen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Nimodipine capsules and liquid should be taken by mouth. If you are unconscious or unable to swallow, you may be given the medication through a feeding tube that is placed in your nose or directly into your stomach. Nimodipine should never be given intravenously (into a vein), because this may cause serious or life-threatening side effects or death.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nimodipine is used to decrease brain damage that may be caused by a subarachnoid hemorrhage (bleeding in the space surrounding the brain that occurs when a weakened blood vessel in the brain bursts). Nimodipine is in a class of medications called calcium channel blockers. It works by relaxing blood vessels in the brain to allow more blood to flow to damaged areas.
How should this medicine be used?
Nimodipine comes as a capsule and an oral solution (liquid) to take by mouth or be given through a feeding tube. It is usually taken every 4 hours for 21 days in a row. Treatment with nimodipine should be started as soon as possible, no later than 96 hours after a subarachnoid hemorrhage occurs. Nimodipine should be taken on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before a meal or 2 hours after a meal Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take nimodipine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole with water.
It is important to finish your entire course of treatment with nimodipine. Continue to take nimodipine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking nimodipine without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking nimodipine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nimodipine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in nimodipine capsules or oral solution. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking nimodipine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with nimodipine: cimetidine (Tagamet); Echinacea; St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking nimodipine. Do not start any of these medications while taking nimodipine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking nimodipine, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat grapefruit while you are taking nimodipine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nimodipine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
diarrhea
nausea
muscle pain
rash
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
dizziness
lightheadedness
slow or fast heartbeat
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, or legs
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light and excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will monitor your blood pressure carefully during your treatment with nimodipine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nimotop
®
¶
Nymalize
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
11/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page