Alitretinoin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Alitretinoin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601012.html
Alitretinoin
pronounced as (a li tre' ti noyn)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Alitretinoin is used to treat skin lesions associated with Kaposi's sarcoma. It helps stop the growth of Kaposi's sarcoma cells.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Alitretinoin comes in topical gel. Alitretinoin is usually used twice a day. Your doctor may tell you to use alitretinoin more or less frequently depending on your response to it. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use alitretinoin exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Alitretinoin controls Kaposi's sarcoma lesions but does not cure them. It will take at least 2 weeks of using alitretinoin before a benefit can be seen. For some patients, it may take 8 to 14 weeks to see results. Do not stop using alitretinoin without talking to your doctor. To apply alitretinoin, follow these steps:
Wash your hands and affected skin area thoroughly with mild soap (not medicated or abrasive soap or soap that dries the skin) and water.
Use clean fingertips, a gauze pad, or a cotton swab to apply the medication.
Apply enough gel to cover the lesion with a generous coating.
Apply the medication to the affected skin area only. Do not apply to unaffected areas; do not apply on or near mucus membranes.
Allow the gel to dry for 3-5 minutes before covering with clothing.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using alitretinoin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to alitretinoin, etretinate, isotretinoin, tazarotene, tretinoin, or any other drugs.
Tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using alitretinoin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription product may interact with alitretinoin: insect repellants containing DEET. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are using these products before you start using alitretinoin. Do not start any of these products while using alitretinoin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a type of skin cancer known as T-cell lymphoma.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using alitretinoin, call your doctor immediately. You should not plan to become pregnant while using alitretinoin.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Alitretinoin may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember. However, if it is almost time to apply the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular application schedule.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Alitretinoin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
warmth or slight stinging of the skin
lightening or darkening of the skin
red, scaling skin
rash
swelling, blistering, or crusting of the skin
pain at site of application
itching
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Alitretinoin is for external use only. Do not let alitretinoin get into your eyes, your nostrils, mouth, or any broken skin, and do not swallow it.
Do not apply dressings, bandages, cosmetics, lotions, or other skin medications to the area being treated unless your doctor tells you.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription. Tell your doctor if your skin condition gets worse or does not improve.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Panretin
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page