Aminophylline: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aminophylline
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601015.html
Aminophylline
pronounced as (am in off'' i lin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Aminophylline is used to prevent and treat wheezing, shortness of breath, and difficulty breathing caused by asthma, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and other lung diseases. It relaxes and opens air passages in the lungs, making it easier to breathe.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Aminophylline comes as a tablet and syrup to take by mouth and a suppository to insert rectally. It usually is taken every 6, 8, or 12 hours. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take aminophylline exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Take the tablets or oral liquid with a full glass of water on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal. Do not chew or crush the long-acting tablets; swallow them whole.
Aminophylline controls symptoms of asthma and other lung diseases but does not cure them. Continue to take aminophylline even if you feel well. Do not stop taking aminophylline without talking to your doctor.
To insert a rectal suppository, follow these steps:
Remove the wrapper.
Dip the tip of the suppository in water.
Lie down on your left side and raise your right knee to your chest. (A left-handed person should lie on the right side and raise the left knee.)
Using your finger, insert the suppository into the rectum, about 1/2 to 1 inch (1.25 to 2.5 centimeters) in infants and children and 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) in adults. Hold it in place for a few moments.
Stand up after about 15 minutes. Wash your hands thoroughly and resume your normal activities.
Other uses for this medicine
Aminophylline is sometimes used to treat breathing problems in premature infants. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this drug for your baby's condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking aminophylline,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to aminophylline or any other drugs.
Tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using aminophylline. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription products may interact with aminophylline: ephedrine, epinephrine, phenylephrine, phenylpropanolamine, pseudoephedrine, cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using aminophylline. Do not start any of these medications while using aminophylline without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had seizures, heart disease, an overactive or underactive thyroid gland, high blood pressure, or liver disease or if you have a history of alcohol abuse.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking aminophylline, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Cigarette smoking may affect the effectiveness of aminophylline.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Drinking or eating foods high in caffeine, like coffee, tea, cocoa, and chocolate, may increase the side effects caused by aminophylline. Avoid large amounts of these substances while you are taking aminophylline.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. If you become severely short of breath, call your doctor.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Aminophylline may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away.
upset stomach
stomach pain
diarrhea
headache
restlessness
insomnia
irritability
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
vomiting
increased or rapid heart rate
irregular heartbeat
seizures
skin rash
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to aminophylline.
Do not change from one brand of aminophylline to another without talking to your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aminophyllin
®
Tablets
¶
Phyllocontin
®
Tablets
¶
Somophyllin
®
Oral Solution
¶
Truphylline
®
Suppositories
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page