Fosinopril: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fosinopril
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a692020.html
Fosinopril
pronounced as (foe sin' oh pril)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Do not take fosinopril if you are pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking fosinopril, call your doctor immediately. Fosinopril may harm the fetus.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fosinopril is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat high blood pressure. It is also used in combination with other medications to treat heart failure. Fosinopril is in a class of medications called angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. It works by decreasing certain chemicals that tighten the blood vessels, so blood flows more smoothly and the heart can pump blood more efficiently.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Fosinopril comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once or twice a day. To help you remember to take fosinopril, take it around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take fosinopril exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of fosinopril and gradually increase your dose.
Fosinopril controls high blood pressure and heart failure but does not cure them. Continue to take fosinopril even if you feel well. Do not stop taking fosinopril without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fosinopril,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to fosinopril; other ACE inhibitors such as benazepril (Lotensin, in Lotrel), captopril (Capoten), enalapril (Vasotec, in Vaseretic), lisinopril (in Prinzide, in Zestoretic), moexipril (Univasc, in Uniretic), perindopril (Aceon), quinapril (Accupril, in Accuretic, in Quinaretic), ramipril (Altace), and trandolapril (Mavik); any other medications; or any ingredients in fosinopril tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking valsartan and sacubitril (Entresto) or if you have stopped taking it within the last 36 hours. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take fosinopril, if you are also taking valsartan and sacubitril. Also, tell your doctor if you have diabetes and you are taking aliskiren (Tekturna, in Amturnide, Tekamlo, Tekturna HCT). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take fosinopril if you have diabetes and you are also taking aliskiren.
some medications should not be taken with fosinopril. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with fosinopril. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting fosinopril with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking fosinopril, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
if you are taking antacids (Maalox, Mylanta), take them 2 hours before or after fosinopril.
the following nonprescription products may interact with fosinopril: aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve); potassium supplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking fosinopril. Do not start any of these medications while taking fosinopril without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you are on dialysis and if you have or have ever had lupus; scleroderma (a condition in which extra tissue grows on the skin and some organs); heart failure; high blood pressure; diabetes; or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking fosinopril.
you should know that diarrhea, vomiting, not drinking enough fluids, and sweating a lot can cause a drop in blood pressure, which may cause lightheadedness and fainting.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor before using salt substitutes containing potassium. If your doctor prescribes a low-salt or low-sodium diet, follow these instructions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fosinopril may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
cough
upset stomach
vomiting
diarrhea
headache
excessive tiredness
weakness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty breathing or swallowing
yellowing of the skin or eyes
fever, sore throat, chills, and other signs of infection
lightheadedness
fainting
Fosinopril may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
dizziness
lightheadedness
fainting
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly to determine your response to fosinopril. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to fosinopril.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking fosinopril.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Monopril
®
¶
Brand names of combination products
Monopril
®
HCT (containing Fosinopril, Hydrochlorothiazide)
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page