Thiamine (Vitamin B1) : MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Thiamine (Vitamin B1)
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682586.html
Thiamine (Vitamin B1)
pronounced as (thye' a min)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Why is this medication prescribed?
Thiamine (vitamin B
1
) is used as a dietary supplement when the amount of thiamine in the diet is not enough. People most at risk for thiamine deficiency are older adults, those who are dependent on alcohol, or who have HIV/AIDS, diabetes, malabsorption syndrome (problems absorbing food), or have had bariatric surgery (an operation that helps you lose weight by making changes to your digestive system). Thiamine is used to treat beriberi (tingling and numbness in feet and hands, muscle loss, and poor reflexes caused by a lack of thiamine in the diet) and to treat and prevent Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome (tingling and numbness in hands and feet, memory loss, confusion caused by a lack of thiamine in the diet). Thiamine is in a class of medications called vitamins. It is needed by the body to turn foods into energy, which is important for the growth, development, and function of cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Thiamine comes as a tablet, capsule, and solution (liquid drops) to take by mouth. It is usually taken once to three times a day depending on the preparation, your age, and your medical condition(s). Thiamine is available without a prescription, but your doctor may prescribe thiamine to treat certain conditions. Follow the directions on your product label or doctor's instructions carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take thiamine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than recommended by your doctor.
Thiamine supplements are available alone and in combination with other vitamins.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking thiamine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to thiamine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in thiamine products. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you drink alcohol or if you have problems absorbing food or if you are receiving dialysis treatments.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking thiamine, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Thiamine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if either of these symptoms is severe or does not go away:
flushing
hives
itching
weakness
sweating
nausea
restlessness
Thiamine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this vitamin.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to thiamine.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking thiamine.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about thiamine.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page