Lasmiditan: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lasmiditan
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620015.html
Lasmiditan
pronounced as (las mid' i tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lasmiditan is used to treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe throbbing headaches that sometimes are accompanied by nausea and sensitivity to sound and light). Lasmiditan is in a class of medications called selective serotonin receptor agonists. Lasmiditan may work by stopping pain signals from being sent to the brain and stopping inflammation of the nerves that cause symptoms of migraine. Lasmiditan does not prevent migraine attacks or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Lasmiditan comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken at the first sign of a migraine headache. If your symptoms improve after you take lasmiditan but return within 24 hours, do not take a second tablet. You should not take more than one dose of lasmiditan in a 24-hour period. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take lasmiditan exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you take lasmiditan more often or for longer than the recommended period of time, your headaches may get worse or may occur more frequently. You should not take lasmiditan or any other headache medication for more than 10 days per month. Call your doctor if you need to take lasmiditan to treat more than four headaches in a 1-month period.
Lasmiditan may be habit forming. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or take it for a longer period of time than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking lasmiditan,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lasmiditan, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in lasmiditan tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking. Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: isocarboxazid (Marplan), phenelzine (Nardil), selegiline (Ensam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor what herbal products and nutritional supplements you are taking, especially St. John's wort.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure; slow, weak, or irregular heart beat; or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking lasmiditan, call your doctor.
you should know that lasmiditan may make you drowsy. You should not drive a car or operate machinery for at least 8 hours after you take lasmiditan.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking lasmiditan. Alcohol can make the side effects from lasmiditan worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lasmiditan may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
sleepiness
numbness
tingling feeling
tiredness
nausea
vomiting
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hallucinations (seeing thing or hearing voices that do not exist)
agitation
fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
sweating
trouble walking
tight muscles
sudden, nausea, vomiting. or diarrhea
hives
itching
wheezing or difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes
Lasmiditan may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor may monitor your blood pressure and heart rate during your treatment with lasmiditan.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you take lasmiditan.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Lasmiditan is a controlled substance. Prescriptions may be refilled only a limited number of times; ask your pharmacist if you have any questions.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Reyvow
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page