Erlotinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Erlotinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a605008.html
Erlotinib
pronounced as (er loe' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Erlotinib is used to treat certain types of non-small cell lung cancer that has spread to nearby tissues or to other parts of the body in patients who have already been treated with at least one other chemotherapy medication and have not gotten better. Erlotinib is also used in combination with another medication (gemcitabine [Gemzar]) to treat pancreatic cancer that has spread to nearby tissues or to other parts of the body and cannot be treated with surgery. Erlotinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of an abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps slow or stop the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Erlotinib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken on an empty stomach once a day, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after eating a meal or snack. Take erlotinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take erlotinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may decrease your dose of erlotinib during your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Continue to take erlotinib even if you feel well. Do not stop taking erlotinib without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking erlotinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to erlotinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in erlotinib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking erlotinib. Your doctor may change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking antacids, take them several hours before or several hours after you take erlotinib.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with erlotinib: St. John's wort; proton pump inhibitors such as esomeprazole (Nexium), lansoprazole (Prevacid), omeprazole (Prilosec), and rabeprazole (AcipHex); H2 blockers such as cimetidine (Tagamet), famotidine (Pepcid), nizatidine (Axid), and ranitidine (Zantac). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking erlotinib. Do not start any of these medications while taking erlotinib without discussing with your healthcare provider. ;.
tell your doctor if you are being treated or have recently been treated with chemotherapy or radiation therapy (treatment for cancer that uses waves of high energy particles to kill cancer cells). Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had lung disease or infection, stomach ulcers, diverticular disease (condition in which abnormal pouches form in the large intestine and may become inflamed), or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should not become pregnant while you are taking erlotinib and for at least 1 month after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use. If you become pregnant, call your doctor immediately. Erlotinib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with erlotinib and for up to 2 weeks after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking erlotinib.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Cigarette smoking may decrease the effectiveness of this medication.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear a hat, other protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Choose a sunscreen that has a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15 and contains zinc oxide or titanium dioxide. Exposure to sunlight increases the risk that you will develop a rash during your treatment with erlotinib.
you should know that erlotinib may cause rashes and other skin problems. To protect your skin, use a mild alcohol-free moisturizer, wash your skin with mild soap, and remove cosmetics with a mild cleanser.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Avoid eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
To prevent diarrhea that may be caused by erlotinib, drink small sips of a liquid such as a sugar-free sports drink often throughout the day, eat mild foods such as crackers and toast, and avoid spicy foods.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the next dose at your regular time the next day. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Erlotinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
loss of appetite
nausea
vomiting
heartburn
gas
constipation
mouth sores
weight loss
extreme tiredness
headache
bone or muscle pain
depression
anxiety
numbness, burning, or tingling of the hands or feet
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
darkening of skin
hair loss
changes in the appearance of the hair and nails
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash (may look like acne and may affect the skin on the face, upper chest, or back)
blistering, peeling, dry, or cracked skin
itching, tenderness, or burning of the skin
shortness of breath
cough
fever or chills
growth of eyelashes on the inside of the eyelid
severe stomach pain
dry, red, painful, teary, or irritated eyes
blurred vision
eye sensitivity to light
chest pain or pressure
pain in the arms, neck, or upper back
rapid, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
slow or difficult speech
dizziness or faintness
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
unusual bruising or bleeding
black and tarry or bloody stools
vomit that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds
sunken eyes
dry mouth
decreased urination
dark urine
pale or yellow skin
redness, warmth, pain, tenderness, or swelling in one leg
Erlotinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
diarrhea
rash
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to erlotinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tarceva
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page