Obeticholic Acid: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Obeticholic Acid
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616033.html
Obeticholic Acid
pronounced as (oh be'' i koe' lik)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
On December 12, 2024, FDA issued a drug safety communication about cases of serious liver injury observed in patients without cirrhosis taking obeticholic acid to treat primary biliary cholangitis. Between May 2021 and September 2024, FDA identified 20 cases reporting one or more of the following events in patients treated with obeticholic acid: liver transplant, evaluation or listing for liver transplant, or liver-related death. Patients should talk to their doctor about risks versus benefits of taking obeticholic acid. Contact your doctor immediately is you notice any of the following: swollen belly; nausea, vomiting or diarrhea; yellowing of eyes or skin; bloody or black stools; coughing or vomiting up blood; loss of appetite or weight loss; new or worsening tiredness; weakness; fever or chills; lightheadedness; less frequent urination; mental status changes such as confusion, slurred speech, mood swings, personality changes, or increased sleepiness or difficulty waking up.
Obeticholic acid can cause liver damage, sometimes serious enough to require liver transplantation or cause death, especially in patients that have cirrhosis (scarring) of the liver. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had cirrhosis of the liver. Your doctor may tell you not to take obeticholic acid. If you experience any of the following symptoms while taking obeticholic acid, call your doctor immediately: yellowing of the skin or eyes, dark urine, black tarry stools, coughing up or vomiting blood, swelling in and around the stomach area, confusion, slurred speech, anxiety, mood swings, or changes in personality. If you experience any of the following symptoms and they are severe or do not go away, call your doctor right away: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss, loss of appetite, tiredness or weakness, lightheadedness, fever, chills, or less frequent urination.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before and during your treatment to check your liver function and your body's response to obeticholic acid.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Obeticholic acid is used alone or in combination with ursodiol (Actigall
®
, Urso
®
) to treat primary biliary cholangitis (PBC; a type of liver disease that destroys bile ducts, which allows bile to stay in the liver and cause damage) in people who cannot take ursodiol or in people who were not treated successfully with ursodiol alone. Obeticholic acid is in a class of medications called farnesoid X receptor agonists. It works by decreasing the production of bile in the liver and increasing the removal of bile from the liver.
How should this medicine be used?
Obeticholic acid comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is taken usually once a day with or without food. Take obeticholic acid at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take obeticholic acid exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may need to temporarily or permanently stop your treatment or decrease your dose of obeticholic acid during your treatment. This will depend on how well the medication works for you or if you experience certain side effects. Continue to take obeticholic acid even if you feel well. Do not stop taking obeticholic acid without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking obeticholic acid,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to obeticholic acid, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in obeticholic acid tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking obeticholic acid. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking cholestyramine (Prevalite
®
), colestipol (Colestid
®
), or colesevelam (Welchol
®
), take them at least 4 hours before or 4 hours after obeticholic acid.
the following nonprescription product may interact with obeticholic acid: caffeine supplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking obeticholic acid. Do not start this medication while taking obeticholic acid without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have bile duct obstruction (blockage in the tubes that carry bile from the liver to the gallbladder and small intestine). Your doctor may tell you not to take obeticholic acid.
tell your doctor if you have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, or if you have or have ever had high cholesterol or thyroid disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking obeticholic acid, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Obeticholic acid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
mouth or throat pain
fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
rash
dizziness
fainting
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
joint or muscle pain
constipation
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
severe itching
dryness, irritation, redness, crusting or drainage of the skin
Obeticholic acid may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark colored urine
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
nausea
vomiting
swelling in the area around the stomach
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ocaliva
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page