Benzgalantamine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Benzgalantamine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624044.html
Benzgalantamine
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Benzgalantamine is used to treat the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease (AD; a brain disease that slowly destroys the memory and the ability to think, learn, communicate and handle daily activities). Benzgalantamine is in a class of medications called acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. It works by increasing the amount of a certain natural substance in the brain that is needed for memory and thought. Benzgalantamine may improve the ability to think and remember or slow the loss of these abilities in people who have AD. However, benzgalantamine will not cure AD or prevent the loss of mental abilities at some time in the future.
How should this medicine be used?
Benzgalantamine comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food two times a day. Take benzgalantamine at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take benzgalantamine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Drink plenty of water while receiving benzgalantamine.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of benzgalantamine and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 4 weeks.
Continue to take benzgalantamine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking benzgalantamine without talking to your doctor. If you do stop taking benzgalantamine for a few days or longer, call your doctor before you start to take benzgalantamine again. Your doctor will probably tell you to start with the lowest dose of benzgalantamine and gradually increase your dose to the dose you had been taking.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking benzgalantamine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to benzgalantamine, galantamine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in benzgalantamine tablet. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking benzgalantamine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with benzgalantamine: diphenhydramine, dimenhydrinate, brompheniramine, doxylamine, loperamide, ibuprofen and naproxen. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking benzgalantamine. Do not start any of these medications while taking benzgalantamine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma or any other lung disease; an enlarged prostate; ulcers; seizures; irregular heartbeat; or heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking benzgalantamine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking benzgalantamine.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking benzgalantamine. Alcohol may cause benzgalantamine to not work as well.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. If you miss more than 3 doses, call your doctor before restarting.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Benzgalantamine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
decreased appetite
depression
dizziness
headache
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
weight loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately {or get emergency medical treatment}:
rash, blistering or peeling of the skin, skin pain, swelling of lips, mouth, throat, tongue or face
fever, sore throat, cough, joint pain, fatigue
feeling weak, confusion, fainting, shortness of breath, chest pain, slowed heart beat
bloody or black, tarry stools, vomiting blood or vomit that looks like coffee grounds, severe abdominal pain
difficulty urinating or weak urine flow, painful urination, blood in urine
seizures
difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
Benzgalantamine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
abdominal cramping
nausea
vomiting
salivation
lacrimation
urination
defecation
sweating
feeling weak, confusion, fainting, shortness of breath, chest pain, slowed heart beat
difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zunveyl
®
Last Revised -
09/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page