Schizoaffective disorder: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Schizoaffective disorder
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/schizoaffective-disorder/
Schizoaffective disorder
Description
Schizoaffective disorder is a mental health condition that includes features of both
schizophrenia
and a mood disorder such as
bipolar disorder
or
depression
. The prefix "schizo-" refers to the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia that affect a person's thinking, sense of self, and perceptions. The term "-affective" refers to extreme shifts in mood, energy, and behavior.
Schizoaffective disorder has a wide range of signs and symptoms that make it challenging to diagnose. Its features overlap significantly with those of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, and there is debate about whether schizoaffective disorder should be considered a separate diagnosis or a subtype of one of these other conditions.
Signs and symptoms of psychosis in people with schizoaffective disorder include false perceptions called hallucinations, such as hearing voices no one else can hear or experiencing visions, smells, or tactile (touch) sensations. Strongly held false beliefs (delusions) are also a characteristic feature. For example, affected individuals may be certain that they are a particular historical figure or that they are being plotted against or controlled by others.
There are two major types of schizoaffective disorder, based on which mood disorder is involved: the bipolar type and the depressive type. The bipolar type includes both dramatic "highs," called manic episodes, and "lows," called depressive episodes. The depressive type includes only depressive episodes. Manic episodes are characterized by increased energy and activity, irritability, restlessness, an inability to sleep, and reckless behavior. Depressive episodes are marked by low energy and activity, a feeling of hopelessness, and an inability to perform everyday tasks.
The psychosis and mood problems associated with schizoaffective disorder usually become evident in adolescence or young adulthood. People with this condition often have difficulty functioning at school, at work, and in social settings. Disordered thinking and concentration, inappropriate emotional responses, erratic speech and behavior, and difficulty with personal hygiene and everyday tasks are also common. People with schizoaffective disorder have a higher risk of substance abuse problems and dying by suicide than the general population.
Frequency
Studies suggest that schizoaffective disorder is less common than schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or depression alone. However, because schizoaffective disorder can be difficult to differentiate from these other conditions, its prevalence is unknown. One study from Finland estimated that schizoaffective disorder affects 3 in 1,000 people.
Causes
Very little is known for certain about the genetics of schizoaffective disorder. Studies suggest that variations in many genes, each with a small effect, combine to increase the risk of developing the condition. There may also be genetic variations with larger effects in some affected individuals or families, but these variants are rare in the general population, and it is unclear which particular genes are involved.
The genes that have been studied as possible contributors to schizoaffective disorder have diverse functions in the brain. These genes include some that regulate the body's daily (
circadian
) rhythms, such as the sleep-wake cycle; others that help control the movement (migration) of nerve cells during brain development; and still others involved in sending and receiving chemical signals in the brain. In particular, several genes that have been associated with the risk of schizoaffective disorder provide instructions for making parts of a receptor for gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA), a chemical called a
neurotransmitter
that sends signals in the brain. GABA's primary role is to prevent the brain from being overloaded with too many signals.
Many of the genetic variations associated with schizoaffective disorder appear also to be involved in schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Other variations seem to be specific to schizoaffective disorder. However, it is challenging to study the genetics of schizoaffective disorder because the disorder has such significant overlap with these other mental health conditions. In some studies, people with schizoaffective disorder are analyzed in the same group as those with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, so it can be difficult to determine which genetic variations influence each of these specific diagnoses.
Inheritance
The inheritance pattern of schizoaffective disorder is unclear. Overall, the risk of developing this condition is greater for
first-degree relatives
of affected individuals (such as siblings or children) as compared to the general public. Many individuals with schizoaffective disorder also have relatives with depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or other mental health conditions. These disorders may run in families in part because they share some genetic risk factors with schizoaffective disorder.
Research with twins found that when a member of an identical twin pair has schizoaffective disorder, the risk that the co-twin will also develop the condition is about 40 percent. In nonidentical (fraternal) twins, the risk is lower, around 5 percent. Because identical twins are more genetically similar than nonidentical twins, this finding suggests that genetics plays an important role in schizoaffective disorder. However, the fact that the risk is much lower than 100 percent, even in identical twins, suggests that noninherited factors are also important causes of schizoaffective disorder.
Other Names for This Condition
Schizo-affective psychosis
Schizo-affective type schizophrenia
Schizoaffective psychosis
Schizoaffective schizophrenia
Schizophrenia, schizo-affective type
Schizophreniform psychosis, affective type
Additional Information & Resources
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
SCHIZOPHRENIA; SCZD
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Cardno AG, Owen MJ. Genetic relationships between schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder, and schizoaffective disorder. Schizophr Bull. 2014 May;40(3):504-15.
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbu016. Epub 2014 Feb 24.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Craddock N, Jones L, Jones IR, Kirov G, Green EK, Grozeva D, Moskvina V,
Nikolov I, Hamshere ML, Vukcevic D, Caesar S, Gordon-Smith K, Fraser C, Russell
E, Norton N, Breen G, St Clair D, Collier DA, Young AH, Ferrier IN, Farmer A,
McGuffin P, Holmans PA; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC); Donnelly
P, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC. Strong genetic evidence for a selective influence of
GABAA receptors on a component of the bipolar disorder phenotype. Mol Psychiatry.
2010 Feb;15(2):146-53. doi: 10.1038/mp.2008.66. Epub 2008 Jul 1.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Green EK, Grozeva D, Moskvina V, Hamshere ML, Jones IR, Jones L, Forty L,
Caesar S, Gordon-Smith K, Fraser C, Russell E, St Clair D, Young AH, Ferrier N,
Farmer A, McGuffin P, Holmans PA, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Craddock N. Variation at
the GABAA receptor gene, Rho 1 (GABRR1) associated with susceptibility to bipolar
schizoaffective disorder. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Oct
5;153B(7):1347-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.31108.
Citation on PubMed
Laursen TM, Labouriau R, Licht RW, Bertelsen A, Munk-Olsen T, Mortensen PB.
Family history of psychiatric illness as a risk factor for schizoaffective
disorder: a Danish register-based cohort study. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005
Aug;62(8):841-8. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.8.841.
Citation on PubMed
Mansour HA, Talkowski ME, Wood J, Chowdari KV, McClain L, Prasad K, Montrose
D, Fagiolini A, Friedman ES, Allen MH, Bowden CL, Calabrese J, El-Mallakh RS,
Escamilla M, Faraone SV, Fossey MD, Gyulai L, Loftis JM, Hauser P, Ketter TA,
Marangell LB, Miklowitz DJ, Nierenberg AA, Patel J, Sachs GS, Sklar P, Smoller
JW, Laird N, Keshavan M, Thase ME, Axelson D, Birmaher B, Lewis D, Monk T, Frank
E, Kupfer DJ, Devlin B, Nimgaonkar VL. Association study of 21 circadian genes
with bipolar I disorder, schizoaffective disorder, and schizophrenia. Bipolar
Disord. 2009 Nov;11(7):701-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2009.00756.x.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Pagel T, Baldessarini RJ, Franklin J, Baethge C. Characteristics of patients
diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder compared with schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder. Bipolar Disord. 2013 May;15(3):229-39. doi: 10.1111/bdi.12057. Epub
2013 Mar 26.
Citation on PubMed
Rink L, Pagel T, Franklin J, Baethge C. Characteristics and heterogeneity of
schizoaffective disorder compared with unipolar depression and schizophrenia - a
systematic literature review and meta-analysis. J Affect Disord. 2016
Feb;191:8-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2015.10.045. Epub 2015 Nov 10.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Bipolar Disorder
Depression
Genetic Disorders
Psychotic Disorders
Schizophrenia
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Schizoaffective disorder
Related Medical Tests
Mental Health Screening
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page