Selinexor: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Selinexor
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619044.html
Selinexor
pronounced as (sel" i nex' or)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Selinexor is used along with dexamethasone to treat multiple myeloma (a type of cancer of the bone marrow) that has returned or that did not respond to at least 4 other treatments. Selinexor is also used with bortezomib and dexamethasone to treat multiple myeloma in patients who have previously been treated with at least one other medication. It is also used to treat certain types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL; a type of cancer that begins in the white blood cells) in adults whose cancer has returned or is unresponsive to at least two other treatments. Selinexor is in a class of medications called selective inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE). It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Selinexor comes as a tablet to take by mouth with or without food. For use in combination with dexamethasone for the treatment of multiple myeloma or for the treatment of DLBCL, selinexor is usually taken on days 1 and 3 of each week. For use in combination with bortezomib and dexamethasone for the treatment of multiple myeloma, selinexor is usually taken once a week. Take selinexor at around the same time of day every day that you take it. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take selinexor exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with water; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you vomit after taking selinexor, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may tell you to take medication to prevent nausea and vomiting before and during your treatment with selinexor.
Your doctor may need to stop or interrupt your treatment or reduce your dose if you experience certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with selinexor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking selinexor,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to selinexor, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in selinexor tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or recently have had an infection, if you have or have had bleeding problems, or if you have cataracts (clouding of the lens of the eye).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You will need to have a negative pregnancy test before you start taking selinexor. If you are a female, you should not become pregnant while you are taking selinexor and for up to 1 week after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you are male, you and your female partner should use birth control during your treatment and continue to use birth control for 1 week after your final dose. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking selinexor, call your doctor immediately. Selinexor may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking selinexor and for 1 week after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women.
you should know that selinexor may make you drowsy or cause dizziness or fainting. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
Your doctor will also probably recommend that you drink enough liquids and eat enough calories during your treatment.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose, skip that dose and take your medication at your next regularly scheduled day and time. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Selinexor may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
weight loss
loss of appetite
extreme tiredness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
headache
taste changes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
easy bleeding or bruising
fatigue, pale skin, or shortness of breath
fever, cough, chills, or other signs of infection
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist
confusion
blurred or double vision
increased sensitivity to light and glare
Selinexor may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will monitor your body weight and order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to selinexor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xpovio
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page