Tedizolid Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tedizolid Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614039.html
Tedizolid Injection
pronounced as (te diz' oh lid)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tedizolid injection is used to treat skin infections caused by certain types of bacteria in adults and children 12 years of age and older. Tedizolid is in a class of medications called oxazolidinone antibiotics. It works by stopping the growth of bacteria.
Antibiotics such as tedizolid injection will not work for colds, flu, and other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Tedizolid injection comes as a solution to be given intravenously (into a vein) over 1 hour. It is usually given once a day for 6 days.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with tedizolid injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, tell your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using tedizolid injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tedizolid, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in tedizolid injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are using or taking or plan to take while using tedizolid injection Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have any medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving tedizolid injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tedizolid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
headache
dizziness
pain, redness, or swelling near the place where tedizolid was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
numbness, tingling, burning, or pain sensation in your hands or feet
change or loss of vision
Tedizolid may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sivextro
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page