Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-bile-acid-synthesis-defect-type-2/
Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2
Description
Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2 is a disorder characterized by cholestasis, a condition that impairs the production and release of a digestive fluid called bile from liver cells. Bile is used during digestion to absorb fats and fat-soluble vitamins, such as vitamins A, D, E, and K. People with congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2 cannot produce (synthesize) bile acids, which are a component of bile that stimulate bile flow and help it absorb fats and fat-soluble vitamins. As a result, an abnormal form of bile is produced.
The signs and symptoms of congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2 often develop in infancy. Affected infants usually have a failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice) due to impaired bile flow and a buildup of partially formed bile. Excess fat in the feces (steatorrhea) is another feature of congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2. As the condition progresses, affected individuals can develop liver abnormalities including inflammation or chronic liver disease (cirrhosis). Some individuals with congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2 cannot absorb certain fat-soluble vitamins, which can result in softening and weakening of the bones (
rickets
) or problems with blood clotting that lead to prolonged bleeding.
If left untreated, congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2 typically leads to cirrhosis and death in childhood.
Frequency
The prevalence of congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2 is unknown. Together, all congenital defects of bile acid synthesis are thought to have a prevalence of 1 to 9 per million people.
Causes
Mutations in the
AKR1D1
gene cause congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2. The
AKR1D1
gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called 3-oxo-5- beta(β)-steroid 4-dehydrogenase. This enzyme is found in certain liver cells that
produce bile acids
. Bile acids are produced from cholesterol in a multi-step process. The 3-oxo-5-β-steroid 4-dehydrogenase enzyme is responsible for the third step in that process, which converts 7alpha(α)-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one to 7α-hydroxy-5 β-cholesten-3-one.
AKR1D1
gene mutations result in a 3-oxo-5-β-steroid 4-dehydrogenase enzyme with severely reduced function. Without enough functional enzyme, the conversion of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one to 7α-hydroxy-5 β-cholesten-3-one is impaired. The 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one instead gets converted into abnormal bile acid compounds that cannot be transported out of the liver into the intestine, where the bile acids are needed to absorb fats and fat-soluble vitamins. As a result, cholesterol and abnormal bile acids build up in the liver and fat-soluble vitamins are not absorbed, which contribute to the signs and symptoms of congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2.
Learn more about the gene associated with Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2
AKR1D1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
CBAS2
Cholestasis with delta(4)-3-oxosteroid 5-beta-reductase deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital bile acid synthesis defect 2
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 2
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 2; CBAS2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Clayton PT. Disorders of bile acid synthesis. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2011
Jun;34(3):593-604. doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9259-3. Epub 2011 Jan 13.
Citation on PubMed
Lemonde HA, Custard EJ, Bouquet J, Duran M, Overmars H, Scambler PJ, Clayton
PT. Mutations in SRD5B1 (AKR1D1), the gene encoding delta(4)-3-oxosteroid
5beta-reductase, in hepatitis and liver failure in infancy. Gut. 2003
Oct;52(10):1494-9. doi: 10.1136/gut.52.10.1494.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Mindnich R, Drury JE, Penning TM. The effect of disease associated point
mutations on 5beta-reductase (AKR1D1) enzyme function. Chem Biol Interact. 2011 May
30;191(1-3):250-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2010.12.020. Epub 2010 Dec 24.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Jaundice
Liver Diseases
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Bile
Cholestasis
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page