Sarecycline: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sarecycline
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618068.html
Sarecycline
pronounced as (sar"e sye' kleen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sarecycline is used to treat certain types of acne in adults and children 9 years of age and older. Sarecycline is in a class of medications called tetracycline antibiotics. It works to treat acne by killing the bacteria that infects pores and decreasing a certain natural oily substance that causes acne.
Antibiotics such as sarecycline will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Sarecycline comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day. Drink a full glass of water with each dose of sarecycline. Take sarecycline at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take sarecycline exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you stop taking sarecycline too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking sarecycline,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to sarecycline, doxycycline, minocycline, omadacycline, tetracycline, demeclocycline, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in sarecycline tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking sarecycline. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
be aware that antacids containing magnesium, aluminum, or calcium; laxatives containing magnesium; and iron products interfere with sarecycline, making it less effective. Take sarecycline 2 hours before or 6 hours after taking antacids, calcium supplements, and laxatives containing magnesium. Take sarecycline 2 hours before or 4 hours after iron preparations and vitamin products that contain iron.
the following nonprescription products may interact with sarecycline: aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking sarecycline. Do not start any of these medications while taking sarecycline without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri; high pressure in the skull that may cause headaches, blurry or double vision, vision loss, and other symptoms).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking sarecycline, call your doctor immediately. Sarecycline can harm the fetus.
you should know that sarecycline may make you dizzy or lightheaded. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight or ultraviolet light (tanning beds and sunlamps) and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Sarecycline may make your skin sensitive to sunlight or ultraviolet light. Tell your doctor right away if you get a sunburn.
you should know that sarecycline may cause fertility problems in males. This may affect your ability to father a child. Talk to your healthcare provider if you have concerns about fertility.
you should know that when sarecycline is used during pregnancy or in babies or children up to age 8, it can cause the teeth to become permanently stained or temporarily affect bone growth. Sarecycline should not be used in children under age 8.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sarecycline may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vaginal itching or discharge
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking sarecycline and call your doctor immediately:
severe headache, blurred vision, seeing double, or loss of vision
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps, or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
return of fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
Sarecycline may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to sarecycline.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Seysara
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page