Defibrotide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Defibrotide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616024.html
Defibrotide Injection
pronounced as (dee fy' broh tide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Defibrotide injection is used to treat adults and children with hepatic veno-occlusive disease (VOD; blocked blood vessels inside the liver, also known as sinusoidal obstruction syndrome), who have kidney or lung problems after receiving a hematopoietic stem-cell transplant (HSCT; procedure in which certain blood cells are removed from the body and then returned to the body). Defibrotide injection is in a class of medications called antithrombotic agents. It works by preventing the formation of blood clots.
How should this medicine be used?
Defibrotide injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) over 2 hours by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. It is usually injected once every 6 hours for 21 days, but may be given for up to 60 days. The length of treatment depends on how well your body responds to the medication and the side effects that you may experience.
Your doctor may need to delay or stop your treatment if you experience certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with defibrotide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving defibrotide injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to defibrotide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in defibrotide injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with defibrotide injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with defibrotide injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before receiving defibrotide injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while receiving defibrotide injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.t
tell your doctor if you are bleeding anywhere on your body or if you have bleeding problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving, call your doctor. Do not breastfeed while receiving defibrotide injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Defibrotide injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
diarrhea
vomiting
nausea
nose bleeding
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the face, lips, tongue or throat
unusual bleeding or bruising
blood in urine or stool
headache
confusion
slurred speech
vision changes
fever, cough, or other signs of infection
Defibrotide injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to defibrotide injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about defibrotide injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Defitelio
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page