Mupirocin topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mupirocin topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a688004.html
Mupirocin topical
pronounced as (myoo peer' oh sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Mupirocin, an antibiotic, is used to treat impetigo as well as other skin infections caused by bacteria. It is not effective against fungal or viral infections.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Mupirocin comes in an ointment that is applied to the skin. Mupirocin usually is applied three times a day for 1 to 2 weeks. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use mupirocin exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Wash the affected skin area thoroughly, and then gently apply a small amount (a thin film) of the ointment. You may cover the area with a sterile gauze dressing.
Do not apply mupirocin to your eyes.
Do not apply mupirocin to burns unless told to do so by your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using mupirocin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to mupirocin or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using mupirocin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using mupirocin, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Mupirocin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, stinging, pain, itching, or rash
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Mupirocin is for external use only. Do not let mupirocin ointment get into your eyes, nose, or mouth, and do not swallow it. Do not apply dressings, bandages, cosmetics, lotions, or other skin medications to the area being treated unless your doctor tells you.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the mupirocin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bactroban
®
Bactroban
®
Nasal
Centany
®
Nasal
Last Revised -
12/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page