Mesna Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mesna Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a695034.html
Mesna Injection
pronounced as (mes' na)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Mesna is used to reduce the risk of hemorrhagic cystitis (a condition that causes inflammation of the bladder and can result in serious bleeding) in people who receive ifosfamide (a medication used for the treatment of cancer). Mesna is in a class of medications called cytoprotectants. It works by protecting against some of the harmful effects of certain chemotherapy medications.
How should this medicine be used?
Mesna comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. It is usually given at the same time as you receive your chemotherapy treatment and then 4 and 8 hours after your chemotherapy treatment.
Drink at least 1 quart (4 cups; about 1 liter) of fluid daily while you are receiving mesna injection.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
Mesna is also sometimes used to reduce the risk of hemorrhagic cystitis in people who receive the chemotherapy drug cyclophosphamide. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving mesna injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to mesna, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in mesna injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an autoimmune disorder (a condition that occurs when your immune system mistakenly attacks healthy body tissue) such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, or nephritis (a type of kidney problem).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Mesna may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
constipation
loss of appetite or weight
diarrhea
abdominal pain
headache
tiredness
dizziness
hair loss
pain or redness at the place where the injection was given
loss of strength and energy
fever
sore throat
cough
flushing
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
pink or red colored urine or blood in urine
swelling of the face, arms, or legs
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
chest pain
fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
unusual bleeding or bruising
Mesna may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving mesna injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mesnex
®
Other names
Sodium 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate
Last Revised -
03/15/2013
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page