Mometasone Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mometasone Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a687014.html
Mometasone Topical
pronounced as (moe met' a sone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Mometasone topical is used to relieve the redness, swelling, itching and inflammation and discomfort of various skin conditions, including psoriasis (a skin disease in which red, scaly patches form on some areas of the body and eczema (a skin disease that causes the skin to be dry and itchy and to sometimes develop red, scaly rashes). Mometasone is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by activating natural substances in the skin to reduce swelling, redness, and itching.
How should this medicine be used?
Mometasone comes as a cream, ointment, and lotion for use on the skin. It usually is applied once a day. Apply it at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use mometasone exactly as directed. Do not apply more or less of it or apply it more often than prescribed by your doctor. Do not apply it to other areas of your body or use it to treat other skin conditions unless directed to do so by your doctor.
Your skin condition should improve during the first 2 weeks of your treatment. Call your doctor if your symptoms do not improve during this time.
To use mometasone cream or ointment, apply a small amount of cream or ointment to cover the affected area of skin with a thin film.
To apply the lotion, place a few drops on the affected areas and massage lightly until it disappears.
This medication is only for use on the skin. Do not let mometasone topical get into your eyes or mouth and do not swallow it. Avoid use on the face, in the genital and rectal areas, and in skin creases and armpits unless directed by your doctor.
Do not apply other skin preparations on the treated area without talking with your doctor.
Do not wrap or bandage the treated area unless your doctor tells you that you should. Such use may increase side effects.
Do not use on a child's diaper area unless your doctor tells you that you should; do not use tight-fitting diapers or plastic pants. Such use may increase side effects.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using mometasone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to mometasone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in mometasone topical products. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take
tell your doctor if you have an infection or have ever had diabetes or Cushing's syndrome (an abnormal condition that is caused by excess hormones [corticosteroids]).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using mometasone topical, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it, However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double amount to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Mometasone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, itching, irritation, redness, or dryness of the skin
acne
skin sores
tiny red bumps or rash around the mouth
small white or red bumps on the skin
bruising or shiny skin
changes in skin color
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
severe skin rash
redness, swelling, or other signs of skin infection in the place where you applied mometasone
Children who use mometasone topical may have an increased risk of side effects including slowed growth and delayed weight gain. Talk to your child's doctor about the risks of applying this medication to your child's skin.
Mometasone topical may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze it.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows mometasone topical, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Elocon
®
Momexin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page