Reslizumab Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Reslizumab Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616023.html
Reslizumab Injection
pronounced as (res liz' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Reslizumab injection may cause serious or life-threatening allergic reactions. You may experience an allergic reaction while you are receiving the infusion or for a short period of time after the infusion has finished.
You will receive each injection of reslizumab in a doctor's office or medical facility. You will stay in the office for some time after you receive the medication so your doctor or nurse can watch you closely for any signs of an allergic reaction. Tell your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms: wheezing or difficulty breathing; shortness of breath; flushing; paleness; fainting, dizziness, or lightheadedness; confusion; fast heartbeat; itching; hives, difficulty swallowing; nausea or stomach discomfort; or swelling of your face, lips, mouth, or tongue.
Talk to your doctor about the risk of using reslizumab.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Reslizumab injection is used along with other medications to treat asthma in certain people. Reslizumab is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by reducing a certain type of white blood cell that may contribute to your asthma.
How should this medicine be used?
Reslizumab comes as a solution (liquid) that is given intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a healthcare setting. It is usually given once every 4 weeks. It will take about 20 to 50 minutes for you to receive your dose of reslizumab.
Reslizumab injection is not used to treat a sudden attack of asthma symptoms. Your doctor will prescribe a short-acting inhaler to use during attacks. Talk to your doctor about how to treat symptoms of a sudden asthma attack. If your asthma symptoms get worse or if you have asthma attacks more often, be sure to talk to your doctor.
Do not decrease your dose of any other asthma medication or stop taking any other medication that has been prescribed by your doctor unless your doctor tells you to do so.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving reslizumab injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to reslizumab, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in reslizumab injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the manufacturer's patient information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have a parasite infection.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving reslizumab injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the symptoms listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment.
Reslizumab injection may increase your risk of developing certain cancers. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving this medication.
Reslizumab injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about reslizumab injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cinqair
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page