Loperamide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Loperamide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682280.html
Loperamide
pronounced as (loe per' a mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Loperamide may cause serious or life-threatening changes in your heart rhythm, especially in people who have taken more than the recommended amount. Tell your doctor if have or have ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death), a slow or irregular heartbeat, or a low level of potassium in your blood. Also tell your doctor if you are taking or plan to take any of the following medications: amiodarone (Nexterone, Pacerone), chlorpromazine, haloperidol (Haldol), methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), moxifloxacin (Avelox), pentamidine (Nebupent, Pentam), procainamide, quinidine (in Nuedexta), sotalol (Betapace, Betapace AF), thioridazine, and ziprasidone (Geodon). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take loperamide if you are taking any of these medications or if you have any of these conditions. If you experience any of the following symptoms while taking loperamide, call your doctor immediately or instruct a friend or caregiver to call local emergency services at 911: fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat; dizziness; lightheadedness; unresponsiveness; or fainting.
Taking more than the recommended amount of loperamide can cause heart problems that may be serious or cause death. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or take it for a longer period of time than prescribed by your doctor or as stated on the package.
Loperamide should
not
be given to a child younger than 2 years of age because of the risk of serious breathing and heart problems.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nonprescription (over-the-counter) loperamide is used to control acute diarrhea (loose stools that come on suddenly and usually lasts less than 2 weeks), including travelers' diarrhea. Prescription loperamide is also used to control acute diarrhea and also ongoing diarrhea associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD; condition in which the lining of all or part of the intestine is swollen, irritated, or has sores). Prescription loperamide is also used to reduce the amount of fluid in people with ileostomies (surgery to create an opening for waste to leave the body through the abdomen). Loperamide is in a class of medications called antidiarrheal agents. It works by decreasing the flow of fluids and electrolytes into the bowel and by slowing down the movement of the bowel to decrease the number of bowel movements.
How should this medicine be used?
Loperamide comes as a tablet, capsule, and as a suspension or solution (liquid) to take by mouth. Nonprescription (over-the-counter) loperamide usually is taken immediately after each loose bowel movement but not more than the 24-hour maximum amount described on the label. Prescription loperamide is sometimes taken on a schedule (one or more times a day). Follow the directions on the package or on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take loperamide exactly as directed.
If you are giving loperamide to your child, read the package label carefully to make sure that it is the right product for the age of the child. Loperamide should
not
be given to a child younger than 2 years of age. Check the package label to find out how much medication the child needs. If you know how much your child weighs, give the dose that matches that weight on the chart. If you don't know your child's weight, give the dose that matches your child's age. Ask your child's doctor if you don't know how much medication to give your child.
If you are taking loperamide liquid, do not use a household spoon to measure your dose. Use the measuring cup that came with the medication or use a spoon made especially for measuring liquid medication.
If you are taking loperamide for acute diarrhea and your symptoms get worse or if your diarrhea lasts longer than 48 hours, stop taking this medication and call your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking loperamide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to loperamide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in loperamide products. Check the package label for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking loperamide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had ulcerative colitis (condition in which sores develop in the intestines causing pain and diarrhea). or colitis (swelling of the intestine caused by certain bacteria). Also, tell your doctor if you have a fever, blood or mucus in the stool, black stools, or stomach pain without diarrhea. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take loperamide or give it your child if you have one or more of these conditions.
tell your doctor if you have acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking loperamide, call your doctor.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy and dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Drink plenty of water or other clear fluids to replace fluids lost while having diarrhea.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you are taking scheduled doses of loperamide, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Loperamide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
fatigue
If you or someone taking loperamide experience any of the following symptoms, call your/their doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
red, peeling or blistering skin
hives
itching
wheezing
difficulty breathing
fever
stomach pain or swelling
bloody stools
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea
inability to urinate
fainting
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
unresponsiveness
confusion
narrowing of the pupils
slow and shallow breathing
shortness of breath
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about taking this medicine.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Imodium
®
Imodium
®
AD
Imotil
®
K-Pek II
®
Kao-Paverin
®
Kaopectate 1-D
®
Maalox
®
Anti-Diarrheal
Pepto
®
Diarrhea Control
Brand names of combination products
Imodium
®
Multi-Symptom Relief (containing Loperamide, Simethicone)
Last Revised -
04/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page