Bentoquatam Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bentoquatam Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607074.html
Bentoquatam Topical
pronounced as (ben' toe kwa tam)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bentoquatam lotion is used to prevent poison oak, poison ivy, and poison sumac rashes in people who may come in contact with these plants. Bentoquatam is in a class of medications called skin protectants. It works by forming a coating on the skin that protects it from the plant oils that may cause a rash. Bentoquatam will not soothe or heal a rash that has already developed from contact with poison oak, poison ivy, or poison sumac.
How should this medicine be used?
Bentoquatam comes as a lotion to apply to the skin. It is usually applied at least 15 minutes before possible contact with poison oak, poison ivy, or poison sumac, and reapplied at least once every 4 hours for as long as the risk of contact with these plants continues. Follow the directions on the package label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use bentoquatam exactly as directed.
Bentoquatam lotion is available without a prescription. However, you should ask a doctor before you apply bentoquatam lotion to a child who is younger than 6 years old.
Shake the lotion very well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
Bentoquatam lotion is only for use on the skin. Do not get bentoquatam lotion in your eyes and do not swallow the medication. If you do get bentoquatam lotion in your eyes, rinse them with plenty of water.
Do not apply bentoquatam lotion to an open rash.
Bentoquatam lotion may catch fire. Stay away from fires and open flames while applying the lotion and for as long as the lotion is on your skin.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using bentoquatam lotion,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bentoquatam or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using bentoquatam, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually applied as needed. Bentoquatam lotion begins to protect the skin from the plant oils that cause rash 15 minutes after it is applied.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bentoquatam may cause side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows bentoquatam, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about bentoquatam.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ivy Block
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page