Lithium: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lithium
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a681039.html
Lithium
pronounced as (lith' ee um)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to lithium.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lithium is used to treat and prevent episodes of mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood) in people with bipolar disorder (manic-depressive disorder; a disease that causes episodes of depression, episodes of mania, and other abnormal moods). Lithium is in a class of medications called antimanic agents. It works by decreasing abnormal activity in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Lithium comes as a tablet, capsule, extended-release (long-acting) tablet, and solution (liquid) to take by mouth. The tablets, capsules, and solution are usually taken three to four times a day. The extended-release tablets are usually taken two to three times a day. Take lithium at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take lithium exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the extended-release tablet whole; do not split, chew, or crush it.
Your doctor may increase or decrease the dose of your medication during your treatment. Follow these directions carefully.
Lithium may help to control your condition but will not cure it. It may take 1 to 3 weeks or longer for you to feel the full benefit of lithium. Continue to take lithium even if you feel well. Do not stop taking lithium without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Lithium is also sometimes used to treat depression, schizophrenia (a mental illness that causes disturbed or unusual thinking, loss of interest in life, and strong or inappropriate emotions), disorders of impulse control (inability to resist the urge to perform a harmful action), and certain mental illnesses in children. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking lithium,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lithium or any other medications.
tell your doctor if you are taking diuretics ('water pills'). Your doctor may tell you not to take lithium if you are taking this medication or will monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking lithium. Your doctor may have to change the doses of your medication or monitor you more carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with lithium: sodium bicarbonate; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking lithium. Do not start any of these medications while taking lithium without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart or kidney disease. Also tell your doctor if you have or develop severe diarrhea, excessive sweating, or fever during your treatment. Your doctor may tell you not to take lithium or may monitor you more carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had organic brain syndrome (any physical condition that affects the way your brain works) or thyroid disease or if you have ever fainted without an explanation. Also tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family have or have ever had Brugada syndrome (a disorder that can cause a potentially fatal irregular heart rhythm) or if anyone in your family has died suddenly with no explanation before the age of 45 years.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking lithium, call your doctor. Lithium may harm the fetus.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking lithium.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
It is important to follow a proper diet, including the right amounts of fluid and salt during your treatment. Your doctor will give you specific directions about the diet that is right for you. Follow these directions carefully.
Talk to your doctor about drinking drinks that contain caffeine, such as tea, coffee, cola, or chocolate milk.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lithium may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
restlessness
fine hand movements that are difficult to control
mild thirst
loss of appetite
stomach pain
gas
indigestion
weight gain or loss
dry mouth
excessive saliva in the mouth
change in the ability to taste food
swollen lips
acne
hair loss
unusual discomfort in cold temperatures
constipation
depression
joint or muscle pain
paleness
thin, brittle fingernails or hair
itching
rash
Some side effects may be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical help:
unusual tiredness or weakness
excessive thirst
frequent urination
slow, jerky movements
movements that are unusual or difficult to control
blackouts
seizures
fainting
dizziness or lightheadedness
fast, slow, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
shortness of breath
chest tightness
confusion
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
crossed eyes
painful, cold, or discolored fingers and toes
headache
pounding noises inside the head
swelling of the feet, ankles, or lower legs
If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking lithium and call your doctor immediately:
drowsiness
shaking of a part of your body that you cannot control
muscle weakness, stiffness, twitching, or tightness
loss of coordination
diarrhea
vomiting
slurred speech
giddiness
ringing in the ears
blurred vision
Lithium may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you experience any unusual symptoms while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
diarrhea
vomiting
drowsiness
muscle weakness
loss of coordination
giddiness
blurred vision
ringing in the ears
frequent urination
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Eskalith
®
¶
Eskalith
®
CR
¶
Lithobid
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
04/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page