Jansen-de Vries syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Jansen-de Vries syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/jansen-de-vries-syndrome/
Jansen-de Vries syndrome
Description
Jansen-de Vries syndrome is a developmental disorder that affects many parts of the body. Features of this condition include unique facial features, intellectual disability, certain personality characteristics, behavioral changes, and gastrointestinal problems.
The signs and symptoms of Jansen-de Vries syndrome typically begin soon after birth. Affected infants often have low muscle tone (hypotonia) and feeding difficulties. Children with this disorder are often slow to develop speech and language skills, They may also be slow to acquire motor skills, such as standing or walking. People with Jansen-de Vries syndrome also tend to have intellectual disability, which can range from mild to severe.
Additional features seen in people with Jansen-de Vries syndrome may include short stature, small hands and feet, and differences in facial features. The facial features that are common in people with this condition include a broad forehead, thin upper lip, low-set ears that are rotated backwards, and downturned corners of the mouth.
Gastrointestinal problems, such as constipation, are also common in people with Jansen-de Vries syndrome. Many affected individuals experience recurrent episodes of nausea and vomiting (cyclic vomiting).
Though people with Jansen-de Vries syndrome tend to be very social with outgoing and friendly personalities, affected individuals may experience behavioral differences, such as anxiety disorders and
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder
. Some people with Jansen-de Vries syndrome have
autism-spectrum disorder
, a developmental disorder that affects communication and social skills.
Other signs and symptoms of Jansen-de Vries syndrome include vision problems, an increased sensitivity to sound (hyperacusis), and a higher-than-normal pain threshold. Less commonly, people with Jansen-de Vries syndrome can have congenital heart defects. These may include openings in the wall (septum) that separates the upper or lower chambers of the heart (atrial or ventricular septal defects).
Frequency
Jansen-de Vries is a rare condition; fewer than 100 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Causes
Certain variants (sometimes called mutations) in the
PPM1D
gene cause Jansen-de Vries syndrome. The
PPM1D
gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called protein phosphatase 1D. This enzyme is present in many of the body's tissues, including the developing brain.
Protein phosphatase 1D belongs to a group of enzymes called the PP2C phosphatases, which regulate cell development in response to environmental stress. In particular, protein phosphatase 1D helps return the cell to its normal state after the cell's DNA has been damaged by environmental agents such as toxic chemicals or radiation.
In addition, protein phosphatase 1D is thought to play a role in regulating areas of tightly packed DNA called heterochromatin. Because gene expression is lower when DNA is tightly packed than when DNA is loosely packed, protein phosphatase 1D helps to turn off (silence) regions of DNA that are not needed.
The variants in the
PPM1D
gene that cause Jansen-de Vries syndrome typically disrupt the gene's instructions, resulting in an enzyme that does not function as it should. Researchers believe that this enzyme is not able to reach the cell's nucleus. Without enough functional protein phosphatase 1D, gene expression may be altered and cells are not able to fully recover from DNA damage. Researchers are trying to learn exactly how these gene variants affect the developing brain and other body systems to cause the signs and symptoms of Jansen-de Vries syndrome.
Learn more about the gene associated with Jansen-de Vries syndrome
PPM1D
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Most cases of this condition result from new (de novo) variants in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in an affected individual's parent or during early embryonic development. These affected individuals typically have no history of the disorder in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
IDDGIP
Intellectual developmental disorder with gastrointestinal difficulties and high pain threshold
JDVS
Additional Information & Resources
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
JANSEN-DE VRIES SYNDROME; JDVS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Jansen S, Geuer S, Pfundt R, Brough R, Ghongane P, Herkert JC, Marco EJ,
Willemsen MH, Kleefstra T, Hannibal M, Shieh JT, Lynch SA, Flinter F, FitzPatrick
DR, Gardham A, Bernhard B, Ragge N, Newbury-Ecob R, Bernier R, Kvarnung M,
Magnusson EA, Wessels MW, van Slegtenhorst MA, Monaghan KG, de Vries P, Veltman
JA; Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study; Lord CJ, Vissers LE, de Vries BB.
De Novo Truncating Mutations in the Last and Penultimate Exons of PPM1D Cause an
Intellectual Disability Syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Apr 6;100(4):650-658. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.02.005. Epub 2017 Mar 23.
Citation on PubMed
Kuroda Y, Murakami H, Yokoi T, Kumaki T, Enomoto Y, Tsurusaki Y, Kurosawa K.
Two unrelated girls with intellectual disability associated with a truncating
mutation in the PPM1D penultimate exon. Brain Dev. 2019 Jun;41(6):538-541. doi:
10.1016/j.braindev.2019.02.007. Epub 2019 Feb 20.
Citation on PubMed
Lu X, Nannenga B, Donehower LA. PPM1D dephosphorylates Chk1 and p53 and
abrogates cell cycle checkpoints. Genes Dev. 2005 May 15;19(10):1162-74. doi:
10.1101/gad.1291305. Epub 2005 May 3.
Citation on PubMed
Porrmann J, Rump A, Hackmann K, Di Donato N, Kahlert AK, Wagner J, Jahn A,
Eger I, Flury M, Schrock E, Tzschach A, Gieldon L. Novel truncating PPM1D
mutation in a patient with intellectual disability. Eur J Med Genet. 2019
Jan;62(1):70-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.05.006. Epub 2018 May 11.
Citation on PubMed
Tuiskula A, Rahikkala E, Kero A, Haanpaa MK, Avela K. Jansen de Vries
syndrome: Report of four new patients and review of the literature. Eur J Med
Genet. 2023 Aug;66(8):104807. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104807. Epub 2023 Jun 28.
Citation on PubMed
Wojcik MH, Srivastava S, Agrawal PB, Balci TB, Callewaert B, Calvo PL, Carli
D, Caudle M, Colaiacovo S, Cross L, Demetriou K, Drazba K, Dutra-Clarke M,
Edwards M, Genetti CA, Grange DK, Hickey SE, Isidor B, Kury S, Lachman HM,
Lavillaureix A, Lyons MJ, Marcelis C, Marco EJ, Martinez-Agosto JA, Nowak C,
Pizzol A, Planes M, Prijoles EJ, Riberi E, Rush ET, Russell BE, Sachdev R,
Schmalz B, Shears D, Stevenson DA, Wilson K, Jansen S, de Vries BBA, Curry CJ.
Jansen-de Vries syndrome: Expansion of the PPM1D clinical and phenotypic spectrum
in 34 families. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Jul;191(7):1900-1910. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.63226. Epub 2023 May 14.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page