Agalsidase beta Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Agalsidase beta Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623025.html
Agalsidase beta Injection
pronounced as (a gal' si dase be' ta)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Agalsidase beta has been associated with hypersensitivity (severe allergic) reactions, including anaphylaxis, and may cause infusion-related reactions during and within 24 hours after infusions. Your doctor or nurse will monitor you very closely during your infusion. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical care: headache; nausea; vomiting; diarrhea; stomach pain; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat; rash; hives; itching; fever; chills; dizziness; weakness; difficulty breathing; fast or irregular heartbeat; or chest pain. Your doctor will give you your medicine at a hospital or clinic and monitor you closely. Your doctor may given you medicines prior to each infusion to reduce the chance of these events occurring.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Agalsidase beta injection is used to treat Fabry disease (an inherited condition in which a type of fatty substance builds up in the body, resulting in nerve and organ damage) in adults and children 2 years of age and older. Agalsidase beta injection is in a class of medications called enzymes. It works by replacing an enzyme normally produced by the body that helps prevent the build up of the fatty substance in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Agalsidase beta comes as a powder to be mixed with a liquid and injected intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or a nurse in a hospital or clinic. Agalsidase beta injection is usually infused (injected slowly) intravenously over a period of at least 90 minutes once every 2 weeks.
Agalsidase beta injection may cause serious adverse reactions, including allergic reactions during an infusion and for 24 hours afterwards.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving agalsidase beta injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to agalsidase beta, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in agalsidase beta injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart or kidney problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving agalsidase beta injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of agalsidase beta injection, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Agalsidase beta injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
cough, sore throat, runny nose, or other signs of infection
fatigue
back pain
ringing in the ears
hearing loss
repeatedly picking or scratching skin
anxiety
depression
hot flashes
falling
Agalsidase beta injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Fabrazyme
®
Last Revised -
09/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page