Ceftazidime and Avibactam Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ceftazidime and Avibactam Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615018.html
Ceftazidime and Avibactam Injection
pronounced as (sef taz'' i deem) and (a vi bak' tam)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of ceftazidime and avibactam injection is used with metronidazole (Flagyl) to treat abdominal (stomach area) infections. It is also used to treat pneumonia that developed in people who are on ventilators or who were in a hospital, and kidney and urinary tract infections. Ceftazidime is in a class of medications called cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria. Avibactam is in a class of medications called beta-lactamase inhibitors. It works by preventing bacteria from breaking down ceftazidime.
Antibiotics such as ceftazidime and avibactam will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of ceftazidime and avibactam injection comes as a powder to be added to fluid and injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually infused (injected slowly) intravenously over a period of 2 hours every 8 hours. The length of your treatment depends on your general health, the type of infection you have and how well you respond to the medication. Your doctor will tell you how long to use ceftazidime and avibactam injection. You may receive ceftazidime and avibactam injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving ceftazidime and avibactam injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with ceftazidime and avibactam injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, tell your doctor. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish ceftazidime and avibactam injection, tell your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using ceftazidime and avibactam injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ceftazidime and avibactam injection, carbapenem antibiotics such as doripenem (Doribax), imipenem and cilastatin (Primaxin), or meropenem (Merrem); cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil, cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefdinir, cefditoren (Spectracef), cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefoxitin, cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftazidime (Fortaz, Tazicef, in Avycaz), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Ceftin, Zinacef), and cephalexin (Keflex); penicillin; any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ceftazidime and avibactam injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving ceftazidime and avibactam injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using ceftazidime and avibactam injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ceftazidime and avibactam injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting
nausea
diarrhea
constipation
stomach pain
dizziness
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, itching, hives, difficulty breathing or swallowing
severe diarrhea with watery or bloody stools (up to 2 months after your treatment)
seizures
confusion
sudden muscle twitching or jerking that you cannot control
hand tremor
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
Ceftazidime and avibactam injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to ceftazidime and avibactam injection.
If you have diabetes, ceftazidime and avibactam injection can cause false results with certain urine glucose tests. Talk to your doctor about which glucose tests you can use during your treatment with ceftazidime and avibactam injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Avycaz
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page