Toremifene: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Toremifene
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608003.html
Toremifene
pronounced as (tore em' i feen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Toremifene may cause QT prolongation (an irregular heart rhythm that can lead to fainting, loss of consciousness, seizures, or sudden death). Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had long QT syndrome (an inherited condition in which a person is more likely to have QT prolongation) or you have or have ever had low levels of potassium or magnesium in your blood, an irregular heartbeat, heart failure, or liver disease. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking amitriptyline (Elavil); antifungals such as ketoconazole (Nizoral), itraconazole (Sporanox), or voriconazole (Vfend); clarithromycin (Biaxin, in Prevpac); erythromycin (E.E.S., E-Mycin, Erythrocin); granisetron (Kytril); haloperidol (Haldol); certain medications for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) such as atazanavir (Reyataz), indinavir (Crixivan), nelfinavir (Viracept), ritonavir (Norvir, in Kaletra), and saquinavir (Invirase); certain medications for irregular heartbeat such as amiodarone (Cordarone, Pacerone), disopyramide (Norpace), dofetilide (Tikosyn), ibutilide (Corvert), procainamide (Procanbid, Pronestyl), quinidine, and sotalol (Betapace, Betapace AF); levofloxacin (Levaquin); nefazodone; ofloxacin; ondansetron (Zofran); telithromycin (Ketek); thioridazine; and venlafaxine (Effexor). If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking toremifene and call your doctor immediately: fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat; fainting; loss of consciousness; or seizures.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to toremifene. Your doctor also may order electrocardiograms (EKGs, tests that record the electrical activity of the heart) before and during your treatment to be sure that it is safe for you to take toremifene.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking toremifene.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Toremifene is used to treat breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body in women who have experienced menopause ('change of life'; end of monthly menstrual periods). Toremifene is in a class of medications called nonsteroidal antiestrogens. It works by blocking the activity of estrogen (a female hormone) in the breast. This may stop the growth of some breast tumors that need estrogen to grow.
How should this medicine be used?
Toremifene comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day. Take toremifene at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take toremifene exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking toremifene,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to toremifene, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in toremifene tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking toremifene. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with toremifene: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking toremifene. Do not start this medication while taking toremifene without discussing with your healthcare provider..
tell your doctor if your cancer has spread to your bones and if you have or have ever had any condition that causes your blood to clot more easily than normal or endometrial hyperplasia (overgrowth of the lining of the uterus).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking toremifene, call your doctor. Toremifene may harm the fetus. If you have not experienced menopause, you should use a reliable nonhormonal method of birth control to prevent pregnancy while you are taking toremifene.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking toremifene.
you should know that your tumor may grow slightly bigger when you begin treatment with toremifene. If this happens, you may experience redness of the skin and bone pain. This is normal and does not mean that your cancer is worsening. As you continue your treatment with toremifene, your tumor will shrink.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while you are taking this medicine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Toremifene may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
hot flashes
sweating
blurred or abnormal vision
sensitivity to light or seeing halos around lights
difficulty seeing at night
fading or yellowing of colors
dry eyes
dizziness
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
vaginal bleeding
pelvic pain or pressure
irregular periods
unusual vaginal discharge
sleepiness
confusion
muscle pain or weakness
joint pain
abdominal pain
constipation
frequent urination
excessive thirst
loss of appetite
nausea
vomiting
Some people who took toremifene developed cancer of the lining of the uterus. There is not enough information to tell if toremifene caused these people to develop cancer. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Toremifene may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat, and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
headache
nausea
vomiting
dizziness
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
unsteadiness
hot flashes
vaginal bleeding
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Fareston
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page