Deoxycholic Acid Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Deoxycholic Acid Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615026.html
Deoxycholic Acid Injection
pronounced as (dee ox'' i koe' lik as' id)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Deoxycholic acid injection is used to improve the appearance and profile of moderate to severe submental fat ('double chin'; fatty tissue located under the chin). Deoxycholic acid injection is in a class of medications called cytolytic medications. It works by breaking down cells in fatty tissue.
How should this medicine be used?
Deoxycholic acid injection comes as a liquid to be injected subcutaneously (just under the skin) by a doctor. Your doctor will choose the best place to inject the medication in order to treat your condition. You may receive up to 50 injections in a single treatment session. You may receive up to 6 additional treatment sessions, each spaced 1 month apart, depending on your condition and response as recommended by your doctor.
Your doctor may use an anesthetic cream, or a cold pack, to numb your skin before injecting deoxycholic acid.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving deoxycholic acid injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to deoxycholic acid, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in deoxycholic acid injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention if you take any medication that prevents your blood from clotting, including anticoagulant medications or aspirin or other antiplatelet medications. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have swelling or other signs of infection in the area where deoxycholic acid will be injected. Your doctor will not inject the medication into an infected area.
tell your doctor if you have had cosmetic treatments or surgery to your face, neck, or chin or have had or have medical conditions in or near the neck area, bleeding problems, or difficulty swallowing.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving deoxycholic acid injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Deoxycholic acid injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
swelling, warmth, numbness, or bruising in the place where you received the injection
hardness in the place where you received the injection
hair loss in the place where you received the injection
itching
headache
nausea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
difficulty swallowing
pain or tightness in the face or neck
uneven smile
face muscle weakness
pain, redness, bleeding, sores, or drainage where you received the injection
rash, hives, itching
Deoxycholic acid injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about deoxycholic acid injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Kybella
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page