Arimoclomol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Arimoclomol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624065.html
Arimoclomol
pronounced as (ar im″ oh kloe′ mol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Arimoclomol is used in combination with miglustat to treat neurologic symptoms in adults and children 2 years of age and older who have Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC; an inherited disease in which a certain fatty substance is not broken down and used normally in the body and instead builds up in some organs and can cause nerve and brain problems). Arimoclomol is in a class of medications called heat shock protein activators. It is not known exactly how arimoclomol works to treat neurologic symptoms in patients with Niemann-Pick disease type C.
How should this medicine be used?
Arimoclomol comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food three times a day. Take arimoclomol at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take arimoclomol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not chew or crush them.
If you are unable to swallow capsules whole, you may open the capsules and sprinkle the contents over one tablespoonful (15 mL) of water, apple juice, or a soft food such as applesauce, pudding, or yogurt in a small cup. Stir the mixture with a spoon for 15 seconds and swallow the mixture immediately. Do not store the mixture for future use.
If you have a nasogastric (NG) tube, your doctor or pharmacist will explain how to prepare arimoclomol to give through an NG tube.
Arimoclomol controls Niemann-Pick disease but does not cure it. Continue to take arimoclomol even if you feel well. Do not stop taking arimoclomol without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking arimoclomol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to arimoclomol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in arimoclomol capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking arimoclomol. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. Your doctor may tell you to use birth control to prevent pregnancy while you are taking arimoclomol. If you become pregnant while taking arimoclomol, call your doctor. Arimoclomol may harm the fetus.
You should know that arimoclomol may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking arimoclomol.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Arimoclomol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
weight loss
decreased appetite
nasal congestion, runny nose, sneezing, sore or scratchy throat, cough, or fever
headache
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking arimoclomol and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives; rash; itching; swelling of the face, eyes, mouth, throat, tongue, or lips; difficulty breathing or swallowing; dizziness
seizure
Arimoclomol may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Miplyffa
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page