Childhood absence epilepsy: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Childhood absence epilepsy
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/childhood-absence-epilepsy/
Childhood absence epilepsy
Description
Childhood absence epilepsy is a condition characterized by recurrent seizures (epilepsy). This condition begins in childhood, usually between ages 3 and 8. Affected children have absence seizures (also known as petit mal seizures), which are brief episodes of impaired consciousness that look like staring spells. During seizures, children are not aware of and do not respond to people or activities around them. The seizures usually last several seconds and they occur often, up to 200 times each day.
Some affected individuals have febrile seizures before they develop childhood absence epilepsy. Febrile seizures are involuntary muscle contractions (convulsions) brought on by a high body temperature (fever).
In most people with childhood absence epilepsy, the absence seizures disappear in adolescence. However, some affected individuals continue to have absence seizures into adulthood, or they may develop generalized tonic-clonic seizures, which cause muscle rigidity, convulsions, and loss of consciousness, or myoclonic seizures, which are characterized by rapid, uncontrolled muscle jerks.
Frequency
Childhood absence epilepsy affects 2 to 8 in 100,000 children under age 15 each year. The condition is more common in girls than in boys.
Causes
The genetics of childhood absence epilepsy are complex and not completely understood. It is thought that multiple genetic changes or a combination of genetic and environmental factors contribute to development of the condition. Most genetic changes associated with childhood absence epilepsy are rare, having been found in only a small number of affected individuals. Each genetic change appears to play a role in some populations but not others.
Several genes associated with childhood absence epilepsy provide instructions for making pieces (subunits) of the GABA
A
receptor protein. The GABA
A
receptor acts as a
channel
that allows negatively charged chlorine atoms (chloride ions) to cross the cell membrane. The influx of chloride ions in nerve cells (
neurons
) in developed brains creates an environment that blocks (inhibits) signaling between neurons and prevents the brain from being overloaded with too many signals. Mutations in GABA
A
receptor subunit genes lead to production of altered subunit proteins that cannot form functional receptors, so fewer GABA
A
receptors are available. As a result, neurons become overloaded with signals. Researchers believe that the overstimulation of certain neurons in the brain triggers the abnormal brain activity associated with seizures.
Problems with another type of ion channel, called a calcium channel, are also associated with childhood absence epilepsy. Calcium channels transport positively charged calcium atoms (calcium ions) into cells. These channels help control the release of
neurotransmitters
, which are chemicals that relay signals from one neuron to another. Mutations that result in overactive calcium channels cause certain neurons to become overstimulated, triggering seizures.
Mutations in other genes that do not provide instructions for making ion channels have also been associated with childhood absence epilepsy. It is not clear how these changes are involved in the development of absence seizures.
Learn more about the gene associated with Childhood absence epilepsy
GABRA1
Additional Information from NCBI Gene:
CACNA1H
GABRB3
GABRG2
JRK
Inheritance
Because childhood absence epilepsy appears to be a complex disease without a single genetic cause, it does not have a straightforward pattern of inheritance. When associated with mutations in GABA
A
receptor or calcium channel genes, it seems to follow an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase the likelihood of the disorder. Some people who have the altered gene never develop the condition, a situation known as reduced penetrance.
Other Names for This Condition
Absence epilepsy, childhood
Petit mal epilepsy
Pykno-epilepsy
Pyknolepsy
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, childhood absence 4
Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, childhood absence, JRK related
Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, childhood absence, susceptibility to, 1
Genetic Testing Registry: EPILEPSY, CHILDHOOD ABSENCE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2
Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, childhood absence, susceptibility to, 5
Genetic Testing Registry: Epilepsy, childhood absence, susceptibility to, 6
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
EPILEPSY, CHILDHOOD ABSENCE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1; ECA1
FEBRILE SEIZURES, FAMILIAL, 8; FEB8
EPILEPSY, CHILDHOOD ABSENCE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 6; ECA6
EPILEPSY, CHILDHOOD ABSENCE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 5; ECA5
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Crunelli V, Leresche N. Childhood absence epilepsy: genes, channels, neurons
and networks. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2002 May;3(5):371-82. doi: 10.1038/nrn811.
Citation on PubMed
Hirose S. Mutant GABA(A) receptor subunits in genetic (idiopathic) epilepsy.
Prog Brain Res. 2014;213:55-85. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63326-2.00003-X.
Citation on PubMed
Kang JQ, Macdonald RL. Molecular Pathogenic Basis for GABRG2 Mutations
Associated With a Spectrum of Epilepsy Syndromes, From Generalized Absence
Epilepsy to Dravet Syndrome. JAMA Neurol. 2016 Aug 1;73(8):1009-16. doi:
10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.0449.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Yalcin O. Genes and molecular mechanisms involved in the epileptogenesis of
idiopathic absence epilepsies. Seizure. 2012 Mar;21(2):79-86. doi:
10.1016/j.seizure.2011.12.002. Epub 2011 Dec 27.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Epilepsy
Genetic Disorders
Seizures
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Absence seizure
Bilateral tonic-clonic seizure
Febrile seizures
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page