Ranibizumab Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ranibizumab Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607044.html
Ranibizumab Injection
pronounced as (ra'' ni biz' oo mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Ranibizumab injection is available as different products that are biologic medications (medications made from living organisms). These biologic products are considered to be "biosimilar" to ranibizumab injection which means they work just as well and are just as safe to use as ranibizumab injection. Ranibizumab injection mentioned in the monograph below refers to any of these products.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ranibizumab injection is used to treat wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD; an eye disease that causes central vision loss [ability to see straight ahead]), diabetic macular edema (an eye disease caused by diabetes that can lead to vision loss), diabetic retinopathy (damage to the eyes caused by diabetes), myopic choroidal neovascularization (mCNV; a complication in near-sighted people where new blood vessels grow in the back of the eye), and macular edema after retinal vein occlusion (an eye disease caused by blockage of blood flow from the eye that leads to blurry vision and vision loss). Ranibizumab is in a class of medications called vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) antagonists. It works by stopping abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage in the eye(s) that may cause vision loss.
How should this medicine be used?
Ranibizumab injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected into the eye by a doctor. It is given once a month. Your doctor may give you injections on a different schedule if that is best for you.
Before you receive ranibizumab injection, your doctor will clean your eye to prevent infection and numb your eye to reduce discomfort during the injection. You may feel pressure in your eye when the medication is injected. After your injection, your doctor will need to examine your eyes before you leave the office.
Ranibizumab controls certain eye conditions, but does not cure them. Your doctor will watch you carefully to see how well ranibizumab works for you. Talk to your doctor about how long you should continue treatment with ranibizumab.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving ranibizumab injection products or implant,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have an infection in or around your eyes. Your doctor may not give you ranibizumab injection until the infection is gone.
tell your doctor if you have inflammation in your eye or any other eye condition. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a heart attack or a stroke.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving ranibizumab injection, call your doctor.
your doctor may prescribe antibiotic eye drops for you to use for a few days after you receive each injection or implant. Talk to your doctor about how to use these eye drops.
ask your doctor if there are any activities you should avoid during your treatment with ranibizumab injection.
you should plan to have someone drive you home after your treatment.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive ranibizumab injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ranibizumab may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
dry or itchy eyes
teary eyes
feeling that something is in your eye
nausea
sneezing, runny nose, cough, or sore throat
tiredness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
worsening eye pain, eye redness, bleeding in or around the eye, discharge from the eyes, puffy eyelids, or swelling of the eyes
eye sensitivity to light, blurred or cloudy vision, or vision loss
seeing flashing lights or seeing ''floaters'' or small specks
chest pain, shortness of breath, slow or difficult speech, or weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
Ranibizumab injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cimerli
®
(ranibizumab-eqrn)
Byooviz
®
(ranibizumab-nuna)
Lucentis
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page