Bunion: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Bunion
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/bunion/
Bunion
Description
A bunion, known technically as hallux valgus, is a bony bump on the side of the foot at the base of the big toe. Bunions develop slowly as pressure on the joint at the base of the big toe causes the toe to move out of place, leaning inward toward the second toe. Because this joint carries a lot of weight during activities like standing and walking, bunions can cause foot pain, stiffness, redness, and swelling. Calluses may form where the big toe and second toe rub together or on the ball of the foot. Unless they are treated, bunions get worse over time, and it may become difficult to wear regular shoes or walk without pain. Bunions can occur in one or both feet.
In most cases, bunions develop in adulthood. Rarely, children may be born with bunions (known as congenital hallux valgus) or develop them later in childhood (juvenile or adolescent hallux valgus).
Frequency
Bunions are a very common foot disorder, affecting about a third of adults in the United States. The prevalence of bunions increases with age. They are more common in women than in men, likely because of differences in foot anatomy, footwear, and genetic influences.
Causes
The causes of bunions are unclear, although scientists suspect that both inherited and lifestyle factors contribute to their development. Studies suggest that congenital and juvenile hallux valgus tend to be related to joint deformities with a genetic cause. Little is known about the genetic contribution to bunions that occur later in life, and no specific genes involved in the development of bunions have been identified.
For bunions that appear in adulthood, inherited factors related to the shape and structure of the foot and the way the foot moves (foot mechanics) likely influence a person's risk of developing the condition. It has long been suggested that wearing ill-fitting shoes are another significant risk factor, specifically shoes that are too tight, shoes with high heels, or shoes with a narrow toe box. Research suggests that poorly fitting shoes probably do not cause bunions, but they may make bunions develop earlier or worsen more quickly in people with an underlying susceptibility.
Other risk factors for bunions include inflammatory diseases (such as
rheumatoid arthritis
),
osteoarthritis
, and flat feet (
pes planus
). Bunions are also a feature of several rare genetic syndromes that affect bone development, including Chitayat syndrome and
fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva
.
Inheritance
Bunions are a complex condition without a clear pattern of inheritance. Many affected individuals have multiple family members who are also affected. The risk of developing bunions is greater for
first-degree relatives
of affected individuals (such as siblings or children) as compared to the general public.
When bunions occur as part of a genetic syndrome, this feature follows the inheritance pattern of the syndrome.
Other Names for This Condition
Bunion of great toe
Hallux abductovalgus
Hallux valgus
HAV
HV
Additional Information & Resources
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Hannan MT, Menz HB, Jordan JM, Cupples LA, Cheng CH, Hsu YH. High heritability
of hallux valgus and lesser toe deformities in adult men and women. Arthritis
Care Res (Hoboken). 2013 Sep;65(9):1515-21. doi: 10.1002/acr.22040.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Hecht PJ, Lin TJ. Hallux valgus. Med Clin North Am. 2014 Mar;98(2):227-32.
doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2013.10.007. Epub 2013 Dec 8.
Citation on PubMed
Hsu YH, Liu Y, Hannan MT, Maixner W, Smith SB, Diatchenko L, Golightly YM,
Menz HB, Kraus VB, Doherty M, Wilson AG, Jordan JM. Genome-wide association
meta-analyses to identify common genetic variants associated with hallux valgus
in Caucasian and African Americans. J Med Genet. 2015 Nov;52(11):762-9. doi:
10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103142. Epub 2015 Sep 2.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Nix S, Smith M, Vicenzino B. Prevalence of hallux valgus in the general
population: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Foot Ankle Res. 2010 Sep
27;3:21. doi: 10.1186/1757-1146-3-21.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Nix SE, Vicenzino BT, Collins NJ, Smith MD. Characteristics of foot structure
and footwear associated with hallux valgus: a systematic review. Osteoarthritis
Cartilage. 2012 Oct;20(10):1059-74. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2012.06.007. Epub 2012
Jul 5.
Citation on PubMed
Vanore JV, Christensen JC, Kravitz SR, Schuberth JM, Thomas JL, Weil LS,
Zlotoff HJ, Mendicino RW, Couture SD; Clinical Practice Guideline First
Metatarsophalangeal Joint Disorders Panel of the American College of Foot and
Ankle Surgeons. Diagnosis and treatment of first metatarsophalangeal joint
disorders. Section 1: Hallux valgus. J Foot Ankle Surg. 2003
May-Jun;42(3):112-23. doi: 10.1016/s1067-2516(03)70014-3. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Foot Injuries and Disorders
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Bunion removal
Bunions
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page