Netarsudil Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Netarsudil Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618014.html
Netarsudil Ophthalmic
pronounced as (ne tar' soo dil)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Netarsudil ophthalmic is used to treat glaucoma (a condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision) and ocular hypertension (a condition which causes increased pressure in the eye). Netarsudil is in a class of medications called rho kinase inhibitors. It works by lowering the pressure in the eye by increasing the flow of natural eye fluids out of the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Netarsudil ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eye. Place in the affected eye(s) once a day in the evening. Use netarsudil eye drops at around the same time every day.
Use netarsudil eye drops exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Netarsudil controls glaucoma and ocular hypertension but does not cure them. Do not stop using netarsudil eye drops without talking to your doctor.
To use the eye drops follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the space between your lower eyelid and your eye. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using netarsudil eye drops,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are using another topical eye medication, instill it at least 5 minutes before or after you instill netarsudil eye drops.
tell your doctor if you have any other eye problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking netarsudil eye drops, call your doctor.
if you are having eye surgery, tell the doctor that you are using netarsudil eye drops.
you should know that if you have an eye injury or develop an eye or eye lid infection while using netarsudil eye drops, ask your doctor if you can continue using netarsudil eye drops.
If you wear contact lenses, remove them before instilling netarsudil eye drops. You may put them back in 15 minutes after you instill the drops.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule in the evening. Do not instill two doses in one day, or instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Netarsudil may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, stinging, or eye pain after instilling the medication
discoloration of the eye
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
eye pain
changes in vision (blurriness, difficulty seeing)
eye sensitivity to light
teary eyes
eye or eye lid redness
Netarsudil ophthalmic may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the bottle it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store unopened bottles in the refrigerator. You may store opened bottles of the medication in the refrigerator until after the expiration date printed on the package has passed, or you may store the medication at room temperature (up to 77°F [25°C]) for up to 6 weeks.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Rhopressa
®
Rocklatan
®
(as a combination product containing Latanoprost, Netarsudil)
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page