Propranolol (Infantile Hemangioma): MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Propranolol (Infantile Hemangioma)
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615024.html
Propranolol (Infantile Hemangioma)
pronounced as (proe pran' oh lole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Propranolol oral solution is used to treat proliferating infantile hemangioma (benign [noncancerous] growths or tumors appearing on or under the skin shortly after birth) in infants 5 weeks to 5 months of age. Propranolol is in a class of medications called beta blockers. It works by narrowing the blood vessels already formed and by preventing new ones from growing.
How should this medicine be used?
Propranolol comes as an oral solution (liquid) to take by mouth. Propranolol oral solution is usually taken twice daily (at least 9 hours apart) during or immediately after a meal. Give propranolol solution at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on the prescription label carefully, and ask the doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Give propranolol exactly as directed. Do not give your child more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by the doctor.
Do not shake the oral solution container before use.
If your child is unable to eat or is vomiting the dose, skip the dose and continue the regular dosing schedule when they are eating again.
Your doctor may start your child on a low dose of propranolol and increase the dose after a week, again at the end of the second week, and then as your child's weight changes afterwards.
Follow the manufacturer's directions to measure the dose using the oral syringe supplied with the medication. You can give the solution to your child straight from the oral syringe or you can mix it with a small amount of milk or fruit juice and give it in a baby's bottle. Ask the pharmacist or doctor if you have any questions about how to use the oral syringe or give this medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before you give propranolol oral solution,
tell the doctor and pharmacist if your child is allergic to propranolol, any other medications, or any ingredients in propranolol oral solution. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell the doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products your child is taking or if you are a breastfeeding mother and are taking or plan to take any medications. A doctor may need to change the dose or monitor your child carefully for side effects. If you are breastfeeding, your doctor may tell you not to breastfeed during your child's treatment with propranolol.
tell the doctor if your child was born prematurely and is younger than a corrected age of 5 weeks, weighs less than 4.5 lbs (2 kg), or has a low blood pressure or pulse rate. Also, tell the doctor if your child has or has had asthma or other breathing problems, pheochromocytoma (a tumor on a small gland near the kidneys that causes high blood pressure), or heart failure. The doctor will probably tell you not to give propranolol oral solution.
you should know that propranolol may increase the risk of hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) and prevent the warning signs and symptoms that would tell you that your child's blood sugar is low. Let your doctor know if your child is unable to eat or drink normally, is vomiting, or has a cold or other infection while they are taking propranolol. You should know the symptoms of low blood sugar and what to do if your child has these symptoms. If your child experiences any of the following symptoms of hypoglycemia, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment: pale, blue or purple skin; sweating; irritability; crying more than usual; irregular or fast heartbeat; shallow or interrupted breathing; poor feeding; low body temperature; unusual sleepiness; seizures; or loss of consciousness. If your child is conscious, your doctor may tell you to give your child a drink that contains sugar.
you should know that if your child has allergic reactions to different substances, the reactions may be worse while your child is taking propranolol and the allergic reactions may not respond to the usual doses of injectable epinephrine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless the doctor tells you otherwise, the child should continue a normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss giving a dose, skip the dose and continue the regular dosing schedule. Do not give a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Propranolol may cause side effects. Tell your child's doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
sleep problems
nightmares
vomiting
diarrhea
stomach pain
agitation
irritability
decreased appetite
Some side effects can be serious. If the child experiences any of the following symptoms, call the child's doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
difficulty breathing or swallowing
wheezing
shortness of breath
slow, irregular heartbeat
sudden weakness of an arm or leg
cold hands or feet
pale skin
unusual tiredness or fatigue
fainting
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat, and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze. Dispose of any remaining propranolol oral solution 2 months after you first open the bottle.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
slow or irregular heartbeat
cough or wheezing
dizziness
fainting
seizures
restlessness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with the doctor.
Do not let anyone else take this medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling the prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Hemangeol
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page