Nipocalimab-aahu Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nipocalimab-aahu Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625078.html
Nipocalimab-aahu Injection
pronounced as nip″ oh kal′ i mab
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nipocalimab-aahu injection is used to treat certain types of myasthenia gravis (MG; a disorder of the nervous system that causes muscle weakness). Nipocalimab-aahu is in a group of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by reducing a certain natural substance in the body that causes symptoms of myasthenia gravis.
How should this medicine be used?
Nipocalimab-aahu comes as a solution (liquid) to be slowly injected intravenously (into a vein) over at least 15 minutes by a doctor or a nurse in a hospital or medical facility. It is injected once every 2 weeks.
Nipocalimab-aahu injection may cause serious reactions during the infusion or within 2 days after the infusion. A doctor or nurse will watch you closely during and for 30 minutes after finishing the infusion. Your doctor may slow or stop your infusion if you have a reaction to the medication. Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms: chills; flushing; itching or rash; nausea, extreme tiredness; headache; cough, fever, or flu-like symptoms; or dizziness.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking nipocalimab-aahu injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have an infection or have or have ever had an infection that keeps coming back.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving nipocalimab-aahu injection, call your doctor.
check with your doctor to see if you need to receive any vaccinations before beginning your treatment with nipocalimab-aahu injection. Do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of nipocalimab-aahu injection, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nipocalimab-aahu injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
stomach pain
back pain
muscle spasms
swelling of the arms hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the HOW section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever; chills; sore throat; cough; warm, red, or painful skin; painful or frequent urination; or other signs of infection
rash; hives; itching; feeling faint or lightheaded; swelling of the face, eyes, lips, mouth, throat, or tongue; trouble breathing; or chest or throat tightness
Nipocalimab-aahu injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Imaavy
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page