Sodium Bicarbonate Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sodium Bicarbonate Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625025.html
Sodium Bicarbonate Injection
pronounced as (soe′ dee um bye kar′ bo nate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sodium bicarbonate is used to treat metabolic acidosis (when too much acid builds up in your body fluids). Sodium bicarbonate is in a class of medications called alkalinizing agents. It works by providing bicarbonate to balance the effects of acidosis in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Sodium bicarbonate injection comes as a solution (liquid), or can be further diluted in fluid, to be given into a vein by a healthcare provider. It is usually given in an amount depending on your condition.
Your doctor will monitor bicarbonate levels in your blood and and increase or decrease your dose as needed.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving sodium bicarbonate,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be used with sodium bicarbonate. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before receiving sodium bicarbonate with your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have been vomiting or if you are taking diuretic medications (water pills). Your doctor may decide not to give you sodium bicarbonate.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had swelling of the hands, arms, legs and feet; heart failure; or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sodium bicarbonate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting, diarrhea, thirsty
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms telll your doctor immediately:
muscular twitchings or movements that you can not control, decreased urination, irritability, confusion, seizures
redness, swelling, or pain at the site of injection
Sodium bicarbonate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to sodium bicarbonate.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page