Ciprofloxacin Otic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ciprofloxacin Otic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618027.html
Ciprofloxacin Otic
pronounced as (sip roe flox' a sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ciprofloxacin otic solution (Cetraxal) and ciprofloxacin otic suspension (Otiprio) are used to treat outer ear infections in adults and children. Ciprofloxacin otic suspension (Otiprio) is also used in children during ear tube placement surgery to prevent infection or ear drainage. Ciprofloxacin otic is in a class of medications called quinolone antibiotics. It works by killing the bacteria that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Ciprofloxacin otic (Cetrexal) comes as a solution (liquid) to place into the ear. It is usually used twice a day for 7 days. Use ciprofloxacin otic solution at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use ciprofloxacin otic exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Ciprofloxacin otic (Otiprio) also comes as a suspension (liquid) to be placed into the ear by a doctor or nurse in a doctor's office or other medical facility. Ciprofloxacin otic suspension (Otiprio) is usually given as a single dose.
Ciprofloxacin otic is only for use in the ears. Do not use in the eyes.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment of out ear infections with ciprofloxacin otic. If your symptoms do not improve after one week or get worse, call your doctor. Also, call your doctor if you have ear pain, continuous ear discharge, or fever following use during ear tube surgery.
Ciprofloxacin otic (Cetrexal) ear drops come in single-use containers (small bottles to be used for one dose). Use the liquid from the container immediately after opening, and throw away the container when you are finished. Use ciprofloxacin otic ear drops until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using ciprofloxacin otic too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
To use the eardrops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly.
Hold the container in your hand for at least 1 minute to warm the solution.
Twist off the top of the container.
Lie down with the affected ear upward.
Place the entire contents of the container into your ear.
Remain lying down with the affected ear upward for at least 60 seconds.
Repeat steps 1-6 for the opposite ear if necessary.
Throw away the empty container(s) in a trash can.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using ciprofloxacin otic,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ciprofloxacin (Cipro), gemifloxacin (Factive), levofloxacin (Levaquin), lomefloxacin (Maxaquin), moxifloxacin (Avelox), nalidixic acid (NegGram), norfloxacin (Noroxin), ofloxacin (Floxin), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ciprofloxacin otic. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using ciprofloxacin otic, call your doctor.
you should know that you must keep your infected ear(s) clean and dry while using ciprofloxacin otic. Avoid getting the infected ear(s) wet while bathing, and avoid swimming unless your doctor has told you otherwise.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use extra eardrops to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ciprofloxacin otic may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
ear discomfort, pain, or itching
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using ciprofloxacin otic and call your doctor immediately
rash
hives
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty swallowing or breathing
Ciprofloxacin otic may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cetraxal
®
Otiprio
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page