Retapamulin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Retapamulin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607049.html
Retapamulin
pronounced as (re' te pam' ue lin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Retapamulin has been discontinued in the US. Because this drug is no longer available in the US market, the material in this monograph is no longer updated. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers’ labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Retapamulin is used to treat impetigo (a skin infection caused by bacteria) in children and adults. Retapamulin is in a class of medications called antibacterials. It works by killing and stopping the growth of bacteria on the skin.
How should this medicine be used?
Retapamulin comes as an ointment to be applied in a thin layer to the skin. It is usually used two times a day for 5 days. Apply retapamulin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use retapamulin exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The infected area of the skin should begin to look better during the first few days of treatment with retapamulin. If your symptoms do not improve after using this medication for 3 to 4 days or get worse, call your doctor.
Retapamulin is for use only on the infected area of the skin. Do not let retapamulin ointment get into your eyes, or inside your mouth, or nose, or inside the female genital area. Do not swallow this medication.
Use retapamulin until you finish the prescription, even if the infection looks better. If you stop using retapamulin too soon or skip doses, the infection may not be completely gone and the bacteria could become difficult to treat with another antibiotic.
To use the ointment, follow these steps:
Use a clean cotton swab to spread a thin layer of retapamulin on the skin that is infected.
Cover the treated area with a bandage or clean gauze to protect the area and prevent accidental spread of the ointment to the eyes or other areas, especially in young children.
Wash your hands after applying retapamulin if the hands are not to be treated.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking retapamulin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to retapamulin, or any other medications. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using retapamulin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra ointment to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Retapamulin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
irritation at the place where you applied the ointment
blisters
burning
redness
swelling
oozing from the place where you applied the ointment
itching
diarrhea
headache
Retapamulin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish retapamulin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Altabax
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page