Teriparatide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Teriparatide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603018.html
Teriparatide Injection
pronounced as (terr ih par' a tyd)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Teriparatide injection is used to treat osteoporosis (a condition in which the bones become thin and weak and break easily) in women who have undergone menopause ('change in life,' end of menstrual periods), who are at high risk of fractures (broken bones), and cannot use other osteoporosis treatments. It is also used to increase bone mass in men with certain types of osteoporosis who are at high risk for having broken bones (fractures), and who cannot use other osteoporosis treatments. Teriparatide injection is also used to treat osteoporosis in men and women who are taking corticosteroids (a type of medication that may cause osteoporosis in some patients) who are at high risk of fractures (broken bones), and cannot use other osteoporosis treatments. Teriparatide injection contains a synthetic form of natural human hormone called parathyroid hormone (PTH). It works by causing the body to build new bone and by increasing bone strength and density (thickness).
How should this medicine be used?
Teriparatide injection comes as a solution (liquid) to inject subcutaneously (under the skin) in your thigh or lower stomach area. This medication comes in prefilled dosing pens. It is usually injected once a day for up to 2 years. To help you remember to use teriparatide injection, use it at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use teriparatide injection exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You can inject teriparatide injection yourself or have a friend or relative perform the injections. Before you use teriparatide injection yourself the first time, read the User Manual that comes with it. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to show you or the person who will be injecting the medication how to inject it. The User Manual includes solutions to problems you may have when you try to use teriparatide injection. Be sure to ask your pharmacist or doctor if you have any questions about how to inject this medication.
Teriparatide injection comes in a pen that contains enough medication for 28 doses. Do not transfer the medication to a syringe. Use a new needle for each injection. Needles are sold separately. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have questions about the type of needles to use. Dispose of used needles in a puncture-resistant container. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
Teriparatide injection controls osteoporosis but does not cure it. Continue to use teriparatide injection even if you feel well. Do not stop using teriparatide injection without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using teriparatide injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to teriparatide, mannitol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in teriparatide injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using teriparatide injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a bone disease such as Paget's disease, bone cancer or a cancer that has spread to the bone, or radiation therapy of the bones, any condition that causes you to have too much calcium in your blood, such as disease of the parathyroid gland; kidney or urinary tract stones; and liver, kidney, or heart disease.
you should know that teriparatide injection should only be used by women once they have passed menopause and, therefore, cannot become pregnant or breast-feed. Teriparatide injection should not be used during pregnancy or while breast-feeding.
you should know that teriparatide injection may cause fast heartbeat, dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start using teriparatide injection. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. Be sure a chair is nearby when you inject teriparatide injection so you can sit down if you get dizzy.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
You should eat and drink plenty of foods and drinks that are rich in calcium and vitamin D while you are using teriparatide injection. Your doctor will tell you which foods and drinks are good sources of these nutrients and how many servings you need each day. If you find it difficult to eat enough of these foods, tell your doctor. In that case, your doctor may prescribe or recommend a supplement.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it that day. However, if the day has already passed, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Never inject more than one dose per day.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Teriparatide injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain
weakness
heartburn or sour stomach
leg cramps
dizziness
depression
redness, pain, swelling, bruising, a few drops of blood or itching at the injection site
back spasms
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
chest pain
fainting
difficulty breathing
nausea
vomiting
constipation
lack of energy
muscle weakness
purple net-like pattern, painful lumps, or sores on the skin
Teriparatide injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the pen it came in with the cap on and without a needle attached, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it in the refrigerator but do not freeze it. Protect it from light. Discard the pen after 28 days of use, even if it is not empty.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
dizziness
headache
lightheadedness and fainting on standing
constipation
lack of energy
muscle weakness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to teriparatide injection.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Never share a teriparatide injection pen. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of using teriparatide injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bonsity
®
Forteo
®
Parathar
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page