Monomethyl Fumarate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Monomethyl Fumarate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622028.html
Monomethyl Fumarate
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Monomethyl fumarate is used to treat adults with relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS; a disease in which the nerves do not function properly and people may experience weakness, numbness, loss of muscle coordination, and problems with vision, speech, and bladder control) including clinically isolated syndrome (CIS; nerve symptom episodes that last at least 24 hours), relapsing-remitting forms (course of disease where symptoms flare up from time to time), or active secondary progressive disease (later stage of disease with continuous worsening of symptoms).
How should this medicine be used?
Monomethyl fumarate comes as a delayed-release (releases the medication in the intestine to prevent break-down of the medication by stomach acids) capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day. Take monomethyl fumarate at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take monomethyl fumarate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Monomethyl fumarate may be taken with or without food.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not chew or crush them. Do not open the capsules or sprinkle the contents on food.
You may take a non-enteric coated aspirin (325 mg or less) 30 minutes before taking monomethyl fumarate to reduce the chance of flushing (facial redness) during your treatment.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of monomethyl fumarate and increase your dose after 7 days.
Monomethyl fumarate may help to control multiple sclerosis, but will not cure it. Continue to take monomethyl fumarate even if you feel well. Do not stop taking monomethyl fumarate without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking monomethyl fumarate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to monomethyl fumarate, dimethyl fumarate (Tecfidera
®
), diroximel fumarate (Vumerity
®
) any other medications, or any of the ingredients in monomethyl fumarate capsules. Ask your pharmacist or check the manufacturer's patient information for a list of the ingredients.
Some medications should not be taken with monomethyl fumarate. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting monomethyl fumarate with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking monomethyl fumarate, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have any type of infection, including infections that come and go and chronic infections that do not go away, or if you have or have ever had chickenpox or herpes zoster (shingles; a rash that can occur in people who have had chickenpox in the past); ulcers or bleeding in your stomach or intestines; or if you have a low white blood cell count or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking monomethyl fumarate, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Monomethyl fumarate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
warmth, redness, itching, or burning of the skin
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
heartburn
stomach pain
hair loss
runny nose
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking monomethyl fumarate and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
difficulty swallowing or breathing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hives, rash, itching
hoarseness
weakness on one side of the body that worsens over time, clumsiness in your arms or legs, vision problems, changes in thinking and memory, confusion, or personality changes
extreme tiredness, loss of appetite, pain in upper right side of your stomach, dark urine, or yellowing of the skin or eyes
cough; sore throat; fever; warm, red, or painful skin; or other signs of infection
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area but may spread to the back, nausea, vomiting, or loss of appetite
coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds, red or black tarry stools, persistent abdominal pain, or severe vomiting and/or diarrhea
Monomethyl fumarate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order a blood test before you begin your treatment and may order certain lab tests during your treatment to check your body's response to monomethyl fumarate.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bafiertam
®
Other names
MMF
Last Revised -
12/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page