Palopegteriparatide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Palopegteriparatide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624051.html
Palopegteriparatide Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Palopegteriparatide is used for the treatment of hypoparathyrodism in adults. Palopegteriparatide is in a class of medications called parathyroid agents. It works by increasing the amount of parathyroid hormone to maintain appropriate calcium levels in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Palopegteriparatide comes as an injection to inject subcutaneously (under the skin). It is usually given once daily in the evening when you are sitting or lying down. Give the injection into your abdomen (stomach area) or the front of your thigh and be sure to change the place where you give the injection each day. Only give the injection when you can sit or lie down. Use palopegteriparatide at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use palopegteriparatide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a dose of palopegteriparatide and gradually increase or decrease your dose based on your laboratory results and symptoms.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information (Medication Guide) for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking palopegteriparatide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to palopegteriparatide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in palopegteriparatide injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking palopegteriparatide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have a family history of bone disease or if you have or ever had any type of bone disease, including bone cancer, or treatment of your bones with radiation therapy.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking palopegteriparatide, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking palopegteriparatide.
you should know that palopegteriparatide may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking palopegteriparatide. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you have missed your dose by less than 12 hours, give your dose. However, if it the dose has been missed by more than 12 hours, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. If your treatment is delayed or interrupted by 3 days or more call your doctor before restarting palopegteriparatide. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Palopegteriparatide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
injection site reactions
dizziness or lightheadedness
headache
diarrhea
back pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
nausea, vomiting, dizziness, feeling thirsty, confusion, muscle weakness, and irregular heartbeat
tingling in your fingertips, toes, lips or tongue, muscle spasms or cramps, oral numbness, depression, have problems thinking or remembering, abnormal heart rhythms, and seizures
pain in any areas of your body that does not go away or any new or unusual lumps or swelling under your skin that is tender to touch
Palopegteriparatide may cause osteosarcoma (bone cancer). Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Palopegteriparatide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it the refrigerator until you first use it. After first use, you may store it for up to 14 days at room temperature (below 30°C [86°F]). After each use, remove the needle and put the pen cap on to protect from light. Properly dispose of the pen 14 days after your first use.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea, vomiting, dizziness, feeling thirsty, confusion, muscle weakness, and irregular heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to palopegteriparatide.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking palopegteriparatide.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Yorvipath
®
Last Revised -
09/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page