Alfuzosin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Alfuzosin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604002.html
Alfuzosin
pronounced as (al fyoo' zoe sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Alfuzosin is used in men to treat symptoms of an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH), which include difficulty urinating (hesitation, dribbling, weak stream, and incomplete bladder emptying), painful urination, and urinary frequency and urgency. Alfuzosin is in a class of medications called alpha blockers. It works by relaxing the muscles in the prostate and bladder to allow urine to flow more easily.
How should this medicine be used?
Alfuzosin comes as an extended-release (long-acting) tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day, immediately after a meal. Do not take alfuzosin on an empty stomach. To help you remember to take alfuzosin, take it after the same meal every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take alfuzosin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Alfuzosin controls BPH but does not cure it. Continue to take alfuzosin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking alfuzosin without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking alfuzosin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to alfuzosin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in alfuzosin. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you have liver disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take alfuzosin.
Some medications should not be taken with alfuzosin. Other medications may require dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with alfuzosin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting alfuzosin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking alfuzosin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist..
The following nonprescription product may interact with alfuzosin: cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking alfuzosin. Do not start any of these medications while taking alfuzosin without discussing with your healthcare provider..
tell your doctor if you or any member of your family have an irregular heartbeat; or if you have or have ever had prostate cancer; angina (chest pain); low blood pressure; or heart or kidney disease; and if you have ever become dizzy, fainted, or had low blood pressure after taking any medication.
you should know that alfuzosin is only for use in men. Women should not take alfuzosin, especially if they are or could become pregnant or are breast-feeding. If a pregnant woman takes alfuzosin, she should call her doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking alfuzosin. If you need to have eye surgery at any time during or after your treatment, be sure to tell your doctor that you are taking or have taken alfuzosin.
you should know that alfuzosin may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting, especially when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking alfuzosin. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. If these symptoms do not improve, call your doctor. Avoid driving, operating machinery, or performing dangerous tasks until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit or drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Alfuzosin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
headache
runny or stuffy nose
pain
stomach pain
heartburn
constipation
nausea
decrease in sexual ability
sore throat, fever, chills, cough and other signs of infection
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty swallowing or breathing
chest pain
fainting
Alfuzosin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light and excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
dizziness
fainting
lightheadedness
blurred vision
nausea
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Uroxatral
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page