Desloratadine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Desloratadine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602002.html
Desloratadine
pronounced as (des lor at' a deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Desloratadine is used to relieve sneezing, runny nose, and red, itchy, tearing eyes from allergies. It is also used to relieve symptoms of urticaria (hives; red, itchy raised areas of the skin) including itching and rash. Desloratadine is in a class of medications called antihistamines. It works by blocking histamine, a substance in the body that causes allergic symptoms.
How should this medicine be used?
Desloratadine comes as a tablet, oral solution (liquid), and an orally disintegrating tablet to take by mouth. Take once a day with or without food. Take desloratadine around the same time every day.
Take desloratadine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Use a measuring device (dropper or an oral syringe) to accurately measure the correct amount of solution for each dose. Do not use a household spoon.
To take the orally disintegrating tablet, use dry hands to peel back the foil packaging. Immediately take out the tablet and place it on your tongue. The tablet will quickly dissolve and can be swallowed with saliva or water.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking desloratadine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking desloratadine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking desloratadine, call your doctor.
if you have phenylketonuria (PKU, an inherited condition in which a special diet must be followed to prevent mental retardation, damage to your brain that can cause severe intellectual disability), you should know that the orally disintegrating tablets may contain aspartame that forms phenylalanine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Desloratadine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
nausea
diarrhea
dizziness
sore throat
dry mouth
muscle pain
tiredness, sleepiness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking desloratadine and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash; itching; hives; difficulty breathing or swallowing; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Desloratadine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
drowsiness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Clarinex
®
Clarinex
®
Reditabs
®
Brand names of combination products
Clarinex-D
®
(containing Desloratadine, Pseudoephedrine)
Other names
Descarboethoxyloratadine
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page