Influenza Vaccine, Inactivated or Recombinant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Influenza Vaccine, Inactivated or Recombinant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607017.html
Influenza Vaccine, Inactivated or Recombinant
Why get vaccinated?
What is inactivated or recombinant influenza vaccine?
Who should not get or should wait to get the influenza vaccine?
What are the risks from inactivated or recombinant influenza vaccine?
What if there is a serious reaction?
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
How can I learn more?
Brand names
Other names
Why get vaccinated?
Influenza vaccine can prevent influenza (flu).
Flu is a contagious disease that spreads around the United States every year, usually between October and May. Anyone can get the flu, but it is more dangerous for some people. Infants and young children, people 65 years of age and older, pregnant women, and people with certain health conditions or a weakened immune system are at greatest risk of flu complications.
Pneumonia, bronchitis, sinus infections and ear infections are examples of flu-related complications. If you have a medical condition, such as heart disease, cancer or diabetes, flu can make it worse.
Flu can cause fever and chills, sore throat, muscle aches, fatigue, cough, headache, and runny or stuffy nose. Some people may have vomiting and diarrhea, though this is more common in children than adults.
Each year thousands of people in the United States die from flu, and many more are hospitalized. Flu vaccine prevents millions of illnesses and flu-related visits to the doctor each year.
What is inactivated or recombinant influenza vaccine?
CDC recommends everyone 6 months of age and older get vaccinated every flu season. Children 6 months through 8 years of age may need 2 doses during a single flu season. Everyone else needs only 1 dose each flu season.
It takes about 2 weeks for protection to develop after vaccination.
There are many flu viruses, and they are always changing. Each year a new flu vaccine is made to protect against three or four viruses that are likely to cause disease in the upcoming flu season. Even when the vaccine doesn't exactly match these viruses, it may still provide some protection.
Influenza vaccine does not cause flu.
Influenza vaccine may be given at the same time as other vaccines.
Who should not get or should wait to get the influenza vaccine?
Tell your vaccine provider if the person getting the vaccine:
Has had an allergic reaction after a previous dose of influenza vaccine, or has any severe, life-threatening allergies.
Has ever had Guillain-Barré Syndrome (also called GBS).
In some cases, your health care provider may decide to postpone influenza vaccination to a future visit.
Influenza vaccine can be administered at any time during pregnancy. Women who are or will be pregnant during influenza season should receive inactivated influenza vaccine.
People with minor illnesses, such as a cold, may be vaccinated. People who are moderately or severely ill should usually wait until they recover before getting influenza vaccine.
Your health care provider can give you more information.
What are the risks from inactivated or recombinant influenza vaccine?
Soreness, redness, and swelling where shot is given, fever, muscle aches, and headache can happen after influenza vaccination.
There may be a very small increased risk of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) after inactivated influenza vaccine (the flu shot).
Young children who get the flu shot along with pneumococcal vaccine (PCV13), and/or DTaP vaccine at the same time might be slightly more likely to have a seizure caused by fever. Tell your health care provider if a child who is getting flu vaccine has ever had a seizure.
People sometimes faint after medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your provider if you feel dizzy or have vision changes or ringing in the ears.
As with any medicine, there is a very remote chance of a vaccine causing a severe allergic reaction, other serious injury, or death.
What if there is a serious reaction?
An allergic reaction could occur after the vaccinated person leaves the clinic. If you see signs of a severe allergic reaction (hives, swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, or weakness), call 9-1-1 and get the person to the nearest hospital.
For other signs that concern you, call your health care provider.
Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself. Visit the VAERS website at www.vaers.hhs.gov or call
1-800-822-7967
.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions, and VAERS staff members do not give medical advice.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a federal program that was created to compensate people who may have been injured by certain vaccines. Claims regarding alleged injury or death due to vaccination have a time limit for filing, which may be as short as two years. Visit the VICP website at
https://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation
or call
1-800-338-2382
to learn about the program and about filing a claim.
How can I learn more?
Ask your healthcare provider.
Call your local or state health department.
Visit the website of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for vaccine package inserts and additional information at
https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/vaccines
.
Contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Call
1-800-232-4636
(
1-800-CDC-INFO
) or visit CDC's website at
https://www.cdc.gov/flu
.
Brand names
Afluria
®
Fluad
®
Fluarix
®
Flublok
®
Flucelvax
®
FluLaval
®
Fluzone
®
Other names
Flu Vaccine
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page