Vitamin E (Alpha-Tocopherol): MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Vitamin E (Alpha-Tocopherol)
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621029.html
Vitamin E (Alpha-Tocopherol)
pronounced as (al' fa toe kof er ol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Vitamin E is used as a dietary supplement when the amount of vitamin E taken in the diet is not enough. People most at risk for vitamin E deficiency are those with a limited variety of food in their diet and people with Crohn's disease (a condition in which the body attacks the lining of the digestive tract, causing pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fever), cystic fibrosis (an inborn disease that causes problems with breathing, digestion, and reproduction), or who have gastrointestinal (GI) malabsorption problems (problems absorbing food). Vitamin E is also used to treat vitamin E deficiency in those at risk due to certain diseases and conditions. Vitamin E is in a class of medications called antioxidants. It is needed by the body to support the immune system and for blood clotting. It works as an antioxidant to protect your cells against free radicals.
How should this medicine be used?
Vitamin E comes as a capsule, gel capsule, and liquid drops to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day or as directed by your doctor. Vitamin E is available without a prescription, but your doctor may prescribe it to treat certain conditions. Follow the directions on the package or on your product label or doctor's instructions carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take vitamin E exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than recommended by your doctor.
Vitamin E supplements are available alone and in combination with other vitamins.
Other uses for this medicine
Vitamin E is used along with other vitamins and minerals to reduce the risk of age-related macular degeneration (AMD; an ongoing disease of the eye that causes loss of the ability to see straight ahead and may make it more difficult to read, drive, or perform other daily activities) in certain people.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking vitamin E,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to vitamin E, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in vitamin E products. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking vitamin E. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking vitamin E, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Vitamin E may cause side effects. Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
unusual bleeding or bruising
Vitamin E may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this vitamin.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
bleeding
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about vitamin E.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aquasol E
®
Other names
alpha-tocopherol
Last Revised -
04/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page