Moxifloxacin Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Moxifloxacin Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a605016.html
Moxifloxacin Ophthalmic
pronounced as (mox ee flox' a sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution is used to treat bacterial conjunctivitis (pink eye; infection of the membrane that covers the outside of the eyeballs and the inside of the eyelids). Moxifloxacin is in a class of antibiotics called fluoroquinolones. It works by killing the bacteria that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Moxifloxacin comes as an ophthalmic solution (liquid) to instill in the eyes. It is usually used three times a day for 7 days. Try to use at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use moxifloxacin eye drops exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should expect your symptoms to improve during your treatment. Call your doctor if your symptoms do not go away or get worse, or if you develop other problems with your eyes during your treatment.
Use moxifloxacin eye drops until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using moxifloxacin eye drops too soon, your infection may not be completely cured and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
When you use moxifloxacin eye drops, be careful not to let the tip of the bottle touch your eye, fingers, face, or any surface. If the tip does touch another surface, bacteria may get into the eye drops. Using eye drops that are contaminated with bacteria may cause serious damage to the eye or loss of vision. If you think your eye drops have become contaminated, call your doctor or pharmacist.
To use the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
If you are to use more than one drop in the same eye, wait at least 5 minutes before instilling the next drop. If your doctor told you to place moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution in both eyes, repeat steps 6 to 10 above for your other eye.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using moxifloxacin eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to moxifloxacin (Avelox, Vigamox), other quinolone antibiotics such as cinoxacin (Cinobac) (not available in the US), ciprofloxacin (Cipro, Ciloxan), enoxacin (Penetrex) (not available in the US), gatifloxacin (Tequin, Zymar), levofloxacin (Levaquin, Quixin, Iquix), lomefloxacin (Maxaquin), nalidixic acid (NegGram) (not available in the US), norfloxacin (Noroxin), ofloxacin (Floxin, Ocuflox), sparfloxacin (Zagam), and trovafloxacin and alatrofloxacin combination (Trovan) (not available in the US) or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you wear contact lenses. You should not wear contact lenses while you have symptoms of bacterial conjunctivitis.
you should know that bacterial conjunctivitis spreads easily. Wash your hands often, especially after you touch your eyes. When your infection goes away, you should wash or replace any eye makeup, contact lenses, or other objects that touched your infected eye(s).
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Moxifloxacin eye drops may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
red, irritated, itchy, or teary eyes
blurred vision
eye pain
dry eyes
broken blood vessels in the eyes
runny nose
cough
iIf you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
sore throat, fever, chills and other signs of infection
ear pain or fullness
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Moxifloxacin eye drops may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the moxifloxacin eye drops, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Moxeza
®
Vigamox
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page