Haloperidol Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Haloperidol Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615023.html
Haloperidol Injection
pronounced as (ha loe per' i dole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Studies have shown that older adults with dementia (a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities and that may cause changes in mood and personality) who take antipsychotics (medications for mental illness) such as haloperidol have an increased chance of death during treatment.
Haloperidol injection and haloperidol extended-release injection are not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of behavior disorders in older adults with dementia. Talk to the doctor who prescribed this medication if you, a family member, or someone you care for has dementia and is being treated with haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection. For more information visit the FDA website:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs
Talk to your doctor about the risk(s) of receiving haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Haloperidol injection and haloperidol extended-release injection are used to treat schizophrenia (a mental illness that causes disturbed or unusual thinking, loss of interest in life, and strong or inappropriate emotions). Haloperidol injection is also used to control motor tics (uncontrollable need to repeat certain body movements) and verbal tics (uncontrollable need to repeat sounds or words) in people who have Tourette's disorder (condition characterized by motor or verbal tics). Haloperidol is in a class of medications called conventional antipsychotics. It works by decreasing abnormal excitement in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Haloperidol injection comes as a solution to be injected into a muscle by a healthcare provider. Haloperidol injection is usually given as needed for agitation, motor tics, or verbal tics. If you still have symptoms after you receive your first dose, you may be given one or more additional doses. Haloperidol extended-release injection comes as a solution to be injected into a muscle by a healthcare provider. Haloperidol extended-release injection is usually given once every 4 weeks.
Haloperidol injection and haloperidol extended-release injection may help control your symptoms but will not cure your condition. Continue to keep appointments to receive haloperidol even if you feel well. Talk to your doctor if you do not feel like you are getting better during your treatment with haloperidol injection.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to haloperidol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start using haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection. Do not start this medication while receiving haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have Parkinson's disease (PD; a disorder of the nervous system that causes difficulties with movement, muscle control, and balance). Your doctor will probably tell you not to receive haloperidol injection.
tell your doctor if you have a low number of white blood cells. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had QT prolongation (an irregular heart rhythm that can lead to fainting, loss of consciousness, seizures, or sudden death); bipolar disorder (condition that causes episodes of depression, episodes of mania, and other abnormal moods); trouble keeping your balance; an abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG; a test that records electrical activity in the brain); seizures; an irregular heartbeat; low levels of potassium or magnesium in your blood; or heart or thyroid disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, especially if you are in the last few months of your pregnancy, or if you plan to become pregnant or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving haloperidol, call your doctor. Haloperidol may cause problems in newborns following delivery if it is given during the last months of pregnancy.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving haloperidol injection.
you should know that receiving haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection may make you drowsy and may affect your ability to think clearly, make decisions, and react quickly. Do not drive a car or operate machinery after you receive haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication. Do not drink alcohol during your treatment with haloperidol.
you should know that haloperidol injection may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you forget to keep an appointment to receive haloperidol extended-release injection, call your doctor to schedule another appointment as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
mood changes
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
restlessness
anxiety
agitation
dizziness, feeling unsteady, or having trouble keeping your balance
headache
dry mouth
increased saliva
blurred vision
loss of appetite
constipation
diarrhea
heartburn
nausea
vomiting
breast enlargement or pain
breast milk production
missed menstrual periods
decreased sexual ability in men
increased sexual desire
difficulty urinating
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever
muscle stiffness
falling
confusion
fast or irregular heartbeat
sweating
decreased thirst
involuntary movements of tongue, face, mouth or jaw
uncontrollable eye movements
unusual, slowed, or uncontrollable movements of any part of the body
tightness in the throat
fine, worm-like tongue movements
neck cramps
difficulty breathing or swallowing
tongue that sticks out of the mouth
uncontrollable, rhythmic face, mouth, or jaw movements
difficulty walking
difficulty talking
seizures
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist
yellowing of the skin or eyes
erection that lasts for hours
Haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
unusual, slowed, or uncontrollable movements of any part of the body
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
stiff or weak muscles
sedation
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about haloperidol injection or haloperidol extended-release injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Haldol
®
Haldol
®
Decanoate
Last Revised -
07/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page