Doripenem Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Doripenem Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608015.html
Doripenem Injection
pronounced as (dor'' i pen' em)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Doripenem injection is used to treat serious infections of the urinary tract, kidney, and abdomen that are caused by bacteria. Doripenem injection is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat pneumonia that developed in people who were on a ventilator in a hospital. Doripenem injection is in a class of medications called carbapenem antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as doripenem injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Doripenem injection comes as a liquid to be injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually given every 8 hours. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection being treated. After your condition improves, your doctor may switch you to another antibiotic that you can take by mouth to complete your treatment. You may receive doripenem injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you are using doripenem injection at home, use it at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use doripenem injection exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with doripenem injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Use doripenem injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using doripenem injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using doripenem injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to doripenem injection; other carbapenem antibiotics such as imipenem/cilastatin (Primaxin) or meropenem (Merrem); penicillins; cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil, cefuroxime (Ceftin, Zinacef), or cephalexin (Keflex); aztreonam (Azactam); or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention the following: probenecid (Probalan, in Col-Probenecid) and valproic acid (Depakene). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have any allergies and if you have or have ever had a stroke, seizures or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using doripenem injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Doripenem injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
nausea
diarrhea
redness, pain, or swelling at the injection site
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
hives
itching
rash
blisters on the skin, mouth, nose, and eyes
sloughing (shedding) of skin
fever
difficulty breathing or swallowing
seizures
watery or bloody stools (up to 2 months after your treatment)
excessive tiredness
weakness
shortness of breath
pale skin
Doripenem may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to doripenem injection.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish doripenem injection, talk to your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Doribax
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page