Perfluorohexyloctane ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Perfluorohexyloctane ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623054.html
Perfluorohexyloctane ophthalmic
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Perfluorohexyloctane ophthalmic solution is used to treat signs and symptoms of dry eye disease (a condition where tears aren't able to provide adequate moisture for your eyes). Perfluorohexyloctane is in a class of medications called semifluorinated alkanes. It works by providing a film layer on the eye to prevent tears and moisture from evaporating.
How should this medicine be used?
Perfluorohexyloctane ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid) to place into the eye. It is usually used four times a day. Contact lenses should be removed before using the eye drops and kept out for at least 30 minutes after using perfluorohexyloctane. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use perfluorohexyloctane exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the liquid well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
Perfluorohexyloctane ophthalmic solution controls dry eye disease but does not cure it. Continue to take perfluorohexyloctane even if your symptoms improve. Do not stop using perfluorohexyloctane without talking to your doctor.
To use the perfluorohexyloctane eye drops, follow these steps:
wash hands
remove contact lenses
remove the cap from the eye drop bottle
holding bottle upright, gently squeeze the bottle
while squeezing the bottle, turn bottle upside down and stop squeezing
keeping the bottle upside down, place the bottle above your eye and squeeze 1 drop into affected eye
repeat the above steps for the second eye, if needed
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using perfluorohexyloctane ophthalmic solution,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to perfluorohexyloctane, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in perfluorohexyloctane ophthalmic solution. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using perfluorohexyloctane, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Place the missed dose in your eye(s) as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra eye drops to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Perfluorohexyloctane may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
blurred vision
red eyes
Perfluorohexyloctane ophthalmic solution may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Miebo
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page