Ketoconazole: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ketoconazole
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682816.html
Ketoconazole
pronounced as (kee toe kon' na zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Ketoconazole should only be used to treat fungal infections when other medications are not available or cannot be tolerated.
Ketoconazole may cause liver damage, sometimes serious enough to require liver transplantation or to cause death. Liver damage may occur in people who do not already have liver disease or any other conditions that increase the risk that they will develop liver damage. Tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol and if you have or have ever had liver disease. Do not drink any alcoholic beverages during your treatment with ketoconazole because drinking alcoholic beverages may increase the risk that you will develop liver damage. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: extreme tiredness, loss of appetite, weight loss, nausea, vomiting, yellowing of the skin or eyes, dark yellow urine, pale stools, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, fever, or rash.
Ketoconazole can cause QT prolongation (an irregular heart rhythm that can lead to fainting, loss of consciousness, seizures, or sudden death). Do not take disopyramide (Norpace), dofetilide (Tikosyn), dronedarone (Multaq), pimozide (Orap), quinidine (Quinidex, Quinaglute), cisapride (Propulsid; no longer available in the US), methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), and ranolazine (Ranexa) while you are taking ketoconazole. If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking ketoconazole and call your doctor immediately: fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat; fainting; dizziness; lightheadedness; or loss of consciousness.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests to check your body's response to ketoconazole.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with ketoconazole and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking ketoconazole.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ketoconazole is used to treat fungal infections when other medications are not available or cannot be tolerated. Ketoconazole should not be used to treat fungal meningitis (infection of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord caused by a fungus) or fungal nail infections. Ketoconazole is in a class of antifungals called imidazoles. It works by slowing the growth of fungi that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Ketoconazole comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day Take ketoconazole at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take ketoconazole exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may increase your dose if your condition does not improve.
You may need to take ketoconazole for 6 months or longer to cure your infection completely. Continue to take ketoconazole until your doctor tells you that you should stop, even if you feel better. Do not stop taking ketoconazole without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking ketoconazole too soon, your infection may come back after a short time.
Other uses for this medicine
High doses of ketoconazole are sometimes used to treat Cushing syndrome (a condition that occurs when there is too much corticosteroid hormone in the body) and advanced prostate cancer (cancer of a male reproductive gland). Ketoconazole has not been shown to be safe or effective for these uses. Talk to your doctor about using ketoconazole for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ketoconazole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ketoconazole or any other medications or any of the ingredients in ketoconazole tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking alprazolam (Niravam, Xanax);eplerenone (Inspra); ergot alkaloids such as ergotamine (Ergomar, in Cafergot, in Migergot), dihydroergotamine (D.H.E 45, Migranal), and methylergonovine (Methergine); felodipine (Plendil); irinotecan (Camptosar); lovastatin (Mevacor); lurasidone (Latuda); midazolam (Versed); nisoldipine (Sular); simvastatin (Zocor); tolvaptan (Samsca); and triazolam (Halcion). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take ketoconazole if you are taking one or more of these medications or any of the medications listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section.
some medications should not be taken with ketoconazole. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with ketoconazole. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting ketoconazole with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking ketoconazole, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
if you are taking an antacid containing aluminum, calcium, or magnesium (Maalox, Mylanta, Tums, others), take it 1 hour before or 2 hours after you take ketoconazole.
the following nonprescription products may interact with ketoconazole: medications for indigestion, heartburn, or ulcers such as cimetidine (Tagamet), famotidine (Pepcid), lansoprazole (Prevacid), nizatidine (Axid), omeprazole (Prilosec), and ranitidine (Zantac). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking ketoconazole. Do not start any of these medications while taking ketoconazole without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had the conditions mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section or adrenal insufficiency (condition in which the adrenal glands do not make enough steroid hormones).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking ketoconazole, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking ketoconazole.
you should know that drinking alcoholic beverages (including wine, beer, and medications that contain alcohol such as cough syrup) while taking ketoconazole increases the risk that you will develop liver damage and may cause unpleasant symptoms such as flushing, rash, nausea, headache, and swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs if you drink alcohol while you are taking ketoconazole.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ketoconazole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
stomach pain
diarrhea
constipation
heartburn
gas
change in ability to taste food
dry mouth
change in tongue color
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
nervousness
numbness, burning, or tingling of the hands or feet
muscle pain
hair loss
flushing
chills
sensitivity to light
nosebleeds
breast enlargement in males
decrease in sexual ability
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty breathing or swallowing
tiredness or weakness
Ketoconazole may cause a decrease in the number of sperm (male reproductive cells) produced, especially if it is taken at high doses. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication if you are a man and would like to have children.
Ketoconazole may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking ketoconazole.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist if you have any questions about refilling your prescription. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the ketoconazole, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nizoral
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page