Lidocaine Injection (antiarrhythmic): MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lidocaine Injection (antiarrhythmic)
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625037.html
Lidocaine Injection (antiarrhythmic)
pronounced as (lye' doe kane)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lidocaine injection is used to treat arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats). Lidocaine injection is in a class of medications called antiarrhythmics. It works by acting on the heart muscle to improve the heart's rhythm.
How should this medicine be used?
Lidocaine injection comes as a solution (liquid) for injection. It may be injected or mixed with other fluids and given into a vein by a healthcare provider.
Your doctor will increase or decrease your dose depending on your response. Lidocaine injection is routinely given for a short period of time, usually for less than 24 hours.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving lidocaine injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving lidocaine injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have serious heart rhythm problems such as Stokes-Adams syndrome, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, or any type of heart block. Your doctor will probably tell you not to receive lidocaine injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lidocaine injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
light-headedness, drowsiness, dizziness
ringing in the ears
blurry or double vision
nausea or vomiting
feeling hot or cold or numbness
twitching or tremors
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms tell your doctor immediately:
rash, hives, difficulty breathing
pale, gray, or blue colored skin; headache; rapid heart rate; shortness of breath; lightheadedness; or fatigue
seizures
slowing of heartbeat
difficulty breathing
Lidocaine injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to lidocaine injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page