Bethanechol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bethanechol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682849.html
Bethanechol
pronounced as (be than' e kole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bethanechol is used to relieve difficulties in urinating caused by surgery, drugs, or other factors.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Bethanechol comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Bethanechol usually is taken two to four times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take bethanechol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Bethanechol usually is taken at evenly spaced intervals during the day.
Take this medication on an empty stomach (at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals) to prevent stomach upset.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking bethanechol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bethanechol or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking, especially procainamide (Pronestyl), quinidine (Quinaglute), medications for colds or nasal congestion, and vitamins.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, a bladder infection, epilepsy, high blood pressure, heart disease, Parkinson's disease, an overactive thyroid gland, or ulcers.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking bethanechol, call your doctor.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bethanechol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
vomiting
dizziness
sweating or flushing
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
shortness of breath
fainting
slow heart rate (pulse less than 50 beats per minute)
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Duvoid
®
Myotonachol
®
¶
Urecholine
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page