Cytarabine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cytarabine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682222.html
Cytarabine Injection
pronounced as (sye tare' a been)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Cytarabine injection must be given under the supervision of a doctor who is experienced in giving chemotherapy medications for cancer.
Cytarbine can cause a severe decrease in the number of blood cells produced in your bone marrow. This may cause certain symptoms and may increase the risk that you will develop a serious infection or bleeding. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: fever, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, or other signs of infection; pale skin, tiredness, fast heartbeat, fainting, or dizziness; unusual bleeding or bruising; black and tarry stools; red blood in stools; bloody vomit; vomited material that looks like coffee grounds.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cytarabine is used to treat certain types of leukemia (cancer of the white blood cells). Cytarabine is in a class of medications called antimetabolites. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells in your body.
How should this medicine be used?
Cytarabine comes as a powder to mixed with liquid to be injected into a vein, under the skin, or into the fluid-filled space of the spinal canal by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. Your doctor will tell you how often you will receive cytarabine. The schedule depends on the condition you have and on how your body responds to the medication.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
Cytarabine is also sometimes used to treat certain types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (a type of cancer that begins in a type of white blood cells that normally fights infection). Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving cytarabine injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving cytarabine injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant while you are receiving cytarabine injection. If you become pregnant while receiving cytarabine, call your doctor. Cytarabine may harm the fetus.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cytarabine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach pain
loss of appetite
sores in the mouth and throat
hair loss
tiredness
sore or red eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area but may spread to the back
redness, pain, swelling, or burning at the site where the injection was given
rash, itching, hives, difficulty breathing or swallowing
fever, muscle or joint pain, tiredness, chest pain, rash, redness and itching of the eyes
shortness of breath, trouble breathing
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark-colored urine or decreased urination
sudden change or loss of vision
seizures
confusion, sleepiness, changes in personality
numbness, burning, or tingling in the hands, arms, feet, or legs
Cytarabine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cytosar-U
®
Other names
1-beta-Arabinofuranosylcytosine
Arabinosylcytosine
Cytosine arabinoside
Ara-C
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page