Aceclidine Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aceclidine Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625091.html
Aceclidine Ophthalmic
pronounced as (a sek′ li deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Aceclidine ophthalmic is used to treat presbyopia (gradual loss of eyes' ability to focus on close objects). Aceclidine ophthalmic is in a class of medications called cholinergic agonists. It works by stimulating the muscle in the eye that helps improve depth of focus.
How should this medicine be used?
Aceclidine ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid) to be placed in the eye. Place one drop in each eye, wait 5 minutes and place second drop in each eye. Do this once a day.
Use aceclidine ophthalmic exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Remove contact lens prior to placing aceclidine ophthalmic and do not place back in eye until 10 minutes after giving the eye drops.
Do not use any other eye drops within 5 minutes of using aceclidine ophthalmic.
Avoid letting the tip of the vial come in contact with your eye or any other surface.
Each vial is for single use. Once opened and use, throw away the vial.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before use aceclidine ophthalmic,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have had a history of iritis (inflammation of the iris of the eye).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using aceclidine ophthalmic, call your doctor.
you should know that aceclidine ophthalmic may cause temporary blurred, dark or dim vision. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until vision returns to normal. Use caution with night driving.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use extra eye drops to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, get emergency medical treatment:
sudden onset of flashing lights, floaters or vision loss
Aceclidine ophthalmic may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it in the refrigerator. Once removed from the refrigerator, it can be stored at room temperature for 30 days. After 30 days at room temperature, discard any unused vials.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
If someone swallows aceclidine ophthalmic, call your local poison control center at
1-800-222-1222
. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
increased saliva
sweating
abdominal cramping, diarrhea, nausea
tremors
low heart rate, dizziness, lightheadedness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vizz
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page