Uncombable hair syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Uncombable hair syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/uncombable-hair-syndrome/
Uncombable hair syndrome
Description
Uncombable hair syndrome is a condition that is characterized by dry, frizzy hair that cannot be combed flat. This condition develops in childhood, often between infancy and age 3, but can appear as late as age 12. Affected children have light-colored hair, described as blond or silvery with a glistening sheen. The hair does not grow downward but out from the scalp in multiple directions. Despite its appearance, the hair is not fragile or brittle, and it grows at a normal or slightly slower rate. Only scalp hair is affected in uncombable hair syndrome.
For unknown reasons, this condition usually improves over time. By adolescence individuals with uncombable hair syndrome have hair that lies flat and has normal or nearly normal texture.
Frequency
The prevalence of uncombable hair syndrome is unknown; at least 100 cases have been described in the scientific literature. There are likely more people who are undiagnosed because adults who seem unaffected may have had uncombable hair syndrome in childhood.
Causes
Uncombable hair syndrome is caused by mutations in the
PADI3
,
TGM3
, or
TCHH
gene. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that help give structure to the hair strand (shaft).
The proteins produced from the
PADI3
and
TGM3
genes modify the protein produced from the
TCHH
gene, known as trichohyalin. The modified trichohyalin can attach (bind) to other trichohyalin proteins and to molecules called
keratin intermediate filaments
to create organized cross-links. These links form dense networks that provide structure to the hair shaft and give it a cylindrical shape.
PADI3
,
TGM3
, or
TCHH
gene mutations likely lead to the production of proteins with little or no activity. As a result, the shape of the hair shaft is altered. Instead of having a cylindrical shape, it has a triangular, heart-like, or flat cross-section. Sometimes all of these irregular shapes can occur along the length of a single strand of hair. Because of the angular shape of the hair shaft, the hair will not lie flat. In children with uncombable hair syndrome, 50 to 100 percent of their strands of hair have an irregular shape. Additionally, the abnormal hair reflects light differently than normal hair, accounting for its glistening sheen.
Some people with uncombable hair syndrome do not have an identified mutation in one of these three genes. The cause of the condition in these individuals is unknown.
Learn more about the genes associated with Uncombable hair syndrome
PADI3
TCHH
TGM3
Inheritance
When uncombable hair syndrome is caused by mutations in the PADI3, TGM3, or TCHH gene, it is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
In other cases, uncombable hair syndrome appears to be inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In these cases an affected person usually inherits the mutation from one affected parent, although the associated gene is unknown.
In still other cases of uncombable hair syndrome, the inheritance pattern is unknown.
Other Names for This Condition
Cheveux incoiffables
Pili trianguli et canaliculi
Spun glass hair
UHS
Unmanageable hair syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Uncombable hair syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
UNCOMBABLE HAIR SYNDROME 1; UHS1
UNCOMBABLE HAIR SYNDROME 2; UHS2
UNCOMBABLE HAIR SYNDROME 3; UHS3
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Calderon P, Otberg N, Shapiro J. Uncombable hair syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol.
2009 Sep;61(3):512-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2009.01.006.
Citation on PubMed
Rieubland C, de Viragh PA, Addor MC. Uncombable hair syndrome: a clinical
report. Eur J Med Genet. 2007 Jul-Aug;50(4):309-14. doi:
10.1016/j.ejmg.2007.03.002. Epub 2007 Apr 11.
Citation on PubMed
U Basmanav FB, Cau L, Tafazzoli A, Mechin MC, Wolf S, Romano MT, Valentin F,
Wiegmann H, Huchenq A, Kandil R, Garcia Bartels N, Kilic A, George S, Ralser DJ,
Bergner S, Ferguson DJP, Oprisoreanu AM, Wehner M, Thiele H, Altmuller J,
Nurnberg P, Swan D, Houniet D, Buchner A, Weibel L, Wagner N, Grimalt R, Bygum A,
Serre G, Blume-Peytavi U, Sprecher E, Schoch S, Oji V, Hamm H, Farrant P, Simon
M, Betz RC. Mutations in Three Genes Encoding Proteins Involved in Hair Shaft
Formation Cause Uncombable Hair Syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Dec
1;99(6):1292-1304. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.10.004. Epub 2016 Nov 17.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Hair Problems
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page