Mesoridazine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mesoridazine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682306.html
Mesoridazine
pronounced as (mez oh rid' a zeen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Mesoridazine is no longer available in the United States. If you are currently taking mesoridazine, you should call your doctor to discuss switching to another treatment.
Mesoridazine can cause life-threatening irregular heartbeats. You should only take mesoridazine if your schizophrenia has not responded to other medications. If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor immediately: fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking mesoridazine.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Mesoridazine is used to treat the symptoms of schizophrenia and reduce restlessness, anxiety, and tension. It can also reduce hyperactivity and uncooperativeness.
How should this medicine be used?
Mesoridazine comes as a tablet and liquid concentrate to take by mouth. It is usually taken two or three times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take mesoridazine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The liquid concentrate must be diluted before use. It comes with a specially marked dropper for measuring the dose. Ask your pharmacist to show you how to use the dropper if you have difficulty. To dilute the liquid concentrate, add it to at least 2 ounces (60 milliliters) of water, orange juice, or grape juice before taking it. If any of the juice gets on the dropper, rinse the dropper with tap water before replacing it in the bottle. Do not allow the liquid concentrate to touch your skin or clothing; it can irritate your skin. If you spill the liquid concentrate on your skin, wash it off immediately with soap and water.
Continue to take mesoridazine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking mesoridazine without talking to your doctor, especially if you have taken large doses for a long time. Your doctor probably will decrease your dose gradually. This drug must be taken regularly for a few weeks before its full effect is felt.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication should not be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking mesoridazine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to mesoridazine or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking mesoridazine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with mesoridazine: antacids; allergy medications (diphenhydramine, loratadine, fexofenadine, chlorpheniramine or cetirizine). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking mesoridazine. Do not start any of these medications while taking mesoridazine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression; seizures; shock therapy; asthma; emphysema; chronic bronchitis; problems with your urinary system or prostate; glaucoma; history of alcohol abuse; thyroid problems; angina; irregular heartbeat; problems with your blood pressure; blood disorders; or blood vessel, heart, kidney, liver, or lung disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking mesoridazine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking mesoridazine.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Mesoridazine may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Mesoridazine may cause an upset stomach. Take mesoridazine with food or milk.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it and take any remaining doses for that day at evenly spaced intervals. However, if you remember a missed dose when it is almost time for your next scheduled dose, skip the missed dose. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Side effects from mesoridazine are common. Your urine may turn pink or reddish-brown; this effect is not harmful. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
dry mouth
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
restlessness
headache
weight gain
If you experience any of the following symptoms or the one listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
dizziness or seizures
lightheadedness or fainting
tremor
jaw, neck, or back muscle spasms
restlessness or pacing
fine worm-like tongue movements
unusual face, mouth, or jaw movements
shuffling walk
slow, jerky movements
seizures or convulsions
difficulty urinating or loss of bladder control
eye pain or discoloration
difficulty breathing or fast breathing
skin rash
yellowing of the skin or eyes
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Protect the liquid from light.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to mesoridazine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Serentil
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page