Radium Ra 233 Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Radium Ra 233 Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625052.html
Radium Ra 233 Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Radium Ra 223 is used to treat certain types of prostate cancer. Radium Ra 223 is in a class of medications called radiotherapeutic drugs. It works by killing tumor cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Radium Ra 223 comes as a solution to be given into a vein by a healthcare professional. It is usually given every 4 weeks for a total of 6 injections.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving radium Ra 223,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
you should know that some medications should not be taken with radium Ra 223. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting radium Ra 223 with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking radium Ra 223, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical conditions.
you should know that radium Ra 223 is only for use in men. Women should not receive this medication, especially if they are or may become pregnant or are breastfeeding. If received by a pregnant woman, radium Ra 223 may harm the fetus.
you should use birth control (condoms) during and for 6 months after completing treatment with radium Ra 223. If your partner is capable of becoming pregnant, they should use birth control during and for 6 months after completing treatment. Talk to your doctor about which birth control is right for you.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving radium Ra 223.
you should know that you need to drink enough fluids during your treatment. Tell your doctor if you are not urinating or if you have other signs of dehydration such as dry mouth, dark urine, decreased sweating, and dry skin.
you should know that your body fluids (urine, feces, vomit) may contain radiation during your treatment and for at least one week after completion of treatment. Be sure to flush several times after using the toilet. If your clothing has urine or fecal matter, wash promptly and separately from other clothing. You or your caregivers should wear gloves and gowns when cleaning up or handling body fluids.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Radium Ra 223 may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
swelling of the hands, feet, and legs
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those in SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
bleeding or bruising
tiredness, shortness of breath
fever, sore throat, congestion, chills, or other signs of infection
Radium Ra 223 may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will/may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to Radium Ra 223.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xofigo
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page