Guanabenz: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Guanabenz
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a686003.html
Guanabenz
pronounced as (gwahn' a benz)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Guanabenz is used to treat high blood pressure. It is in a class of medications called centrally acting alpha
2A
-adrenergic receptor agonists. Guanabenz works by decreasing your heart rate and relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can flow more easily through the body.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Guanabenz comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken twice a day at evenly spaced intervals. Take guanabenz at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take guanabenz exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Guanabenz controls high blood pressure but does not cure it. Continue to take guanabenz even if you feel well. Do not stop taking guanabenz without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop taking guanabenz you may develop high blood pressure and experience unwanted side effects.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking guanabenz,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to guanabenz, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in guanabenz tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking guanabenz. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have had a recent heart attack, or have coronary artery disease, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking guanabenz, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking guanabenz.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are using guanabenz. Alcohol can make the side effects from guanabenz worse.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking guanabenz if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take guanabenz because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Your doctor may prescribe a low-salt or low-sodium diet. Follow these directions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Guanabenz may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth
drowsiness
dizziness
weakness
headache
decreased sexual ability
upset stomach
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fainting
increased or decreased heartbeat
irregular heartbeat
swollen ankles or feet
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly to determine your response to guanabenz.
Your doctor may ask you to check your pulse (heart rate) daily and will tell you how rapid it should be. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to teach you how to take your pulse. If your pulse is slower or faster than it should be, call your doctor before taking the medication that day.
To avoid dizziness or faintness, get up slowly from a sitting or lying position. If you feel dizzy or faint at any time, you should lie or sit down.
To relieve dry mouth caused by guanabenz, chew gum or suck sugarless hard candy.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Wytensin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
08/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page