Benztropine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Benztropine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682155.html
Benztropine
pronounced as (benz' troe peen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Benztropine is used along with other medications to treat the symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD; a disorder of the nervous system that causes difficulties with movement, muscle control, and balance) and tremors caused by other medical problems or medications. Benztropine is in a class of medications called anticholinergics. It works by blocking a certain natural substance (acetylcholine) to help to decrease symptoms in people with Parkinson's disease.
How should this medicine be used?
Benztropine comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken at bedtime. It is usually taken once daily but may be taken up to four times a day depending on your symptoms. Take benztropine at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take benztropine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may start with a small dose and increase it slowly after seeing your response to benztropine. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand.
Do not stop taking benztropine suddenly without talking with your doctor, especially if you are also taking other medications. Sudden stoppage can cause symptoms of Parkinson's disease to return.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking benztropine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to benztropine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in the benztropine preparation. Ask your doctor or pharmacist or check the package label for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any of the following: tricyclic antidepressants such as desipramine (Norpramin), clomipramine (Anafranil), imipramine (Tofranil), or trimipramine (Surmontil) or haloperidol (Haldol).
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had tardive dyskinesia (uncontrollable movement of the face, tongue, or other body parts); glaucoma; prostatic hypertrophy (BPH, enlargement of the prostate gland) or other problems with your urinary system; or heart or blood pressure problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking benztropine , call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking benztropine.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by benztropine.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Benztropine may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking benztropine if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take benztropine because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Side effects from benztropine are common. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth
difficulty or pain when urinating
constipation
vomiting
nausea
loss of appetite
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
fever
confusion
depression
delusions or hallucinations
vision changes
Benztropine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
excitement
confusion
nervousness
seeing things that do not exist (hallucinating)
dizziness
muscle weakness
dry mouth
blurred vision
rapid or pounding heartbeat
upset stomach
vomiting
painful urination
difficulty swallowing
rash
headache
hot, dry, flushed skin
bloody vomit
seizure
coma
heat stroke
heartburn
constipation
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to benztropine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cogentin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page