Daunorubicin and Cytarabine Lipid Complex Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Daunorubicin and Cytarabine Lipid Complex Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617045.html
Daunorubicin and Cytarabine Lipid Complex Injection
pronounced as (daw'' noe roo' bi sin) (sye tare' a been)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex is different than other products containing these medications and should not be substituted for one another.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex is used to treat certain types of acute myeloid leukemia (AML; a type of cancer of the white blood cells). Daunorubicin is in a class of medications called anthracyclines. Cytarabine is in a class of medications called antimetabolites. Daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex slows or stops the growth of cancer cells in your body.
How should this medicine be used?
Daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected into a vein by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. Your doctor will tell you how often you will receive daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex. The schedule depends on the condition you have and on how your body responds to the medication.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have previously received radiation therapy to the chest area or have or have ever had a heart attack, or Wilson's disease (a disease that causes copper to build-up in the body) or heart, liver, or kidney disease; or if you have an infection, blood-clotting problems, or anemia (decreased amount of red blood cells in the blood).
Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are receiving daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex. You will need to have a pregnancy test before you begin treatment. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy in yourself or your partner during your treatment with daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex and for 6 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant while receiving daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex, call your doctor. Daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex may harm the fetus.
you should know that this medication may cause infertility in men; however, you should not assume that you cannot get someone else pregnant.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex and for at least 2 weeks after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, constipation, diarrhea, stomach pain,
sores in the mouth and throat
tiredness
muscle or joint pain
headache
dizziness or lightheadedness
unusual dreams or sleep problems, including trouble falling or staying asleep
vision problems
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
pain, itching, redness, swelling, blisters, or sores in the place where the medication was injected
rash, hives, itching, shortness of breath, difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles or lower legs
fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
chest pain
fever, chills, sore throat, cough, frequent or painful urination, or other signs of infection
excessive tiredness or weakness
unusual bleeding or bruising, nosebleed, black and tarry stools, red blood in stools, bloody vomit, vomited material that looks like coffee grounds
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark brown or yellow ring around the iris of the eye
Daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to daunorubicin and cytarabine lipid complex.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vyxeos
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page