Triamterene: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Triamterene
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682337.html
Triamterene
pronounced as (trye am' ter een)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Triamterene is used alone or with other medications to treat edema (fluid retention; excess fluid held in body tissues) caused by various conditions, including liver and heart disease. Triamterene is in a class of medications called diuretics ('water pills'). It causes the kidneys to eliminate unneeded water and sodium from the body into the urine, but reduces the loss of potassium.
How should this medicine be used?
Triamterene comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It usually is taken once a day in the morning after breakfast or twice a day after breakfast and lunch. It is best to take triamterene earlier in the day so that frequent trips to the bathroom do not interfere with nighttime sleep. Take triamterene at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take triamterene exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Triamterene is used in combination with other diuretics to treat high blood pressure.
This medicine may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking triamterene,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to triamterene or any other medications (Dyazide, Maxzide).
do not take triamterene if you are taking amiloride (Midamor), spironolactone (Aldactone), or other medications containing triamterene.
some medications should not be taken with triamterene. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with triamterene. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting triamterene with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking triamterene, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist
the following nonprescription products may interact with triamterene: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking triamterene. Do not start any of these medications while taking triamterene without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, gout, kidney stones, or heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking triamterene, call your doctor. Do not breastfeed if you are taking triamterene.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking triamterene.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Triamterene may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Follow your doctor's directions for your meals, including advice for a reduced salt (sodium) diet and daily exercise program. Avoid potassium-containing salt substitutes while you are taking this medication..Talk with your doctor about the amount of potassium-rich foods (e.g., bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice) that you may have in your diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Triamterene may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting
dizziness
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
muscle weakness or cramps
slow or irregular heartbeat
diarrhea
rash
difficulty breathing or swallowing
upset stomach
extreme tiredness
unusual bleeding or bruising
lack of energy
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
flu-like symptoms
sore throat
severe dry mouth
unusual bruising or bleeding
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
upset stomach
vomiting
weakness or tiredness
dizziness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to triamterene.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Dyrenium
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page