Tolvaptan (kidney disease): MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tolvaptan (kidney disease)
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620041.html
Tolvaptan (kidney disease)
pronounced as (tol vap' tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Tolvaptan (Jynarque) may cause liver damage, sometimes serious enough to require liver transplantation or to cause death. Tell your doctor if you have or ever had liver problems, including hepatitis. Your doctor may tell you not to take tolvaptan (Jynarque). Your doctor will order laboratory tests regularly before and during your treatment to see if tolvaptan (Jynarque) is affecting your liver. Your doctor may tell you that you should not receive this medication if the tests show that you have liver problems. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: nausea, vomiting, extreme tiredness, unusual bleeding or bruising, lack of energy, loss of appetite, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, yellowing of the skin or eyes, dark-colored urine, rash, itching, or flu-like symptoms.
Because of the risks with this medication, tolvaptan (Jynarque) is available only through a special restricted distribution program. A program called the Jynarque Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies (REMS) has been set up to decrease the risks of taking tolvaptan (Jynarque). Your doctor and your pharmacist must be registered with the Jynarque REMS program. Ask your doctor for more information about this program and how you will receive your medication. Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to tolvaptan (Jynarque).
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with tolvaptan (Jynarque) and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risk of taking tolvaptan (Jynarque).
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tolvaptan (Jynarque) is used to slow the worsening of kidney function in certain patients with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD; a certain type of inherited kidney disease). Tolvaptan (Jynarque) is in a class of medications called vasopressin V
2
receptor antagonists. It works by increasing the amount of water released from the body as urine and decreases the growth of cysts in the kidneys. Removing fluid from the body and slowing the growth of cysts helps to slow the worsening of kidney function.
Tolvaptan is also available as a tablet (Samsca) to treat low blood levels of sodium in people who have heart failure or certain other conditions. This monograph only gives information about tolvaptan tablets (Jynarque) to slow the worsening of kidney function in patients with ADPKD. If you are using this medication to treat low levels of sodium in the blood, read the monograph entitled tolvaptan (low blood sodium).
How should this medicine be used?
Tolvaptan (Jynarque) comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day, one tablet in the morning and one tablet 8 hours later, with or without food. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take tolvaptan (Jynarque) exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of tolvaptan (Jynarque) and gradually increase your dose.
Your doctor may need to decrease your dose if you experience certain side effects. It is important for you to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tolvaptan (Jynarque),
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tolvaptan (Jynarque, Samsca), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in tolvaptan tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with tolvaptan. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with tolvaptan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting tolvaptan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking tolvaptan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with tolvaptan: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking tolvaptan. Do not start this medication while taking tolvaptan without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have any of the conditions mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, if you have or have ever had a high level of sodium in your blood, if you have difficulty urinating or are unable to urinate, if you have had severe vomiting or diarrhea or think you may be dehydrated, or if you are unable to notice that you are thirsty. Your doctor may tell you not to take tolvaptan (Jynarque).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking tolvaptan (Jynarque), call your doctor. You should not breastfeed while you are taking tolvaptan (Jynarque).
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
You will need to drink enough water while you are taking tolvaptan (Jynarque) so you do not become thirsty or dehydrated.
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tolvaptan (Jynarque) may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
thirst
dry mouth
frequent, excessive urination
heartburn
decreased appetite
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
diarrhea
inability to drink normally
dizziness
faintness
decreased urination
weakness
drowsiness
confusion
weight loss
rapid or pounding heartbeats
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
hives
Tolvaptan (Jynarque) may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
excessive urination
excessive thirst
dizziness
faintness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to tolvaptan (Jynarque).
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Jynarque
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page