Trimethoprim: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Trimethoprim
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a684025.html
Trimethoprim
pronounced as (trye meth' oh prim)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Trimethoprim eliminates bacteria that cause urinary tract infections. It is used in combination with other drugs to treat certain types of pneumonia. It also is used to treat traveler's diarrhea. Antibiotics will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Trimethoprim comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken one or two times a day. Trimethoprim may be taken with or without food. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your pharmacist or doctor to explain any part you do not understand. Take trimethoprim exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking trimethoprim,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to trimethoprim, sulfa drugs, diuretics ('water pills', oral diabetes medications, or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking trimethoprim. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had anemia or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking trimethoprim, call your doctor immediately.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Take trimethoprim on an empty stomach, 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals. However, if you experience nausea, you may take trimethoprim with food.
Drink at least eight glasses of liquid (water, tea, coffee, soft drinks, milk, and fruit juice) every day.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Trimethoprim may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
vomiting
diarrhea
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash (hives)
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
sore throat
fever or chills
mouth sores
unusual bruising or bleeding
yellowing of the skin or eyes
paleness
joint aches
bluish-colored fingernails, lips, or skin
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to trimethoprim.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the trimethoprim, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Primsol
®
Proloprim
®
¶
Trimpex
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
10/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page