Clindamycin Vaginal: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clindamycin Vaginal
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a609006.html
Clindamycin Vaginal
pronounced as (klin'' da mye' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Vaginal clindamycin is used to treat bacterial vaginosis (an infection caused by harmful bacteria in the vagina). Clindamycin is in a class of medications called lincomycin antibiotics. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of bacteria. Vaginal clindamycin is not used to treat vaginal irritation caused by yeast infections or by sexually transmitted diseases such as chlamydia and trichomoniasis.
How should this medicine be used?
Vaginal clindamycin comes as a suppository to place in the vagina, and a cream and a gel to apply to the inside of the vagina. Vaginal clindamycin may be used once a day for 3 or 7 days in a row. It may also be used as a single dose. Your doctor will tell you when to use it and for how long to use it based on the product.
Use clindamycin vaginal exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
This medication is for vaginal use only. Do not swallow the cream, gel, or suppositories, and do not apply the cream or gel to any other part of your body. Be careful not to get the cream or gel in your eyes. If you get the cream or gel in your eyes, rinse your eyes with plenty of cool water.
Your medication will come with directions for use. Read these directions and follow them carefully. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how to use vaginal clindamycin.
Use vaginal clindamycin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using vaginal clindamycin too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using vaginal clindamycin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using vaginal clindamycin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had inflammatory bowel disease (IBD; condition in which the lining of all or part of the intestine is swollen, irritated, or has sores), Crohn’s disease (a condition in which the body attacks the lining of the digestive tract, causing pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fever), or severe diarrhea caused by an antibiotic. Your doctor may tell you not to use vaginal clindamycin.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using vaginal clindamyin, call your doctor.
you should know that certain ingredients in vaginal clindamycin may weaken latex or rubber contraceptive devices such as condoms and vaginal diaphragms. Do not use these devices during your treatment and for 3 to 7 days after your treatment. Your doctor will tell you how many days you should not use these devices based on the product you are using. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how long to stop using these devices.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using vaginal clindamycin.
you should know that you should not have vaginal intercourse or use vaginal products such as tampons or douches during your treatment with vaginal clindamycin.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Vaginal clindamycin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
white patches in the mouth
thick, white vaginal discharge
burning, itching, and swelling of the vagina
burning, painful urination
vaginal pain
constipation
nausea
headache
back pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
stomach pain or cramping, diarrhea, watery or bloody stools
rash, hives, itching, peeling or blistering skin, difficulty breathing or swallowing
Vaginal clindamycin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat (above 86 °F) and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish using vaginal clindamycin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cleocin
®
Vaginal
Clindesse
®
Xaciato
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page