Ombitasvir, Paritaprevir, Ritonavir, and Dasabuvir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ombitasvir, Paritaprevir, Ritonavir, and Dasabuvir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614057.html
Ombitasvir, Paritaprevir, Ritonavir, and Dasabuvir
pronounced as (om bit' as vir) (par'' I ta' pre vir) (ri toe' na vir) (da sa' bue vir)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
Notice:
Ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir is no longer available in the United States.
IMPORTANT WARNING:
You may already be infected with hepatitis B (a virus that infects the liver and may cause severe liver damage) but do not have any symptoms of the disease. In this case, taking the combination of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir may increase the risk that your infection will become more serious or life-threatening and you will develop symptoms. Tell your doctor if you have or ever had a hepatitis B virus infection. Your doctor will order a blood test to see if you have or have ever had hepatitis B infection. Your doctor will also monitor you for signs of hepatitis B infection during and for several months after your treatment. If necessary, your doctor may give you medication to treat this infection before and during your treatment with the combination of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir. If you experience any of the following symptoms during or after your treatment, call your doctor immediately: excessive tiredness, yellowing of the skin or eyes, loss of appetite, nausea or vomiting, pale stools, stomach pain, or dark urine.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain tests before, during, and after your treatment to check your body's response to the combination of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir.
Talk to your doctor about the risk(s) of taking the combination of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir.
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir is used alone or in combination with ribavirin (Copegus, Rebetol) to treat chronic (long-term) hepatitis C infection (swelling of the liver caused by a virus). Ombitasvir is a hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5A inhibitor. It works by stopping the virus that causes hepatitis C from spreading inside the body. Paritaprevir is a protease inhibitor. It works by decreasing the amount of HCV in the body. Ritonavir is a protease inhibitor. It helps to increase the amount of paritaprevir in the body so that the medication will have a greater effect. Dasabuvir is a non-nucleoside NS5B polymerase inhibitor. It works by decreasing the amount of HCV in the body. It is not known if ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, or dasabuvir prevent the spread of hepatitis C to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir comes as tablets to take by mouth. This medication comes in a package with 28 days of medication. Each daily dose package has different types of tablets, two containing the combination of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, and ritonavir and two others containing dasabuvir. Take ombitasvir, paritaprevir, and ritonavir (2 tablets) and dasabuvir (1 tablet) every morning with food, then take dasabuvir (1 tablet) every evening with food. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir at around the same time(s) every day. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The combination of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir controls HCV but does not cure it. Continue to take ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir even if you feel well. The length of your treatment (12 to 24 weeks) depends on your condition, how well you respond to the medication, and whether you experience severe side effects. Do not stop taking ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, dasabuvir, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir tablets. If you have had a serious or life-threatening reaction to ritonavir (rash, blistering or peeling of the skin), your doctor will probably tell not to take ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir,and dasabuvir. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following herbal product may interact with ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir. Do not start this medication while taking ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have any type of liver disease other than hepatitis C. Your doctor may tell you not to take ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir.
tell your doctor if you have ever had a liver transplant, anemia (a lower than normal number of red blood cells), or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir, call your doctor.
you should know that ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, injections, and intrauterine devices). Use another form of birth control while you are taking ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir and for 2 weeks after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about types of birth control that will work for you during and after your treatment with ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, and ritonavir, take the missed dose with a meal as soon as you remember it. However, if it is more than 12 hours since the time you should have taken your dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
If you miss a dose of dasabuvir, take the missed dose with a meal as soon as you remember it. However, if it is more than 6 hours since the time you should have taken your dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
rash
reddening of the skin
itching
weakness
Ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the carton it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Viekira Pak
®
(as a combination product containing Ombitasvir, Paritaprevir, Ritonavir, Dasabuvir)
Last Revised -
08/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page