Blepharocheilodontic syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Blepharocheilodontic syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/blepharocheilodontic-syndrome/
Blepharocheilodontic syndrome
Description
Blepharocheilodontic (BCD) syndrome is a disorder that is present at birth. It mainly affects the eyelids (blepharo-), upper lip (-cheilo-), and teeth (-dontic).
People with BCD syndrome have lower eyelids that turn out so that the inner surface is exposed (
ectropion
). The outside of the lower lid may sag away from the eye (euryblepharon), and the eyelids may not be able to close completely (lagophthalmia). There can be extra eyelashes (distichiasis) on the upper eyelids, ranging from a few extra eyelashes to a full extra set. These eyelashes do not grow along the edge of the eyelid with the normal lashes, but out of its inner lining. When the abnormal eyelashes touch the eyeball, they can cause damage to the clear covering of the eye (
cornea
). Affected individuals may also have widely spaced eyes (
hypertelorism
), a
flat face
, and a high forehead.
Other features of BCD syndrome usually include openings on both sides of the upper lip (bilateral
cleft lip
) and an opening in the roof of the mouth (
cleft palate
). Affected individuals may have fewer teeth than normal (oligodontia) and their teeth are often smaller than usual and
cone-shaped
. The dental abnormalities affect both primary teeth (sometimes called "baby teeth") and secondary (permanent) teeth. Other frequent features include
sparse, fine hair
and abnormal nails.
Occasionally people with BCD syndrome have additional features, including an obstruction of the
anal opening
(imperforate anus); malformation or absence of the butterfly-shaped gland in the lower neck called the
thyroid
, resulting in lack of thyroid gland function; or fused fingers or toes (
syndactyly
). Very rarely, affected individuals have incompletely formed arms or legs (limb reduction defects) or a spinal cord abnormality known as
spina bifida
.
Frequency
BCD syndrome is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. At least 50 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
Causes
BCD syndrome is caused by mutations in the
CDH1
or
CTNND1
gene. These genes provide instructions for making proteins called epithelial cadherin (E-cadherin) and p120-catenin, respectively. The E-cadherin protein is found within the
membrane
that surrounds epithelial cells, which are the cells that line the surfaces and cavities of the body, including the inside of the eyelids and mouth. This protein is involved in the attachment of cells to one another (cell adhesion). The p120-catenin protein helps keep E-cadherin in its proper place in the cell membrane, preventing it from being taken into the cell and broken down prematurely. Interactions between the two proteins are also important for other cell processes that are involved in the development of the head and face (craniofacial development), including the eyelids and teeth.
While the specific effects of the
CDH1
gene mutations that cause BCD syndrome are not well understood, researchers suggest that the mutations may result in an E-cadherin protein that is unstable and quickly broken down.
CTNND1
gene mutations reduce or eliminate the production or function of p120-catenin, so E-cadherin is broken down prematurely. A shortage of these proteins disrupts normal development, especially craniofacial development, which is thought to underlie the features of BCD syndrome.
Learn more about the genes associated with Blepharocheilodontic syndrome
CDH1
CTNND1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from
one affected parent
. Other cases result from
new mutations in the gene
and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
BCD syndrome
BCDS
Blepharo-cheilo-dontic syndrome
Blepharo-cheilo-odontic syndrome
Clefting, ectropion, and conical teeth
Ectropion, inferior, with cleft lip and/or palate
Elschnig syndrome
Lagophthalmia with bilateral cleft lip and palate
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Blepharocheilodontic syndrome 1
Genetic Testing Registry: Blepharocheilodontic syndrome 2
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Blepharo-cheilo-odontic syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
BLEPHAROCHEILODONTIC SYNDROME 1; BCDS1
BLEPHAROCHEILODONTIC SYNDROME 2; BCDS2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Ababneh FK, Al-Swaid A, Elhag A, Youssef T, Alsaif S. Blepharo-cheilo-dontic
(BCD) syndrome: expanding the phenotype, case report and review of literature. Am
J Med Genet A. 2014 Jun;164A(6):1525-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36465. Epub 2014 Apr
9.
Citation on PubMed
Ghoumid J, Stichelbout M, Jourdain AS, Frenois F, Lejeune-Dumoulin S,
Alex-Cordier MP, Lebrun M, Guerreschi P, Duquennoy-Martinot V, Vinchon M, Ferri
J, Jung M, Vicaire S, Vanlerberghe C, Escande F, Petit F, Manouvrier-Hanu S.
Blepharocheilodontic syndrome is a CDH1 pathway-related disorder due to mutations
in CDH1 and CTNND1. Genet Med. 2017 Sep;19(9):1013-1021. doi:
10.1038/gim.2017.11. Epub 2017 Mar 16.
Citation on PubMed
Gorlin RJ, Zellweger H, Curtis MW, Wiedemann HR, Warburg M, Majewski F,
Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Prahl-Andersen B, Zackai E. Blepharo-cheilo-dontic (BCD)
syndrome. Am J Med Genet. 1996 Oct 16;65(2):109-12. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961016)65:23.0.CO;2-N.
Citation on PubMed
Guion-Almeida ML, Rodini ES, Kokitsu-Nakata NM, Bologna-Amantini D.
Blepharo-Cheilo-Dontic (BCD) syndrome: report on four new patients. Am J Med
Genet. 1998 Mar 5;76(2):133-6. doi:
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980305)76:23.0.co;2-u.
Citation on PubMed
Valdez-de la Torre MH, Quintana-Garcia M, Canun S. Blepharo-cheilo-dontic
(BCD) syndrome in two Mexican patients. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Jul 16;85(2):157-9.
doi: 10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19990716)85:23.3.co;2-1.
Citation on PubMed
Weaver KN, Rutledge KD, Grant JH, Robin NH. Imperforate anus is a rare
associated finding in blepharocheilodontic syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2010
Feb;152A(2):438-40. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33207.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Cleft Lip and Palate
Craniofacial Abnormalities
Eyelid Disorders
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Cleft lip and palate repair
Ectropion
Genetics
Tooth - abnormal shape
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page