Ixabepilone Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ixabepilone Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608042.html
Ixabepilone Injection
pronounced as (ix'' ab ep' i lone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease. Your doctor will order laboratory tests to see how well your liver is working before and during your treatment. If the tests show that you have liver problems, your doctor will probably not give you ixabepilone injection and capecitabine (Xeloda). Treatment with both ixabepilone injection and capecitabine may cause serious side effects or death in people who have liver disease.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving ixabepilone injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ixabepilone injection is used alone or in combination with capecitabine to treat breast cancer that cannot be treated with other medications. Ixabepilone is in a class of medications called microtubule inhibitors. It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Ixabepilone injection comes as a powder to be added to fluid and injected over 3 hours intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse. It is usually injected once every 3 weeks.
Your doctor may need to delay your treatment and adjust your dose if you experience certain side effects. Your doctor will give you other medications to prevent or treat certain side effects about one hour before you receive each dose of ixabepilone injection. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with ixabepilone injection.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving ixabepilone injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ixabepilone, any other medications, Cremophor EL (polyoxyethylated castor oil), or medications that contain Cremophor EL such as paclitaxel (Taxol). Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you do not know if a medication that you are allergic to contains Cremophor EL.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking, have recently taken, or plan to take while receiving ixabepilone injection.. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with ixabepilone injection: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start using ixabepilone injection. Do not start this medication while receiving ixabepilone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes; any condition that causes numbness, burning or tingling in your hands or feet; or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant while you are receiving ixabepilone injection. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant while receiving ixabepilone injection, call your doctor. Ixabepilone injection may harm the fetus.
you should know that ixabepilone injection contains alcohol and may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you. Talk to your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages or medications that may affect your thinking or judgment during your treatment with ixabepilone injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not drink grapefruit juice while receiving this medication.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ixabepilone injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
hair loss
flaky or darkened skin
problems with toenails or fingernails
tender, red palms and soles of feet
sores on the lip or in the mouth or throat
difficulty tasting food
watery eyes
loss of appetite
weight loss
heartburn
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
stomach pain
joint, muscle, or bone pain
confusion
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
weakness
tiredness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
numbness, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
difficulty breathing
hives
rash
itching
sudden reddening of the face, neck or upper chest
sudden swelling of face, throat or tongue
pounding heartbeat
dizziness
faintness
chest pain or tightness
unusual weight gain
fever (100.5 °F or greater)
chills
cough
burning or pain when urinating
Ixabepilone injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
muscle pain
tiredness
What other information should I know?
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ixempra
®
Last Reviewed -
09/01/2010
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page