Loncastuximab Tesirine-lpyl Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Loncastuximab Tesirine-lpyl Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621031.html
Loncastuximab Tesirine-lpyl Injection
pronounced as (lon'' kas tux' i mab tes' ir een)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl injection is used to treat a certain type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL; a type of cancer that begins in a type of white blood cells that normally fights infection) that did not respond to or has returned after treatment with at least two other cancer treatments. Loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl is in a class of medications called antibody-drug conjugates. It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected into a vein over 30 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or medical facility. It is usually injected once every 3 weeks for as long as your doctor recommends that you receive treatment.
Your doctor will probably treat you with another medication before and for 2 days after each dose to help prevent certain side effects. Your doctor may need to temporarily or permanently stop your treatment or decrease your dose of loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl during your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl.
You should know that loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl should be administered only into a vein. However, it may leak into surrounding tissue causing severe irritation or damage. Your doctor or nurse will monitor the area near where the medication was injected. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately: pain, itching, redness, swelling, or sores near the place where the medication was injected.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or recently have had an infection or if you have or have ever had liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are receiving loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl. If you are female, you may need to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment, and you should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl and for 9 months after your final dose. If you are male, you and your female partner should use birth control during your treatment and continue to use birth control for 6 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl, call your doctor immediately. Loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are receiving loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl and for 3 months after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl injection.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl injection.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
unusual tiredness or weakness
nausea
diarrhea
stomach pain
constipation
decreased appetite
muscle or joint pain
darkening of skin
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
itching
blistering or peeling skin
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower leg
weight gain
swelling of the stomach area
shortness of breath
difficulty breathing
chest pain
fever, chills, headache, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, or other signs of infection
warm, red, painful or swollen skin following a cut or scrape
unusual bleeding or bruising
Loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to loncastuximab tesirine-lpyl injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zynlonta
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page