Quinine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Quinine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682322.html
Quinine
pronounced as (kwye' nine)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Quinine should not be used to treat or prevent nighttime leg cramps. Quinine has not been shown to be effective for this purpose, and may cause serious or life-threatening side effects, including severe bleeding problems, kidney damage, irregular heartbeat, and severe allergic reactions.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with quinine and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Quinine is used alone or with other medications to treat malaria (a serious or life-threatening illness that is spread by mosquitos in certain parts of the world). Quinine should not be used to prevent malaria. Quinine is in a class of medications called antimalarials. It works by killing the organisms that cause malaria.
How should this medicine be used?
Quinine comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It usually is taken with food three times a day (every 8 hours) for 3 to 7 days. Take quinine at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take quinine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not open, chew, or crush them. Quinine has a bitter taste.
You should begin to feel better during the first 1-2 days of your treatment. Call your doctor if your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse. Also call your doctor if you have a fever soon after you finish your treatment. This could be a sign that you are experiencing a second episode of malaria.
Take quinine until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking quinine too soon or if you skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the organisms may become resistant to antimalarials.
Other uses for this medicine
Quinine is also sometimes used to treat babesiosis (a serious or life-threatening illness that is transmitted from animals to humans by ticks). Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking quinine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to quinine, quinidine, mefloquine (Lariam), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in quinine capsules. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking quinine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
do not take antacids that contain magnesium or aluminum (Alternagel, Amphogel, Alu-cap, Alu-tab, Basaljel, Gaviscon, Maalox, Milk of Magnesia, or Mylanta) at the same time as you take quinine.Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how long you should wait between taking this type of antacid and taking quinine.
the following nonprescription products may interact with quinine: cimetidine (Tagamet); ranitidine (Pepcid AC); sodium bicarbonate (in baking soda); dextromethorphan. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking quinine. Do not start any of these medications while taking quinine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause fainting or irregular heartbeat), an abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG; a test that measures the electrical activity of the heart), and if you have or have ever had G-6-PD deficiency (an inherited blood disease), or if you have or have ever had myasthenia gravis (MG; condition that causes weakness of certain muscles), or optic neuritis (inflammation of the optic nerve that may cause sudden changes in vision). Also tell your doctor if you have ever had a serious reaction, especially a bleeding problem or problems with your blood after taking quinine in the past. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take quinine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a slow or irregular heartbeat; low levels of potassium in your blood; or heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking quinine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking quinine.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Cigarette smoking may decrease the effectiveness of this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it has been more than 4 hours since the time you should have taken the missed dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
This medication may cause low blood sugar. You should know the symptoms of low blood sugar and what to do if you develop these symptoms.
Quinine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
restlessness
difficulty hearing or ringing in the ears
confusion
nervousness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
hives
itching
flushing
hoarseness
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles or lower legs
fever
blisters
stomach pain
vomiting
diarrhea
blurriness or changes in color vision
inability to hear or see
faintness
easy bruising
purple, brown, or red spots on the skin
unusual bleeding
blood in the urine
dark or tarry stools
nosebleeds
bleeding gums
sore throat
fast or irregular heartbeat
chest pain
weakness
sweating
dizziness
Quinine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not refrigerate or freeze the medication.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
blurriness or changes in color vision
symptoms of low blood sugar
changes in heartbeat
headache
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
diarrhea
ringing in the ears or difficulty hearing
seizures
slow or difficult breathing
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking quinine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Qualaquin
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page