Mosunetuzumab-axgb Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mosunetuzumab-axgb Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623007.html
Mosunetuzumab-axgb Injection
pronounced as (moe sun" e tooz' ue mab°)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Mosunetuzumab-axgb injection may cause a serious or life-threatening reaction called cytokine release syndrome (CRS). A doctor or nurse will monitor you carefully during your infusions. Your doctor will increase the dose of mosunetuzumab-axgb gradually with each infusion help reduce this risk. If you miss a dose, you may have to start the dosing schedule over again. Tell your doctor if you have an inflammatory condition or if you have or think you may have any type of infection now. If you experience any of the following symptoms during and after your infusion, tell your doctor immediately: fever (100.4°F or higher), chills, low blood pressure, fast or irregular heartbeat, tiredness or weakness, difficulty breathing, headache, confusion, anxiousness, dizziness, nausea or vomiting.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with mosunetuzumab-axgb and each time you receive the drug. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Mosunetuzumab-axgb injection is used to treat follicular lymphoma (FL; a slow-growing blood cancer). Mosunetuzumab-axgb is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Mosunetuzumab-axgb injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be given intravenously (into the vein) by a doctor or nurse at a healthcare facility. It is usually given on days 1, 8 and 15 and then every 3 weeks after your initial treatment cycle. Your doctor will continue treatment based on your response to the medication. You may be given different medications before each treatment to help you tolerate mosunetuzumab-axgb injection.
Your doctor may delay or stop your treatment with mosunetuzumab-axgb, or treat you with additional medications, depending on your response to the medication and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving mosunetuzumab-axgb injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have an infection or if you have or ever have ever had Epstein Barr Virus (EBV; mononucleosis).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You must have a pregnancy test before you start treatment with mosunetuzumab-axgb injection. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with mosunetuzumab-axgb injection and for 3 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use. If you become pregnant while receiving mosunetuzumab-axgbinjection, call your doctor. Mosunetuzumab-axgb injection may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Do not breastfeed during your treatment and for 3 months after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving mosunetuzumab-axgb.
you should know that mosunetuzumab-axgb may make you drowsy and cause confusion, weakness, and dizziness. Do not drive a car or operate machinery after you receive a dose of mosunetuzumab-axgb injection or for the duration of your mosunetuzumab-axgb treatment if you experience any of these symptoms.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Mosunetuzumab-axgb may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness, fever, swelling
rash, itching, dry skin
headache, tingling in hands or feet, dizziness
muscle or joint pain
diarrhea, nausea, abdominal pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
numbness or tingling in arms or legs, dizziness, forgetfulness, sleepiness or insomnia, tremors, loss of consciousness, seizures, loss of balance, trouble writing or speaking
cough, chest pain, shortness of breath, painful rash, sore throat, pain during urination, feeling weak or general unwell feeling
tender or swollen lymph nodes or pain or swelling at the site of the tumor
fever, easy bruising, tiredness, feeling full after eating small amounts of food, tenderness in upper left abdomen, yellowing of skin and eyes
Mosunetuzumab-axgb may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to mosunetuzumab-axgb.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lunsumio
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page