Micafungin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Micafungin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624050.html
Micafungin Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Micafungin is used to treat certain fungal infections that have caused esophagitis ( infection of the throat), spread to the bloodstream, have caused abscesses (collection of pus in body tissue) or caused peritonitis (infection of the lining of the stomach) in adults and children. It is also used to prevent fungal infections in adults and children who have undergone a hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT; procedure in which certain blood cells are removed from the body and then returned to the body). Micafungin is in a class of medications called echinocandins. It works by stopping the building of cell walls in the fungus causing it to die.
How should this medicine be used?
Micafungin injection comes as a powder to be mixed with a liquid and given intravenously (into the vein). It is usually given once a day. Your doctor will decide how long you should receive micafungin.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving micafungin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to micafungin, caspofungin, anidulafungin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in micafungin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking micafungin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking micafungin, call your doctor immediately. Micafungin may harm the fetus.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Micafungin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms tell your doctor immediately:
rash, swelling of tongue or throat, difficulty breathing, difficulty swallowing, wheezing, feeling tired or confused, dizziness
yellowing of skin or white of eyes, dark urine, lower abdominal pain
fever, flushing, tightness of throat, feeling of fast heartbeat, chills, lightheadedness, feeling faint
Micafungin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about micafungin.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mycamine
®
Last Revised -
09/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page