Nalmefene Nasal Spray: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nalmefene Nasal Spray
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623030.html
Nalmefene Nasal Spray
pronounced as (nal' me feen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nalmefene nasal spray is used along with emergency medical treatment to reverse the life-threatening effects of a known or suspected opiate (narcotic) overdose in adults and children 12 years of age and older. Nalmefene nasal spray is in a class of medications called opiate antagonists. It works by blocking the effects of opiates to relieve dangerous symptoms caused by high levels of opiates in the blood.
How should this medicine be used?
Nalmefene comes as a solution (liquid) to spray into the nose. It is usually given as needed to treat opiate overdoses. Each nalmefene nasal spray contains a single dose of nalmefene and should be used only once.
You will probably be unable to treat yourself if you experience an opiate overdose. You should make sure that your family members, caregivers, or the people who spend time with you know how to tell if you are experiencing an overdose, how to use nalmefene nasal spray, and what to do until emergency medical help arrives. Your doctor or pharmacist will show you and your family members how to use the medication. You and anyone who may need to give the medication should read the instructions that come with the nasal spray. Ask your pharmacist for the instructions or visit the manufacturer's website to get the instructions.
You should keep the nasal spray available at all times in case you experience an opioid overdose. Be aware of the expiration date on your device and replace the spray when this date passes.
Nalmefene nasal spray may not reverse the effects of certain opiates such as buprenorphine (Belbuca, Buprenex, Butrans, Sublocade) and pentazocine (Talwin) and may require additional nalmefene doses with a new nasal spray each time.
Symptoms of an opioid overdose include excessive sleepiness, not awakening when spoken to in a loud voice or when the middle of your chest is rubbed firmly, shallow or stopped breathing, or small pupils (black circles in the center of the eyes). If someone sees that you are experiencing these symptoms, he or she should give you your first nalmefene dose and then call 911 immediately. After receiving the nalmefene nasal spray, a person should stay with you and watch you closely until emergency medical help arrives.
To give the inhaler, follow these steps:
Lay the person on their back to give the medication.
Remove the nalmefene nasal spray from the box. Peel back the tab to open the spray.
Do not prime the nasal spray before using it.
Hold the nalmefene nasal spray with your thumb on the bottom of the plunger and your first and middle fingers on either side of the nozzle.
Gently insert the tip of the nozzle into one nostril, until your fingers on either side of the nozzle are against the bottom of the person's nose. Provide support to the back of the person's neck with your hand to allow the head to tilt back.
Press the plunger firmly to release the medication.
Remove the nasal spray nozzle from the nostril after giving the medication.
Turn the person on their side (recovery position) and call for emergency medical assistance immediately after giving the first nalmefene dose.
If the person does not respond by waking up, to voice or touch, or breathing normally or responds and then relapses, give another dose. If needed, give additional doses (repeating steps 2 through 7) every 2 to 5 minutes in alternate nostrils with a new nasal spray each time until emergency medical assistance arrives.
Put the used nasal spray(s) back in the container and out of reach of children until you can safely dispose of it.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving nalmefene nasal spray,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nalmefene, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in nalmefene nasal spray. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you receive naloxone nasal spray during pregnancy, your doctor may need to monitor your unborn baby carefully after you receive the medication.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nalmefene nasal spray may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
nasal congestion, discomfort, or pain
throat irritation
dizziness
hot flushes
red skin
feeling anxious
tiredness
decreased appetite
change in sense of taste
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, get emergency medical treatment:
signs of opiate withdrawal such as body aches; diarrhea; fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat; fever; runny nose; sneezing; sweating; yawning; nausea; vomiting; nervousness; restlessness; irritability; shivering or trembling; stomach cramps; weakness; and the appearance of hair on the skin standing on end
seizures
loss of consciousness
Nalmefene nasal spray may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze the nalmefene nasal spray.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Opvee
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page