Metaxalone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Metaxalone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682010.html
Metaxalone
pronounced as (me tax' a lone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Metaxalone, a muscle relaxant, is used with rest, physical therapy, and other measures to relax muscles and relieve pain and discomfort caused by strains, sprains, and other muscle injuries. Metaxalone is in a class of medications called skeletal muscle relaxants. It works by slowing activity in the nervous system to allow the body to relax.
How should this medicine be used?
Metaxalone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken three or four times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take metaxalone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking metaxalone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to metaxalone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in metaxalone tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking metaxolone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had anemia (a condition with an abnormally low number of red blood cells), kidney disease, or liver disease, Your doctor may tell you not to take metaxalone.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking metaxalone, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking metaxalone.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how metaxalone affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Metaxalone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
dizziness
headache
nervousness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
agitation, hallucinations, coma, fever, sweating, confusion, fast or irregular heartbeat, shivering, severe muscle stiffness or twitching, loss of coordination, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
rash; itching; swelling of the lips, face, or tongue; shortness of breath; difficulty breathing or swallowing
yellowing of the skin or eyes
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature, away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
drowsiness
extreme tiredness
agitation
difficulty breathing
seizures
fast heart rate
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
delusions (having strange thoughts or beliefs that have no basis in reality)
coma
high body temperature
muscle twitching or loss of muscle control
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking metaxolone.
Do not let anyone else take your medications. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Skelaxin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
10/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page