Heparin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Heparin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682826.html
Heparin Injection
pronounced as (hep' a rin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Heparin is used to prevent blood clots from forming in people who have certain medical conditions or who are undergoing certain medical procedures that increase the chance that clots will form. Heparin is also used to stop the growth of clots that have already formed in the blood vessels, but it cannot be used to decrease the size of clots that have already formed. Heparin is also used in small amounts to prevent blood clots from forming in catheters (small plastic tubes through which medication can be administered or blood drawn) that are left in veins over a period of time. Heparin is in a class of medications called anticoagulants ('blood thinners'). It works by decreasing the clotting ability of the blood.
How should this medicine be used?
Heparin comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) or deeply under the skin and as a dilute (less concentrated) solution to be injected into intravenous catheters. Heparin should not be injected into a muscle. Heparin is sometimes injected one to six times a day and sometimes given as a slow, continuous injection into the vein. When heparin is used to prevent blood clots from forming in intravenous catheters, it is usually used when the catheter is first put in place, and every time that blood is drawn out of the catheter or medication is given through the catheter.
Heparin may be given to you by a nurse or other healthcare provider, or you may be told to inject the medication by yourself at home. If you will be injecting heparin yourself, a healthcare provider will show you how to inject the medication. Ask your doctor, nurse, or pharmacist if you do not understand these directions or have any questions about where on your body you should inject heparin, how to give the injection, or how to dispose of used needles and syringes after you inject the medication.
If you will be injecting heparin yourself, follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use heparin exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Heparin solution comes in different strengths, and using the wrong strength may cause serious problems. Before giving an injection of heparin, check the package label to make sure it is the strength of heparin solution that your doctor prescribed for you. If the strength of heparin is not correct do not use the heparin and call your doctor or pharmacist right away.
Your doctor may increase or decrease your dose during your heparin treatment. If you will be injecting heparin yourself, be sure you know how much medication you should use.
Other uses for this medicine
Heparin is also sometimes used alone or in combination with aspirin to prevent pregnancy loss and other problems in pregnant women who have certain medical conditions and who have experienced these problems in their earlier pregnancies. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about the risks of using this medication to treat your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using heparin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to heparin, any other medications, beef products,pork products, or any of the ingredients in heparin injection. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using heparin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with heparin: aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve); nicotine; allergy medications (diphenhydramine, loratadine, fexofenadine, chlorpheniramine or cetirizine). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using heparin. Do not start any of these medications while using heparin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have a low level of platelets (type of blood cells needed for normal clotting) in your blood and if you have heavy bleeding that cannot be stopped anywhere in your body. Your doctor may tell you not to use heparin.
tell your doctor if you are currently experiencing your menstrual period; if you have a fever or an infection; and if you have recently had a spinal tap (removal of a small amount of the fluid that bathes the spinal cord to test for infection or other problems), spinal anesthesia (administration of pain medication in the area around the spine), surgery, especially involving the brain, spinal cord or eye, or a heart attack. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a bleeding disorder such as hemophilia (condition in which the blood does not clot normally), antithrombin III deficiency (condition that causes blood clots to form), blood clots in the legs, lungs, or anywhere in the body, unusual bruising or purple spots under the skin, cancer, ulcers in the stomach or intestine, a tube that drains the stomach or intestine, high blood pressure, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using heparin, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using heparin.
tell your doctor if you smoke or use tobacco products and if you stop smoking at any time during your treatment with heparin. Smoking may decrease the effectiveness of this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you will be injecting heparin yourself at home, talk to your doctor about what you should do if you forget to inject a dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Heparin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
redness, pain, bruising, or sores at the spot where heparin was injected
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
unusual bruising or bleeding
vomit that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds
stool that contains bright red blood or is black and tarry
blood in urine
excessive tiredness
nausea
vomiting
chest pain, pressure, or squeezing discomfort
discomfort in the arms, shoulder, jaw, neck, or back
coughing up blood
excessive sweating
sudden severe headache
lightheadedness or fainting
sudden loss of balance or coordination
sudden trouble walking
sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm or leg, especially on one side of the body
sudden confusion, or difficulty speaking or understanding speech
difficulty seeing in one or both eyes
purple or black skin discoloration
pain and blue or dark discoloration in the arms or legs
itching and burning, especially on the bottoms of the feet
chills
fever
hives
rash
wheezing
shortness of breath
difficulty breathing or swallowing
hoarseness
painful erection that lasts for hours
Heparin may cause osteoporosis (condition in which the bones become weak and may break easily), especially in people who use the medication for a long time. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication.
Heparin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
If you will be injecting heparin at home, your healthcare provider will tell you how to store the medication. Follow these directions carefully. Be sure to keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze heparin.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nosebleed
blood in urine
black, tarry stools
easy bruising
unusual bleeding
red blood in stools
vomit that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to heparin. Your doctor may ask you to check your stool for blood using an at-home test.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using heparin.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lipo-Hepin
®
¶
Liquaemin
®
¶
Panheparin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page