Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/beta-propeller-protein-associated-neurodegeneration/
Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration
Description
Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration (BPAN) is a disorder that damages the nervous system and is progressive, which means that it gradually gets worse. Affected individuals develop a buildup of iron in the brain that can be seen with medical imaging. For this reason, BPAN is classified as a type of disorder called neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA), although the iron accumulation may not occur until late in the disease.
Many people with BPAN have recurrent seizures (epilepsy) beginning in infancy or early childhood. Several different
types of seizures
can occur in this disorder, even in the same individual. Often the first type to occur are febrile seizures, which are triggered by a high fever. Affected individuals can also experience generalized tonic-clonic seizures (also known as grand mal seizures). This type of seizure affects the entire body, causing muscle rigidity, convulsions, and loss of consciousness. Other seizure types that can occur in this disorder include short lapses in awareness that can have the appearance of staring spells or daydreaming (absence seizures, also called petit mal seizures), sudden episodes of weak muscle tone (atonic seizures), involuntary muscle twitches (myoclonic seizures), or more pronounced movements called epileptic spasms. Some individuals have seizure patterns that resemble those in epileptic syndromes, such as West syndrome or
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
.
Children with BPAN also have intellectual disability, delayed development including significant problems with vocabulary and producing speech (expressive language), and difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia). Ataxia can affect the ability to walk and perform fine motor skills such as using utensils. Affected individuals can have neurodevelopmental issues that are often compared to features of a disorder called
Rett syndrome
. These features include repeated hand wringing or clasping (stereotypic hand movements); teeth grinding (bruxism); sleep disturbances; and problems with communication and social interaction characteristic of
autism spectrum disorder
.
In late adolescence or early adulthood, individuals with BPAN may begin to experience a gradual loss of intellectual functioning (cognitive decline) that can lead to a severe loss of thinking and reasoning abilities (dementia). Worsening problems with movement also occur, including dystonia and parkinsonism. Dystonia is a condition characterized by involuntary, sustained muscle contractions. In BPAN, the dystonia often starts in the arms. Parkinsonism can include unusually slow movement (bradykinesia), rigidity, tremors, an inability to hold the body upright and balanced (postural instability), and a shuffling walk that can cause recurrent falls.
The lifespan of people with BPAN varies. With proper management of their signs and symptoms, affected individuals can live into middle age. Death may result from complications of dementia or movement problems, such as injuries from falls or swallowing difficulties (dysphagia) that can lead to a bacterial lung infection called aspiration pneumonia.
Frequency
BPAN is a rare disorder. Its prevalence is unknown, but it is thought to account for between 35 and 40 percent of all cases of NBIA disorders. Some individuals who have been diagnosed with intellectual disability or early-onset parkinsonism based on their signs and symptoms have later been found to have BPAN when genetic testing was done.
Causes
BPAN is caused by variants (also called mutations) in the
WDR45
gene. This gene provides instructions for making the WIPI4 protein. WIPI4 has a characteristic structure resembling a seven-bladed propeller, from which the name of the disorder is derived. The WIPI4 protein is involved in a process called autophagy, which helps clear unneeded materials from cells, including excess amounts of an iron storage protein called
ferritin
.
Most of the
WDR45
gene variants identified in people with BPAN result in the absence of functioning WIPI4 protein. As a result, the process of autophagy is impaired, making cells less efficient at removing damaged cell structures and waste materials. Researchers suggest that nerve cells (
neurons
) may be particularly vulnerable to impaired autophagy because they have long extensions (axons and dendrites), making it even more difficult to transport the waste materials from these structures to the compartments in the cell body where recycling takes place (the
lysosomes
). The waste materials can build up in these areas and damage them. Damage to neurons results in the neurological problems that occur in BPAN.
Learn more about the gene associated with Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration
WDR45
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
X-linked dominant pattern
. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two
sex chromosomes
. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a variant in one of the two copies of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a variant in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
In most X-linked dominant disorders, males experience more severe symptoms than females. While this is not always the case in BPAN, most individuals with the disorder are females, likely because a smaller number of affected males survive until birth.
Almost all cases of BPAN result from new variants in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. Rarely, an affected person inherits the variant from a mildly affected mother. Among reported cases, males with BPAN and most females with BPAN have not had children.
Other Names for This Condition
BPAN
NBIA5
Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation 5
SENDA
Static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation 5
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 5; NBIA5
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Ebrahimi-Fakhari D, Saffari A, Wahlster L, Lu J, Byrne S, Hoffmann GF,
Jungbluth H, Sahin M. Congenital disorders of autophagy: an emerging novel class
of inborn errors of neuro-metabolism. Brain. 2016 Feb;139(Pt 2):317-37. doi:
10.1093/brain/awv371. Epub 2015 Dec 29.
Citation on PubMed
Gregory A, Kurian MA, Haack T, Hayflick SJ, Hogarth P. Beta-Propeller
Protein-Associated Neurodegeneration. 2017 Feb 16. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa
GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK424403/
Citation on PubMed
Haack TB, Hogarth P, Gregory A, Prokisch H, Hayflick SJ. BPAN: the only
X-linked dominant NBIA disorder. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2013;110:85-90. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-410502-7.00005-3.
Citation on PubMed
Hayflick SJ, Kruer MC, Gregory A, Haack TB, Kurian MA, Houlden HH, Anderson J,
Boddaert N, Sanford L, Harik SI, Dandu VH, Nardocci N, Zorzi G, Dunaway T,
Tarnopolsky M, Skinner S, Holden KR, Frucht S, Hanspal E, Schrander-Stumpel C,
Mignot C, Heron D, Saunders DE, Kaminska M, Lin JP, Lascelles K, Cuno SM, Meyer
E, Garavaglia B, Bhatia K, de Silva R, Crisp S, Lunt P, Carey M, Hardy J,
Meitinger T, Prokisch H, Hogarth P. beta-Propeller protein-associated
neurodegeneration: a new X-linked dominant disorder with brain iron accumulation.
Brain. 2013 Jun;136(Pt 6):1708-17. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt095. Epub 2013 May 17.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Nishioka K, Oyama G, Yoshino H, Li Y, Matsushima T, Takeuchi C, Mochizuki Y,
Mori-Yoshimura M, Murata M, Yamasita C, Nakamura N, Konishi Y, Ohi K, Ichikawa K,
Terada T, Obi T, Funayama M, Saiki S, Hattori N. High frequency of beta-propeller
protein-associated neurodegeneration (BPAN) among patients with intellectual
disability and young-onset parkinsonism. Neurobiol Aging. 2015
May;36(5):2004.e9-2004.e15. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.01.020. Epub 2015
Jan 30.
Citation on PubMed
Saitsu H, Nishimura T, Muramatsu K, Kodera H, Kumada S, Sugai K, Kasai-Yoshida
E, Sawaura N, Nishida H, Hoshino A, Ryujin F, Yoshioka S, Nishiyama K, Kondo Y,
Tsurusaki Y, Nakashima M, Miyake N, Arakawa H, Kato M, Mizushima N, Matsumoto N.
De novo mutations in the autophagy gene WDR45 cause static encephalopathy of
childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood. Nat Genet. 2013 Apr;45(4):445-9,
449e1. doi: 10.1038/ng.2562. Epub 2013 Feb 24.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Degenerative Nerve Diseases
Dementia
Epilepsy
Genetic Disorders
Movement Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Intellectual disability
Movement - uncontrollable
Movement - uncoordinated
Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA)
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page