GRIN2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
GRIN2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/grin2b-related-neurodevelopmental-disorder/
GRIN2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder
Description
GRIN2B
-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a condition that affects the nervous system. Neurodevelopmental disorders result from impaired growth and development of the central nervous system, which includes the brain and spinal cord, and the nerves connecting them. These disorders often affect learning ability, memory, and behavior and can be associated with other neurological problems.
Individuals with
GRIN2B
-related neurodevelopmental disorder have mild to profound intellectual disability and delayed development of speech and motor skills, such as sitting and walking. Some affected individuals never develop speech or the ability to walk on their own. Many people with this condition have weak muscle tone (hypotonia), which can contribute to the problems developing motor skills and lead to difficulty eating. Some affected individuals have abnormal muscle stiffness (spasticity), which can also cause problems with movement.
Recurrent seizures (epilepsy) occur in about half of people with
GRIN2B
-related neurodevelopmental disorder. About one-quarter of affected individuals have features of
autism spectrum disorder
, which is characterized by impaired communication and social interaction. Affected individuals may also be hyperactive, impulsive, or easily distractible, and some are described as being overly friendly. Sleeping difficulties can also occur in this condition.
Less common features of
GRIN2B
-related neurodevelopmental disorder include structural brain abnormalities, an unusually small head size (
microcephaly
), impaired vision, and involuntary muscle movements.
Frequency
The prevalence of
GRIN2B
-related neurodevelopmental disorder is unknown. Fewer than 100 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Causes
GRIN2B
-related neurodevelopmental disorder is caused by mutations in a gene called
GRIN2B
. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called GluN2B, which is found in nerve cells (
neurons
) in the brain primarily during development before birth. This protein is a part of specialized protein structures called NMDA receptors, which are involved in normal brain development, changes in the brain in response to experience (synaptic plasticity), learning, and memory.
Some
GRIN2B
gene mutations lead to production of a nonfunctional GluN2B protein or prevent the production of any GluN2B protein from one copy of the gene in each cell. A shortage of this protein may reduce the number of functional NMDA receptors, which would decrease receptor activity in cells. Other mutations lead to production of abnormal GluN2B proteins that likely alter how the NMDA receptors function; some mutations reduce NMDA receptor signaling while others increase it. Researchers are unsure how abnormal activity of NMDA receptors prevents normal growth and development of the brain or why too much or too little activity lead to similar neurological problems in people with
GRIN2B
-related neurodevelopmental disorder.
Learn more about the gene associated with GRIN2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder
GRIN2B
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
Most cases of this condition result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in an affected individual's parent or in early embryonic development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
EIEE27
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 27
GRIN2B encephalopathy
GRIN2B related syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, 27
Genetic Testing Registry: Intellectual disability, autosomal dominant 6
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
DEVELOPMENTAL AND EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY 27; DEE27
INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 6, WITH OR WITHOUT SEIZURES; MRD6
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Bell S, Maussion G, Jefri M, Peng H, Theroux JF, Silveira H, Soubannier V, Wu
H, Hu P, Galat E, Torres-Platas SG, Boudreau-Pinsonneault C, O'Leary LA, Galat V,
Turecki G, Durcan TM, Fon EA, Mechawar N, Ernst C. Disruption of GRIN2B Impairs
Differentiation in Human Neurons. Stem Cell Reports. 2018 Jul 10;11(1):183-196.
doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2018.05.018. Epub 2018 Jun 21.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Fedele L, Newcombe J, Topf M, Gibb A, Harvey RJ, Smart TG. Disease-associated
missense mutations in GluN2B subunit alter NMDA receptor ligand binding and ion
channel properties. Nat Commun. 2018 Mar 6;9(1):957. doi:
10.1038/s41467-018-02927-4.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Freunscht I, Popp B, Blank R, Endele S, Moog U, Petri H, Prott EC, Reis A,
Rubo J, Zabel B, Zenker M, Hebebrand J, Wieczorek D. Behavioral phenotype in five
individuals with de novo mutations within the GRIN2B gene. Behav Brain Funct.
2013 May 29;9:20. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-9-20.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Hu C, Chen W, Myers SJ, Yuan H, Traynelis SF. Human GRIN2B variants in
neurodevelopmental disorders. J Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Oct;132(2):115-121. doi:
10.1016/j.jphs.2016.10.002. Epub 2016 Oct 19.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Platzer K, Lemke JR. GRIN2B-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder. 2018
May 31 [updated 2021 Mar 25]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA,
Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501979/
Citation on PubMed
Platzer K, Yuan H, Schutz H, Winschel A, Chen W, Hu C, Kusumoto H, Heyne HO,
Helbig KL, Tang S, Willing MC, Tinkle BT, Adams DJ, Depienne C, Keren B, Mignot
C, Frengen E, Stromme P, Biskup S, Docker D, Strom TM, Mefford HC, Myers CT, Muir
AM, LaCroix A, Sadleir L, Scheffer IE, Brilstra E, van Haelst MM, van der Smagt
JJ, Bok LA, Moller RS, Jensen UB, Millichap JJ, Berg AT, Goldberg EM, De Bie I,
Fox S, Major P, Jones JR, Zackai EH, Abou Jamra R, Rolfs A, Leventer RJ, Lawson
JA, Roscioli T, Jansen FE, Ranza E, Korff CM, Lehesjoki AE, Courage C, Linnankivi
T, Smith DR, Stanley C, Mintz M, McKnight D, Decker A, Tan WH, Tarnopolsky MA,
Brady LI, Wolff M, Dondit L, Pedro HF, Parisotto SE, Jones KL, Patel AD, Franz
DN, Vanzo R, Marco E, Ranells JD, Di Donato N, Dobyns WB, Laube B, Traynelis SF,
Lemke JR. GRIN2B encephalopathy: novel findings on phenotype, variant
clustering, functional consequences and treatment aspects. J Med Genet. 2017
Jul;54(7):460-470. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104509. Epub 2017 Apr 4.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Swanger SA, Chen W, Wells G, Burger PB, Tankovic A, Bhattacharya S, Strong KL,
Hu C, Kusumoto H, Zhang J, Adams DR, Millichap JJ, Petrovski S, Traynelis SF,
Yuan H. Mechanistic Insight into NMDA Receptor Dysregulation by Rare Variants in
the GluN2A and GluN2B Agonist Binding Domains. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Dec
1;99(6):1261-1280. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.10.002. Epub 2016 Nov 10.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Brain Disorders
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Epilepsy
Genetics
Intellectual disability
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page