Lamotrigine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lamotrigine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a695007.html
Lamotrigine
pronounced as (la moe' tri jeen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Lamotrigine may cause rashes, including serious rashes that may need to be treated in a hospital or cause permanent disability or death. Tell your doctor if you are taking valproic acid (Depakene) or divalproex (Depakote) because taking these medications with lamotrigine may increase your risk of developing a serious rash. Also tell your doctor if you have ever developed a rash after taking lamotrigine or any other medication for epilepsy or if you are allergic to any medications for epilepsy.
Your doctor will start you on low dose of lamotrigine and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 1 to 2 weeks. You may be more likely to develop a serious rash if you take a higher starting dose or increase your dose faster than your doctor tells you that you should. Your first doses of medication may be packaged in a starter kit that will clearly show you the right amount of medication to take each day during the first 5 weeks of your treatment. This will help you to follow your doctor's instructions as your dose is slowly increased. Be sure to take lamotrigine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Serious rashes usually develop during the first 2 to 8 weeks of treatment with lamotrigine, but can develop at any time during treatment. If you develop any of the following symptoms while you are taking lamotrigine, call your doctor immediately: rash; blistering or peeling of the skin; hives; itching; or painful sores in your mouth or around your eyes.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking lamotrigine or of giving lamotrigine to your child. Children 2-17 years of age who take lamotrigine are more likely to develop serious rashes than adults who take the medication.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with lamotrigine and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lamotrigine extended-release (long-acting) tablets are used with other medications to treat certain types of seizures in patients who have epilepsy. All types of lamotrigine tablets (tablets, orally disintegrating tablets, and chewable tablets) other than the extended-release tablets are used alone or with other medications to treat seizures in people who have epilepsy or Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (a disorder that causes seizures and often causes developmental delays). All types of lamotrigine tablets other than the extended-release tablets are also used to increase the time between episodes of depression, mania (frenzied or abnormally excited mood), and other abnormal moods in patients with bipolar I disorder (manic-depressive disorder; a disease that causes episodes of depression, episodes of mania, and other abnormal moods). Lamotrigine has not been shown to be effective when people experience the actual episodes of depression or mania, so other medications must be used to help people recover from these episodes. Lamotrigine is in a class of medications called anticonvulsants. It works by decreasing abnormal electrical activity in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Lamotrigine comes as a tablet, an extended-release tablet, an orally disintegrating tablet (dissolves in the mouth and can be swallowed without water), and a chewable dispersible (can be chewed or dissolved in liquid) tablet to take by mouth with or without food. The extended-release tablets are taken once a day. The tablets, orally disintegrating tablets, and chewable dispersible tablets are usually taken once or twice a day, but may be taken once every other day at the beginning of treatment. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand.
There are other medications that have names similar to the brand name for lamotrigine. You should be sure that you receive lamotrigine and not one of the similar medications each time you fill your prescription. Be sure that the prescription your doctor gives you is clear and easy to read. Talk to your pharmacist to be sure that you are given lamotrigine. After you receive your medication, compare the tablets to the pictures in the manufacturer's patient information sheet. If you think you were given the wrong medication, talk to your pharmacist. Do not take any medication unless you are certain it is the medication that your doctor prescribed.
Swallow the tablets and extended-release tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you are taking the chewable dispersible tablets, you may swallow them whole, chew them, or dissolve them in liquid. If you chew the tablets, drink a small amount of water or diluted fruit juice afterward to wash down the medication. To dissolve the tablets in liquid, place 1 teaspoon (5 mL) of water or diluted fruit juice in a glass. Place the tablet in the liquid and wait 1 minute to allow it to dissolve. Then swirl the liquid and drink all of it immediately. Do not try to divide a single tablet to be used for more than one dose.
To take an orally disintegrating tablet, place it on your tongue and move it around in your mouth. Wait a short time for the tablet to dissolve, and then swallow it with or without water.
If your medication comes in a blisterpack, check the blisterpack before you take your first dose. Do not use any of the medication from the pack if any of the blisters are torn, broken, or do not contain tablets.
If you were taking another medication to treat seizures and are switching to lamotrigine, your doctor will gradually decrease your dose of the other medication and gradually increase your dose of lamotrigine. Follow these directions carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have questions about how much of each medication you should take.
Lamotrigine may control your condition, but it will not cure it. It may take several weeks for you to feel the full benefit of lamotrigine. Continue to take lamotrigine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking lamotrigine without talking to your doctor, even if you experience side effects such as unusual changes in behavior or mood. Your doctor will probably decrease your dose gradually. If you suddenly stop taking lamotrigine, you may experience seizures. If you do stop taking lamotrigine for any reason, do not start taking it again without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking lamotrigine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lamotrigine, any other medications. or any of the ingredients in the type of lamotrigine tablets you will be taking. Ask your doctor or pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking lamotrigine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
you should know that lamotrigine may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking lamotrigine. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an autoimmune disease (condition in which the body attacks its own organs, causing swelling and loss of function) such as lupus (condition in which the body attacks many different organs causing a variety of symptoms); a blood disorder; depression, mood problem, or suicidal thoughts or actions; heart failure, irregular heart rhythms, or other types of heart disease; or kidney or liver disease, or ascites (swelling of the stomach caused by liver disease).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking lamotrigine, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. If you breast-feed during your treatment with lamotrigine, your baby may receive some lamotrigine in breast milk. Watch your baby closely for unusual sleepiness, interrupted breathing, or poor sucking.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways and you may become suicidal (thinking about harming or killing yourself or planning or trying to do so) while you are taking lamotrigine for the treatment of epilepsy, mental illness, or other conditions. A small number of adults and children 5 years of age and older (about 1 in 500 people) who took anticonvulsants such as lamotrigine to treat various conditions during clinical studies became suicidal during their treatment. Some of these people developed suicidal thoughts and behavior as early as one week after they started taking the medication. There is a risk that you may experience changes in your mental health if you take an anticonvulsant medication such as lamotrigine, but there may also be a risk that you will experience changes in your mental health if your condition is not treated. You and your doctor will decide whether the risks of taking an anticonvulsant medication are greater than the risks of not taking the medication. You, your family, or your caregiver should call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: panic attacks; agitation or restlessness; new or worsening irritability, anxiety, or depression; acting on dangerous impulses; difficulty falling or staying asleep; aggressive, angry, or violent behavior; mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood); talking or thinking about wanting to hurt yourself or end your life; withdrawing from friends and family; preoccupation with death and dying; giving away prized possessions; or any other unusual changes in behavior or mood. Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lamotrigine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
loss of balance or coordination
double vision
blurred vision
uncontrollable movements of the eyes
difficulty thinking or concentrating
difficulty speaking
headache
drowsiness
dizziness
diarrhea
constipation
loss of appetite
weight loss
heartburn
nausea
vomiting
dry mouth
stomach, back, or joint pain
missed or painful menstrual periods
swelling, itching, or irritation of the vagina
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those described in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes, difficulty swallowing or breathing, hoarseness
seizures that happen more often, last longer, or are different than the seizures you had in the past
headache, fever, nausea, vomiting, stiff neck, sensitivity to light, chills, confusion, muscle pain, drowsiness
unusual bleeding or bruising
fever, rash, swollen lymph nodes, yellowing of the skin or eyes, abdominal pain, painful or bloody urination, chest pain, muscle weakness or pain, unusual bleeding or bruising, seizures, trouble walking, difficulty seeing or other vision problems
sore throat, fever, chills, coughing, difficulty breathing, ear pain, pink eye, frequent or painful urination, or other signs of infection
racing heartbeat, skipped or slow heartbeat, shortness of breath, dizziness, or fainting
Lamotrigine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature, away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
loss of balance or coordination
uncontrollable movements of the eyes
double vision
increased seizures
irregular heart beat
loss of consciousness
coma
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to lamotrigine.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking lamotrigine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lamictal
®
Lamictal
®
CD
Lamictal
®
ODT
Lamictal
®
XR
Last Revised -
09/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page