Triazolam: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Triazolam
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a684004.html
Triazolam
pronounced as (trye ay' zoe lam)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Triazolam may increase the risk of serious or life-threatening breathing problems, sedation, or coma if used along with certain medications. Tell your doctor if you are taking or plan to take certain opiate medications for cough such as codeine (in Triacin-C, in Tuzistra XR) or hydrocodone (in Anexsia, in Norco, in Zyfrel) or for pain such as codeine (in Fiorinal), fentanyl (Actiq, Duragesic, Subsys, others), hydromorphone (Dilaudid, Exalgo), meperidine (Demerol), methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), morphine (Astramorph, Duramorph PF, Kadian), oxycodone (in Oxycet, in Percocet, in Roxicet, others), and tramadol (Conzip, Ultram, in Ultracet). Your doctor may need to change the dosages of your medications and will monitor you carefully. If you take triazolam with any of these medications and you develop any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical care immediately: unusual dizziness, lightheadedness, extreme sleepiness, slowed or difficult breathing, or unresponsiveness. Be sure that your caregiver or family members know which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor or emergency medical care if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
Triazolam may be habit forming. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or for a longer time than your doctor tells you to. Tell your doctor if you have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, if you use or have ever used street drugs, or have overused prescription medications. Do not drink alcohol or use street drugs during your treatment. Drinking alcohol or using street drugs during your treatment with triazolam also increases the risk that you will experience these serious, life-threatening side effects. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression or another mental illness.
Triazolam may cause a physical dependence (a condition in which unpleasant physical symptoms occur if a medication is suddenly stopped or taken in smaller doses), especially if you take it for several days to several weeks. Do not stop taking this medication or take fewer doses without talking to your doctor. Stopping triazolam suddenly can worsen your condition and cause withdrawal symptoms that may last for several weeks to more than 12 months. Your doctor probably will decrease your triazolam dose gradually. Call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment if you experience any of the following symptoms: unusual movements; ringing in your ears; anxiety; memory problems; difficulty concentrating; sleep problems; seizures; shaking; muscle twitching; changes in mental health; depression; burning or prickling feeling in hands, arms, legs or feet; seeing or hearing things that others do not see or hear; thoughts of harming or killing yourself or others; overexcitement; or losing touch with reality.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Triazolam is used on a short-term basis to treat insomnia (difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep). Triazolam is in a class of medications called benzodiazepines. It works by slowing activity in the brain to allow sleep.
How should this medicine be used?
Triazolam comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken as needed at bedtime but not with or shortly after a meal. Triazolam may not work well if it is taken with food. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take triazolam exactly as directed.
You will probably become very sleepy soon after you take triazolam and will remain sleepy for some time after you take the medication. Plan to go to bed right after you take triazolam and to stay in bed for 7 to 8 hours. Do not take triazolam if you will be unable to remain asleep for 7 to 8 hours after taking the medication. If you get up too soon after taking triazolam, you may experience memory problems.
Your sleep problems should improve within 7 to 10 days after you start taking triazolam. Call your doctor if your sleep problems do not improve during this time, if they get worse at any time during your treatment, or if you notice any changes in your thoughts or behavior.
Triazolam should normally be taken for short periods of time (usually 7 to 10 days). You should not take triazolam for more than 2 to 3 weeks without talking to your doctor. If you take triazolam for 7 to 10 days or longer, triazolam may not help you sleep as well as it did when you first began to take the medication, and you may wake up more easily during the last third of the night. You may also start to feel anxious or nervous during the day, and you may develop dependence ('addiction'; a need to continue taking the medication) on triazolam. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking triazolam for 2 weeks or longer.
You may have more difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep on the first few nights after you stop taking triazolam than you did before you started taking the medication. This is normal and usually gets better without treatment after one or two nights.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with triazolam and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking triazolam,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to triazolam; other benzodiazepines; any other medications; or any of the ingredients in triazolam tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with triazolam. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with triazolam. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting triazolam with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking triazolam, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription products may interact with triazolam: certain histamine-2 receptor blockers (H2 blockers) such as cimetidine (Tagamet) and ranitidine (Zantac). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking triazolam. Do not start any of these medications while taking triazolam without discussing with your healthcare provider
tell your doctor if you have ever thought about killing yourself or tried to do so, and if you have or have ever had any condition that affects your breathing, sleep apnea (condition in which a person briefly stops breathing many times during the night), seizures, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking triazolam, call your doctor immediately. Triazolam may harm the fetus.
talk to your doctor about the safe use of triazolam if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should usually take lower doses of triazolam because higher doses may not be more effective and are more likely to cause serious side effects.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking triazolam.
you should know that triazolam may make you drowsy during the daytime, may decrease your mental alertness, and may increase the risk that you could fall. Take extra care to be sure you do not fall, especially if you get out of bed in the middle of the night. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that some people who took medications for sleep got out of bed and drove their cars, prepared and ate food, had sex, made phone calls, or were involved in other activities while partially asleep. After they woke up, these people were usually unable to remember what they had done. Call your doctor right away if you find out that you have been driving or doing anything else while you were sleeping.
you should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways while you are taking this medication. It is hard to tell if these changes are caused by triazolam or if they are caused by physical or mental illnesses that you already have or suddenly develop. Tell your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: aggressiveness, strange or unusually outgoing behavior, hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist), feeling as if you are outside of your body, memory problems, difficulty concentrating, slowed speech or movements, new or worsening depression, thinking about killing yourself, confusion, and any other changes in your usual thoughts, mood, or behavior. Be sure that your family knows which symptoms may be serious so that they can call the doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Triazolam should only be taken at bedtime. If you did not take triazolam at bedtime and you are unable to fall asleep, you may take triazolam if you will be able to remain in bed for 7 to 8 hours afterward. Do not take triazolam if you are not ready to go to sleep right away and stay asleep for at least 7 to 8 hours.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Triazolam may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
dizziness
lightheadedness
headache
problems with coordination
nervousness
tingling of the skin
nausea
vomiting
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS or IMPORTANT WARNING sections, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical help:
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat
feeling that the throat is closing
difficulty breathing or swallowing
hoarseness
Triazolam may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Keep triazolam in a safe place so that no one else can take it accidentally or on purpose. Keep track of how many capsules are left so you will know if any are missing.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
extreme drowsiness
confusion
problems with coordination
slurred speech
slow or difficult breathing
seizures
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to triazolam.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Triazolam is a controlled substance. Prescriptions may be refilled only a limited number of times; ask your pharmacist if you have any questions.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Halcion
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page