Caplacizumab-yhdp Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Caplacizumab-yhdp Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619030.html
Caplacizumab-yhdp Injection
pronounced as (kap" la siz' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Caplacizumab-yhdp injection is used to treat acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (aTTP; a disorder in which the body attacks itself and causes clots, low amounts of platelets and red blood cells, and could cause other serious complications) in combination with plasma exchange therapy and immunosuppressant medications. Caplacizumab-yhdp is in a class of medications called antithrombotic agents. It works by blocking the action of a certain substance in the body that causes the symptoms of aTTP.
How should this medicine be used?
Caplacizumab-yhdp comes as a powder to be dissolved in liquid and given by intravenous (into the vein) or subcutaneous (under the skin) injection. It is usually given on the first day of treatment as an intravenous injection at least 15 minutes before plasma exchange, and then again as a subcutaneous injection after plasma exchange is finished. After the first day of treatment it is usually given as a once daily subcutaneous injection following plasma exchange for as long as you receive plasma exchange therapy, and then once daily for an additional 30 to 58 days after stopping plasma exchange therapy. Use caplacizumab-yhdp at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use caplacizumab-yhdp exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may allow you or a caregiver to perform the injections at home. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to show you or the person who will be performing the injections how to prepare and inject caplacizumab-yhdp. Before you use caplacizumab-yhdp injection yourself for the first time, read the written instructions that come with it. Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's instructions for use information for the patient.
You should inject caplacizumab-yhdp injection subcutaneously in the abdominal (stomach) area but avoid your navel and the area 2 inches (5 centimeters) around it. Do not inject in the same spot two days in a row.
Dispose of used needles, syringes, and vials in a puncture-resistant container. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving caplacizumab-yhdp,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to caplacizumab-yhdp, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in caplacizumab-yhdp injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had hemophilia (a genetic disorder in which the body can't stop bleeding properly) or other bleeding problems, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving caplacizumab-yhdp, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using caplacizumab-yhdp. Your doctor or dentist may tell you not to use caplacizumab-yhdp for 7 days before the surgery.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if you are no longer receiving plasma exchange therapy, and more than 12 hours have passed since the missed dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Caplacizumab-yhdp may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
extreme tiredness
back pain
muscle pain
tingling, prickling, or numb feeling on the skin
itching near the spot the medication was injected
shortness of breath
fever
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives
heavy bleeding that won't stop including bleeding from rectum, vagina, nose, gums or place where the medication was injected
vomiting blood
red, or black, tarry stools
blood in urine
sudden severe headache, nausea, vomiting
sudden, sharp abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting
frequent, painful, or urgent urination
Caplacizumab-yhdp injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it in the refrigerator, and away from light. Do not freeze. Caplacizumab-yhdp injection may be kept at room temperature for up to 2 months but should be kept on the original carton to protect from light. Caplacizumab-yhdp should not be put back into the refrigerator after it has been stored at room temperature.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
bleeding
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check if treatment with caplacizumab-yhdp should be continued.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cablivi
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page