Tacrolimus Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tacrolimus Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608037.html
Tacrolimus Injection
pronounced as (ta kroe' li mus)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Tacrolimus injection should only be given under the supervision of a doctor who is experienced in treating people who have had an organ transplant and in prescribing medications that decrease the activity of the immune system.
Tacrolimus injection decreases the activity of your immune system. This may increase the risk that you will get a serious infection. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: sore throat; cough; fever; extreme tiredness; flu-like symptoms; warm, red, or painful skin; or other signs of infection.
When your immune system is not working normally, there may be a greater risk that you will develop cancer, especially lymphoma (a type of cancer that begins in the cells of the immune system). The longer you receive tacrolimus injection or other medications that decrease the activity of the immune system, and the higher your doses of these medications, the more this risk may increase. If you experience any of the following symptoms of lymphoma, call your doctor immediately: swollen lymph nodes in the neck, armpits, or groin; weight loss; fever; night sweats; excessive tiredness or weakness; cough; trouble breathing; chest pain; or pain, swelling, or fullness in the stomach area.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving tacrolimus injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tacrolimus injection is used along with other medications to prevent rejection (attack of the transplanted organ by the transplant recipient's immune system) in people who have received kidney, liver, or heart transplants. Tacrolimus injection should only be used by people who are unable to take tacrolimus by mouth. Tacrolimus injection is in a class of medications called immunosupressants. It works by decreasing the activity of the immune system to prevent it from attacking the transplanted organ.
How should this medicine be used?
Tacrolimus injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or medical facility. It is usually given as an ongoing infusion, beginning no sooner than 6 hours after transplant surgery and continuing until tacrolimus can be taken by mouth.
A doctor or nurse will watch you closely during the first 30 minutes of your treatment and then will monitor you often so that you can be treated quickly if you have a serious allergic reaction.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving tacrolimus injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tacrolimus, any other medications, polyoxyl 60 hydrogenated castor oil (HCO-60) or other medications that contain castor oil. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you do not know if a medication you are allergic to contains castor oil.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while receiving tacrolimus injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you more carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are receiving or have recently stopped receiving cyclosporine (Gengraf, Neoral, Sandimmune). If you were receiving cyclosporine, your doctor will probably not start to give you tacrolimus injection until 24 hours after you received your last dose of cyclosporine. If you stop receiving tacrolimus injection, your doctor will also tell you to wait 24 hours before starting to take cyclosporine.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with tacrolimus: St. John's wort; cimetidine (Tagamet); omeprazole (Prilosec); magnesium and aluminum hydroxide antacids. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start receiving tacrolimus. Do not start these medications while receiving tacrolimus without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving tacrolimus injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving tacrolimus injection.
you should know that receiving tacrolimus injection may increase the risk that you will develop skin cancer. Protect yourself from skin cancer by avoiding unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight or ultraviolet light (tanning beds) and wearing protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen with a high skin protection factor (SPF).
you should know that tacrolimus injection may cause high blood pressure. Your doctor will monitor your blood pressure carefully, and may prescribe medication to treat high blood pressure if it develops.
you should know that there is a risk that you will develop diabetes during your treatment with tacrolimus injection. African American and Hispanic patients who have had kidney transplants have an especially high risk of developing diabetes during their treatment with tacrolimus injection. Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had diabetes. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: excessive thirst; excessive hunger; frequent urination; blurred vision or confusion.
do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Avoid eating grapefruit or drinking grapefruit juice while receiving tacrolimus injection.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tacrolimus injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
diarrhea
constipation
nausea
vomiting
heartburn
stomach pain
loss of appetite
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
dizziness
weakness
back or joint pain
burning, numbness, pain or tingling in the hands or feet
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, or those mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
decreased urination
pain or burning on urination
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles or lower legs
weight gain
unusual bleeding or bruising
seizures
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
Tacrolimus injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
hives
sleepiness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests to check your body's response to tacrolimus injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Prograf
®
Other names
FK 506
Last Revised -
02/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page