Sofosbuvir and Velpatasvir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sofosbuvir and Velpatasvir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616034.html
Sofosbuvir and Velpatasvir
pronounced as (soe fos' bue vir) (vel pat' as vir)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
You may already be infected with hepatitis B (a virus that infects the liver and may cause severe liver damage), but not have any symptoms of the disease. In this case, taking the combination of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir may increase the risk that your infection will become more serious or life-threatening and you will develop symptoms. Tell your doctor if you have or ever had a hepatitis B virus infection. Your doctor will order a blood test to see if you have or have ever had hepatitis B infection. Your doctor will also monitor you for signs of hepatitis B infection during and for several months after your treatment. If necessary, your doctor may give you medication to treat this infection before and during your treatment with the combination of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir. If you experience any of the following symptoms during or after your treatment, call your doctor immediately: excessive tiredness, yellowing of the skin or eyes, loss of appetite, nausea or vomiting, pale stools, stomach pain, or dark urine.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain tests before, during, and after your treatment to check your body's response to the combination of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir.
Talk to your doctor about the risk(s) of taking the combination of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir.
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir is used alone or with ribavirin to treat chronic hepatitis C (an ongoing viral infection that damages the liver) in adults and children 3 years of age and older. Sofosbuvir is in a class of antiviral medications called nucleotide hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5B polymerase inhibitors. Velpatasvir is in a class of antiviral medications called HCV NS5A replication complex inhibitors. The combination of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir works by stopping the virus that causes hepatitis C from spreading inside the body.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir comes as a tablet and pellets to take by mouth. It is usually taken usually with or without food once a day for 12 weeks. For children younger than 6 years of age, sofosbuvir and velpatasvir pellets should be taken with food. Take sofosbuvir and velpatasvir at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take sofosbuvir and velpatasvir exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir pellets can be swallowed (without chewing) or they can be taken with food. To prepare a dose of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir pellets with food, sprinkle the entire packet of pellets on one or more spoonfuls of cold or room temperature non-acidic soft food such as pudding, chocolate syrup, or ice cream. Take the entire mixture within 15 minutes of sprinkling the pellets on food. To avoid a bitter aftertaste, do not chew the pellets. Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir pellets should be taken with food in children younger than 6 years of age.
Continue to take sofosbuvir and velpatasvir even if you feel well. Do not stop taking sofosbuvir and velpatasvir without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking sofosbuvir and velpatasvir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in sofosbuvir and velpatasvir tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking antacids, take them 4 hours before or 4 hours after sofosbuvir and velpatasvir. If you are taking a medication for indigestion, heartburn, or ulcers (H
2
blockers) such as cimetidine, ranitidine (Zantac
®
), famotidine (Pepcid
®
, in Duexis
®
), or nizatidine, take them 12 hours before or 12 hours after sofosbuvir and velpatasvir.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with sofosbuvir and velpatasvir: Proton-pump inhibitors such as esomeprazole (Nexium
®
), lansoprazole (Prevacid
®
), or omeprazole (Prilosec
®
, Zegerid
®
); or St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking sofosbuvir and velpatasvir. Do not start any of these medications while taking sofosbuvir and velpatasvir without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have had a liver transplant or if you have human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), or have or have ever had any type of liver problem other than hepatitis C, kidney disease, or are on dialysis.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking sofosbuvir and velpatasvir, call your doctor. If you are taking sofosbuvir and velpatasvir in combination with ribavirin, you should not become pregnant during your treatment with these medications and for 6 months after your treatment. Ribavirin may cause seriosuly harm the fetus.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
fatigue
diarrhea
vomiting (in children younger than 6 years of age)
spitting up the medicine (in children younger than 6 years of age)
rash
lack of energy
feeling irritable
feeling depressed
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Epclusa
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page