Luliconazole Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Luliconazole Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614020.html
Luliconazole Topical
pronounced as (loo'' li kon' a zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Luliconazole is used to treat tinea pedis (athlete's foot; fungal infection of the skin on the feet and between the toes), tinea cruris (jock itch; fungal infection of the skin in the groin or buttocks), and tinea corporis (ringworm; fungal skin infection that causes a red scaly rash on different parts of the body). Luliconazole is in a class of antifungal medications called azoles. It works by slowing the growth of fungi that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Luliconazole comes as a cream to apply to the skin. To treat jock itch and ringworm, luliconazole is usually applied once a day for 1 week. To treat athlete's foot, luliconazole is usually applied once a day for 2 weeks. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use luliconazole exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To use the cream, apply enough cream to cover the affected area and about 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) of the skin around it. You should wash your hands after applying the medication.
Your symptoms should improve at the beginning of your treatment. Continue to use luliconazole cream even if you are feeling well. If you stop using luliconazole cream too soon, your infection may not be completely cured and your symptoms may return.
Luliconazole cream is for external use only. Do not let luliconazole get into your eyes, nose, or mouth, and do not swallow it. Do not use luliconazole cream in the vaginal area.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using luliconazole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to luliconazole, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in luliconazole cream. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using luliconazole, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra cream to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Luliconazole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
irritation, itching, or stinging in the place where you applied the medication
Luliconazole may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows luliconazole cream, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Luzu
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page