Sumatriptan Nasal: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sumatriptan Nasal
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614029.html
Sumatriptan Nasal
pronounced as (soo ma trip' tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sumatriptan nasal products are used to treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes come with nausea and a strong reaction to sound and light). Sumatriptan is in a class of medications called selective serotonin receptor agonists. It works by narrowing blood vessels around the brain, stopping pain signals from being sent to the brain, and stops the release of natural substances that cause pain, nausea, and other symptoms of migraines. Sumatriptan does not stop migraine attacks from coming or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Sumatriptan comes as a spray (Imitrex
®
, Tosymra
®
) to inhale through the nose. It also comes as a powder (Onzetra
®
Xsail
®
) to inhale through the nose with a breath-powered delivery device. Use at the first sign of a migraine headache. If your symptoms improve after you use sumatriptan but come back, you may use a second dose of sumatriptan (Imitrex
®
, Onzetra
®
Xsail
®
) at least 2 hours later, or a second or third dose of sumatriptan (Tosymra
®
) at least 1 hour after each other, if needed. However, if your symptoms do not improve after you use sumatriptan, do not use a second dose without talking to your doctor. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You may use your first dose of sumatriptan nasal in a doctor's office or other medical facility where you can be monitored for serious reactions.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more frequently after using sumatriptan nasal.
If you use sumatriptan more often or for longer than the recommended period of time, your headaches may get worse or may occur more frequently. You should not use sumatriptan nasal or take any other headache medication for more than 10 days per month. Call your doctor if you need to use sumatriptan nasal to treat more than 4 headaches in 1-month period.
To use the nasal spray, follow these steps:
Read all of the manufacturer's instructions for using the nasal spray before you use your first dose.
Blow your nose gently.
Remove the device from the plastic pack.
Hold the sprayer between your fingers and thumb, but be careful not to press the plunger.
Use your other hand to close one nostril by pressing firmly on the side of your nose.
Put the tip of the sprayer into your other nostril as far as feels comfortable (about one half inch). Keep your head upright and close your mouth. If you are using Tosymra
®
, tilt your head slightly back, and point the tip of the inserted sprayer toward the outside of your nose. Be careful not to press the plunger or spray the medication in your eyes.
Breathe in gently through your nose. At the same time, press the plunger firmly with your thumb.
Keep your head level and remove the tip from your nose.
Breathe gently in through your nose and out through your mouth for 10 to 20 seconds. Do not breathe in deeply. It is normal to feel liquid in your nose or the back of your throat.
The sprayer only contains one dose of medication. After you have used it, dispose of it safely, so that is out of the reach of children and pets.
To inhale the nasal powder using an inhaler, follow these steps:
Read all of the manufacturer's instructions for using the nasal device before you use your first dose.
Remove the nosepiece from the pouch. The nosepiece contains a capsule filled with sumatriptan powder.
Click the nosepiece into the device body.
Fully press and release the white piercing button on the device body one time to pierce the capsule inside the nosepiece. It should only be pressed once.
Insert the first nosepiece deeply into the nostril. Keep it in the nostril as you rotate the device to put the mouthpiece into the mouth.
Blow forcefully with your mouth into the device for 2 to 3 seconds to deliver the medication into the nose. You may hear a vibration or rattling noise as you do this. Do not hold or press the white button while blowing.
Press the clear tab to remove the first nosepiece. Check the capsule in the nosepiece to ensure that the medication was given.
Remove and discard the nosepiece safely, so that is out of the reach of children and pets.
Repeat steps 2 to 8 using a second nosepiece in the other nostril to give the total dose.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using sumatriptan nasal,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
do not use sumatriptan nasal if you have taken any of the following medications in the past 24 hours: other selective serotonin receptor agonists such as almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, or zolmitriptan; or ergot-type medications such as bromocriptine, cabergoline, dihydroergotamine, ergoloid mesylates, ergonovine, ergotamine, methylergonovine, methysergide, and pergolide.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past 2 weeks: monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) inhibitor such as isocarboxazid, phenelzine, selegiline, or tranylcypromine
some medications should not be taken with sumatriptan nasal spray. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before using sumatriptan nasal spray with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using sumatriptan nasal spray, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease; a heart attack; angina (chest pain); high blood pressure; irregular heartbeats; stroke or 'mini-stroke'; circulation problems such as varicose veins, blood clots in the legs, Raynaud's disease (problems with blood flow to the fingers, toes, ears, and nose), peripheral vascular disease (poor circulation in the blood vessels that supply blood to the legs), ischemic bowel disease (bloody diarrhea and stomach pain caused by decreased blood flow to the intestines); hemiplegic migraines (migraines that make you unable to move on one side of your body), basilar migraines (a rare type of migraine), or liver disease. Your doctor may tell you not to use sumatriptan nasal products.
tell your doctor if you smoke or are overweight; if you have or have ever had high cholesterol, diabetes, seizures, or kidney disease; if you have gone through menopause; or if any family members have or have ever had heart disease or stroke.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while using sumatriptan nasal, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Your doctor may tell you it is best to wait 12 hours after using the medication before breastfeeding your child.
you should know that sumatriptan nasal may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sumatriptan nasal may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
sore or irritated nose
sore throat
dry mouth
unusual taste in the mouth
nausea
tiredness, dizziness, weakness
burning or tingling feeling
warm feeling
sensitivity to loud noises
flushing
muscle pain or weakness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
pain, tightness, pressure, discomfort, or heaviness in the chest, throat, neck, or jaw
slow or difficult speech
faintness
breaking out in a cold sweat
change in vision
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
bloody diarrhea
vomiting
sudden or severe stomach pain
sudden weight loss
paleness or blue color of the fingers and toes
shortness of breath
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat
difficulty breathing or swallowing
rash, hives
hoarseness
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
seizures
high fever
agitation
hallucination (seeing or hearing things that are not there)
difficulty moving
Sumatriptan nasal may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not store in the refrigerator or freezer.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
seizures (shaking of the body that you can't control)
red or bluish skin
slowed breathing
trouble moving or walking
enlarged pupils (black circle in center of eye)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you use sumatriptan nasal products.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Imitrex
®
Nasal Spray
Onzetra Xsail
®
Nasal Powder
Tosymra
®
Nasal Spray
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page