Donepezil: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Donepezil
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a697032.html
Donepezil
pronounced as (doe nep' e zil)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Donepezil is used to treat dementia (a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities and may cause changes in mood and personality) in people who have Alzheimer's disease (AD; a brain disease that slowly destroys the memory and the ability to think, learn, communicate and handle daily activities). Donepezil is in a class of medications called cholinesterase inhibitors. It improves mental function (such as memory, attention, the ability to interact with others, speak, think clearly, and perform regular daily activities) by increasing the amount of a certain naturally occurring substance in the brain. Donepezil may improve the ability to think and remember or slow the loss of these abilities in people who have AD. However, donepezil will not cure AD or prevent the loss of mental abilities at some time in the future.
How should this medicine be used?
Donepezil comes as a tablet and an orally disintegrating tablet (tablet that dissolves quickly in the mouth) to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food, in the evening just before bedtime. Take donepezil at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take donepezil exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Donepezil helps control the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease but does not cure it. Continue to take donepezil even if you feel well. Do not stop taking donepezil without talking to your doctor.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of donepezil and increase your dose after 4 to 6 weeks. Your doctor may increase your dose again 3 or more months later.
Swallow the 23-mg tablet whole; do not split, crush or chew it. Tell your doctor if you are unable to swallow the tablet whole.
To take the orally disintegrating tablet, place the tablet on your tongue and wait for it to dissolve. Drink some water after the tablet dissolves.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking donepezil,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to donepezil, any piperidine medications, any other medications, any of the ingredients in donepezil tablets or orally disintegrating tablets. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you do not know if a medication that you are allergic to is a piperidine medication. Ask your pharmacist or check the manufacturer's patient information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking donepezil. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you weigh less than 120 lb (55 kg) and if you have or have ever had bleeding in your stomach or intestines; an ulcer; irregular, slow, or fast heartbeat, seizures; difficulty urinating; asthma;chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (a group of lung disease including chronic bronchitis or emphysema); or kidney, liver, or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking donepezil, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking donepezil.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you forget to take a dose of donepezil, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. If you do not take donepezil, for 1 week or longer, you should call your doctor before starting to take this medication again.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Donepezil may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
loss of appetite
weight loss
frequent urination
difficulty controlling urination
muscle cramps
joint pain, swelling, or stiffness
pain
excessive tiredness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
headache
dizziness
nervousness
depression
confusion
changes in behavior or mood
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
abnormal dreams
red, scaling, itchy skin
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fainting
slow heartbeat
chest pain
new or worsening breathing problems
new or worsening stomach pain or heartburn
black or tarry stools
red blood in stools
bloody vomit
vomit that looks like coffee grounds
difficulty urinating or pain when urinating
lower back pain
fever
seizures
discoloration or bruising of the skin
Donepezil may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea
vomiting
drooling
sweating
slow heartbeat
difficulty breathing
muscle weakness
fainting
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aricept
®
Aricept
®
ODT
Namzaric
®
(as a combination product containing Donepezil, Memantine)
Last Revised -
12/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page