Ofloxacin Otic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ofloxacin Otic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607011.html
Ofloxacin Otic
pronounced as (oh floks' a sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ofloxacin otic is used to treat outer ear infections in adults and children, chronic (long-lasting) middle ear infections in adults and children with a perforated eardrum (a condition where the eardrum has a hole in it), and acute (suddenly occurring) middle ear infections in children with ear tubes. Ofloxacin otic is in a class of medications called quinolone antibiotics. It works by killing the bacteria that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Ofloxacin otic comes as a solution (liquid) to place into the ear. It is usually used once or twice a day for 7 to 14 days, depending on your condition. Use ofloxacin otic at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use ofloxacin otic exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Ofloxacin otic is only for use in the ears. Do not use in the eyes.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with ofloxacin otic. If your symptoms do not improve after one week or get worse, call your doctor.
Use ofloxacin otic until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using ofloxacin otic too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
To use the eardrops, follow these steps:
Hold the bottle or single-dispensing container(s) in your hand for 1 or 2 minutes to warm the solution.
Lie down with the affected ear upward.
Place the prescribed number of drops or the contents of the prescribed number of single-dispensing containers into your ear
If you are using a bottle of solution, be careful not to touch the tip to your ear, fingers, or any other surface.
For middle ear infections, push the tragus (small flap of cartilage just in front of the ear canal near the face) of the ear inward four times so that the drops will enter the middle ear.
Remain lying down with the affected ear upward for 5 minutes.
Repeat steps 1-6 for the opposite ear if necessary.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using ofloxacin otic,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ofloxacin (Floxin), cinoxacin (Cinobac) (not available in the U.S.), ciprofloxacin (Cipro), enoxacin (Penetrex) (not available in the U.S.), gatifloxacin (Tequin) (not available in the U.S.), gemifloxacin (Factive), levofloxacin (Levaquin), lomefloxacin (Maxaquin), moxifloxacin (Avelox), nalidixic acid (NegGram), norfloxacin (Noroxin), sparfloxacin (Zagam) (not available in the U.S.), trovafloxacin and alatrofloxacin combination (Trovan) (not available in the U.S.), or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using ofloxacin otic, call your doctor.
you should know that you must keep your infected ear(s) clean and dry while using ofloxacin otic. Avoid getting the infected ear(s) wet while bathing, and avoid swimming unless your doctor has told you otherwise.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use extra eardrops to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ofloxacin otic may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
ear itching or pain
change in taste
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using ofloxacin otic call your doctor immediately:
rash
hives
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty swallowing or breathing
Ofloxacin otic may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Protect from light.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows ofloxacin otic, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the ofloxacin otic, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Floxin
®
Otic
Last Revised -
08/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page