Daptomycin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Daptomycin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608045.html
Daptomycin Injection
pronounced as (dap'' toe mye' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Daptomycin injection is used to treat certain blood infections or serious skin infections caused by bacteria in adults and children 1 year of age and older. Daptomycin injection is in a class of medications called cyclic lipopeptide antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as daptomycin injection will not work for treating colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Daptomycin injection comes as a powder to be added to fluid and injected into a vein by a doctor or nurse. It is usually given once a day. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and your response to daptomycin treatment. You may receive daptomycin injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be using daptomycin injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to infuse the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions. Ask your healthcare provider what to do if you have any problems infusing daptomycin injection.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with daptomycin injection. If your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse, call your doctor.
Use daptomycin injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using daptomycin injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using daptomycin injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to daptomycin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in daptomycin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using daptomycin injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using daptomycin injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Daptomycin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
stomach pain
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
headache
dizziness
increased sweating
redness, pain, or swelling at the injection site
unusual weight gain
sore throat
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
hives
rash
itching
blisters or peeling of skin
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes
shortness of breath
chest pain
cough
new or worsening fever, sore throat, chills, increased urge to urinate, burning sensation when urinating, or other signs of infection
severe diarrhea with watery or bloody stools (up to 2 months after your treatment)
muscle pain or weakness, especially in the forearms and lower legs
dark or cola-colored urine
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet
Daptomycin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to daptomycin injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using daptomycin injection.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish daptomycin injection, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cubicin
®
Cubicin RF
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page