Torsemide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Torsemide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601212.html
Torsemide
pronounced as (tore' se mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Torsemide is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat high blood pressure. Torsemide is used to treat edema (fluid retention; excess fluid held in body tissues) caused by various medical problems, including heart, kidney, or liver disease. Torsemide is in a class of medications called diuretics ('water pills'). It works by causing the kidneys to get rid of unneeded water and salt from the body into the urine.
High blood pressure is a common condition, and when not treated it can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Torsemide comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken once a day. To help you remember to take torsemide, take it around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take torsemide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Torsemide controls high blood pressure and edema but does not cure these conditions. Continue to take torsemide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking torsemide without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medicine is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking torsemide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to torsemide, sulfonamide medications, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in torsemide tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the patient information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking torsemide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects
the following nonprescription products may interact with torsemide: aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn, others). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking torsemide. Do not start any of these medications while taking torsemide without discussing with your healthcare provider.
if you are taking cholestyramine (Questran), take it 4 hours before or 1 hour after toresemide.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take toresemide.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, gout, heart, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. Do not breastfeed while taking this medicine. If you become pregnant while taking torsemide, call your doctor.
you should know that torsemide may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking torsemide. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. Alcohol can add to these side effects.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
If your doctor prescribes a low-salt or low-sodium diet, or to eat or drink increased amounts of potassium-rich foods (e.g., bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice) in your diet, follow these instructions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
frequent urination
cough
constipation
diarrhea
hearing loss
ringing in ears
sore throat
headache
upset stomach
Some side effects can be serious. If you have any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
dry mouth; thirst; nausea; vomiting; weakness, tiredness; drowsiness; restlessness; confusion; muscle weakness, pain, or cramps; fast heartbeat and other signs of dehydration and electrolyte imbalance
rapid, excessive weight loss
vomiting blood
chest pain
difficulty breathing or swallowing
blisters or peeling skin
hives
rash
itching
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area, but may spread to the back
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly, and blood tests should be done occasionally.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking torsemide.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Demadex
®
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page