Dicyclomine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dicyclomine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a684007.html
Dicyclomine
pronounced as (dye sye' kloe meen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dicyclomine is used to treat the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. Dicyclomine is in a class of medications called anticholinergics. It relieves muscle spasms in the gastrointestinal tract by blocking the activity of a certain natural substance in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Dicyclomine comes as a capsule, a tablet, and a syrup to take by mouth. It is usually taken 4 times a day. To help you remember to take dicyclomine, take it around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take dicyclomine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of dicyclomine and gradually increase your dose.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking dicyclomine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dicyclomine or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking while taking dicyclomine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with dicyclomine: antacids. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking dicyclomine. Do not start any of these medications while taking dicyclomine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glaucoma; ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum); an enlarged prostate (prostatic hyperplasia); difficulty urinating; esophageal reflux (heartburn); a blockage in the gastrointestinal tract; myasthenia gravis; high blood pressure; an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism); nerve disease (autonomic neuropathy); heart failure; rapid or pounding heartbeat; hiatal hernia; or liver, kidney, or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking dicyclomine, call your doctor. Do not breast-feed while taking this medication.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking dicyclomine if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take dicyclomine because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking dicyclomine.
you should know that dicyclomine may make you drowsy or cause blurred vision. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication.
you should know that dicyclomine reduces the body's ability to cool off by sweating. In very high temperatures, dicyclomine can cause fever and heat stroke.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dicyclomine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth
upset stomach
vomiting
constipation
stomach pain
gas or bloating
loss of appetite
dizziness
tingling
headache
drowsiness
weakness
blurred vision
double vision
difficulty urinating
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
hot, flushed, dry skin
confusion
forgetfulness
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist (hallucinating)
unsteadiness
coma
anxiety
excessive tiredness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
excitement
inappropriate mood
muscle weakness
rapid or pounding heartbeat
fainting
hives
skin rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
Dicyclomine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
headache
upset stomach
vomiting
blurred vision
dilated pupils
hot, dry skin
dizziness
dry mouth
difficulty swallowing
nervousness
excitement
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist (hallucinating)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bentyl
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page