Ceftazidime Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ceftazidime Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a686007.html
Ceftazidime Injection
pronounced as (sef taz' i deem)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ceftazidime injection is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria including pneumonia and other lower respiratory tract (lung) infections; meningitis (infection of the membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord) and other brain and spinal cord infections; and abdominal (stomach area), skin, blood, bone, joint, female genital tract, and urinary tract infections. Ceftazidime injection is in a class of medications called cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as ceftazidime injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Ceftazidime injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and given intravenously (into a vein) or intramuscularly (into a muscle). Ceftazidime injection is also available as a premixed product to be injected intravenously. It is usually given every 8 or 12 hours until 2 days after all signs and symptoms of the infection have disappeared.
You may receive ceftazidime injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving ceftazidime injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with ceftazidime injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Take ceftazidime injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking ceftazidime injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
Ceftazidime injection is also sometimes used to treat patients who have a fever and are at high risk for infection because they have a low number of white blood cells, melioidosis (a serious infection that is common in places with a tropical climate), certain wound infections, and food poisoning. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ceftazidime injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ceftazidime, other cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil,cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefdinir, cefditoren (Spectracef), cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefotetan, cefoxitin (Mefoxin), cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftaroline (Teflaro), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Zinacef), and cephalexin (Keflex); penicillin antibiotics; or any other medications. Also tell your doctor if you are allergic to any of the ingredients in ceftazidime injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving cetazidime injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have had recent surgery or trauma; or have or ever had diabetes; cancer; heart failure; gastrointestinal disease (GI; affecting the stomach or intestines), especially colitis (condition that causes swelling in the lining of the colon [large intestine]); or liver or kidney disease.
you should know that ceftazidime injection decreases the effectiveness of some oral contraceptives ('birth control pills). You will need to use another form of birth control while taking this medication. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking ceftazidime injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ceftazidime injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain, redness, swelling, or bleeding near the place where cefuroxime was injected
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking ceftazidime injection and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps, or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes
difficulty swallowing or breathing
hoarseness
rash
itching
peeling, blistering, or shedding skin
seizures
a return of fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
Ceftazidime injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Your healthcare provider will tell you how to store your medication. Store your medication only as directed. Make sure you understand how to store your medication properly.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
muscle shakes and spasms
seizures
encephalopathy (confusion, memory problems, and other difficulties caused by abnormal brain function)
coma
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to ceftazidime injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking ceftazidime injection.
If you are diabetic and test your urine for sugar, use Clinistix or TesTape (not Clinitest) to test your urine while taking this medication.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about ceftazidime injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Fortaz
®
Tazicef
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page