Lecanemab-irmb Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lecanemab-irmb Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623004.html
Lecanemab-irmb Injection
pronounced as (lek an' e mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Lecanemab-irmb may cause a serious or life-threatening reaction called amyloid related imaging abnormalities (ARIA; a condition that may cause swelling and bleeding in the brain. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment: headache, confusion, dizziness, vision changes, nausea, difficulty walking or loss of balance, or seizures.
Always carry identification stating that you are receiving lecanemab-irmb injection. If you need an identification card, ask your pharmacist or doctor how to get one.
The chance that you will develop ARIA during your treatment with lecanemab-irmb may be higher if you have a genetic (inherited) risk factor. Your doctor may order a blood test to help decide if this medication is right for you. Tell your doctor if you are taking medications that may cause bleeding.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; a medical test that uses powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body) scans before and during treatment to check your body's response to lecanemab-irmb.
You will be given the Medication Guide. Read the information carefully. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lecanemab-irmb injection is used to treat Alzheimer's disease (a brain disorder that affects memory, thinking, and behavior) in patients with mild disease. Lecanemab-irmb is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by reducing amyloid beta plaques, abnormal proteins that develop in the brain and contribute to the progression of Alzheimer's disease.
How should this medicine be used?
Lecanemab-irmb injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be infused intravenously over about an hour by a doctor or nurse in a healthcare setting. lt is usually given every 2 or 4 weeks by a doctor or nurse in a healthcare setting in an infusion that lasts about an hour.
Lecanemab-irmb injection may cause a severe reaction during or shortly after the infusion of the medication. A doctor or nurse will monitor you carefully while you are receiving the medication. You may be given other medications to help prevent and treat reactions. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately: fever, chills, body aches, joint pain, nausea, vomiting, dizziness or lightheadedness, feeling of racing heart rate or chest pounding, or difficulty breathing or shortness of breath.
Your doctor may need to interrupt your treatment or stop your treatment depending on your response to the medication and any side effects that you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment.
Lecanemab-irmb controls Alzheimer's disease but does not cure it. Do not stop receiving lecanemab-irmb without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving lecanemab-irmb injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving lecanemab-irmb injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription product may interact with lecanemab-irmb injection: aspirin. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start receiving lecanemab-irmb injection. Do not start this medication while receiving lecanemab-irmb injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking lecanemab-irmb, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive lecanemab-irmb injection, call your healthcare provider as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lecanemab-irmb injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
cough
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives; rash; itching; swelling of the lips, tongue, or throat; shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
Lecanemab-irmb may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Leqembi
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page