Calcium Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Calcium Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625036.html
Calcium Injection
pronounced as (kal' see um)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Calcium injection is used in children and adults to treat low levels of calcium in the body. Calcium is in a class of medications called minerals. It works by increasing the supply of calcium necessary for many of the body's functions.
How should this medicine be used?
Calcium injection comes as a solution (liquid) for injection. It is mixed with other fluids and given into a vein by a healthcare provider.
Your doctor will increase or decrease your dose depending on your response.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving calcium injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be used with calcium injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before receiving calcium injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while receiving calcium injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have heart rhythm problems, high levels of calcium in your blood, or are receiving or expect to receive ceftriaxone. Your doctor may tell you not to receive calcium injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Calcium injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
an abnormal sensation of tingling, prickling, burning, or numbness in the skin
burning at the site of injection
dizziness
flushing or feeling of warmth
changes in taste
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
redness, swelling, or thickening or hardening of the skin near the place where the injection is given
dizziness, fainting, fast or irregular heartbeat, chest pain
Calcium injection may cause increased amounts of aluminum to stay in the body and may cause bone or nervous system problems. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving this medication.
Calcium injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to calcium injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Other names
Calcium Gluconate
Calcium Chloride
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page