Levacetylleucine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Levacetylleucine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624063.html
Levacetylleucine
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Levacetylleucine is used to treat neurologic symptoms in adults and children weighing at least 33 pounds (15 kg) who have Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC; an inherited disease in which a certain fatty substance is not broken down and used normally in the body and instead builds up in some organs and can cause nerve and brain problems). Levacetylleucine is in a class of medications called modified amino acids. It is not known how levacetylleucine works to treat the neurologic symptoms in patients with Niemann-Pick disease type C.
How should this medicine be used?
Levacetylleucine comes as packets of granules for suspension (to be mixed with liquid) to take by mouth or be given through a feeding tube. It is usually taken with or without food two or three times a day. Take levacetylleucine at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take levacetylleucine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To prepare a dose of levacetylleucine granules for suspension, sprinkle the entire packet of granules in a cup that contains 40 mL of cold or room temperature water, orange juice, or almond milk; stir with a spoon and drink the entire mixture within 30 minutes. Ask your pharmacist for a cup if one is not included with your medication. Do not use any other liquid to disperse the granules. Do not use hot liquids. If your doctor has told you that need 2 packets of levacetylleucine granules for your dose, repeat the steps above to prepare a second packet of granules.
If you have a nasogastric (NG) tube, your doctor or pharmacist will explain how to prepare levacetylleucine to give through an NG tube.
Levacetylleucine controls Niemann-Pick disease but does not cure it. Continue to take levacetylleucine even if you feel better. Do not stop taking levacetylleucine without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking levacetylleucine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to levacetylleucine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in levacetylleucine oral suspension. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant while you are taking levacetylleucine. If you are female, you will need to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment and use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with levacetylleucine and for 1 week after your final dose. If you become pregnant while taking levacetylleucine, call your doctor immediately. Levacetylleucine can cause fetal harm.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Levacetylleucine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nasal congestion, runny nose, sneezing, sore or scratchy throat, or cough
stomach pain
vomiting
difficulty swallowing
redness or pimples on the face
Levacetylleucine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aqneursa
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page