Doxercalciferol Injection : MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Doxercalciferol Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616044.html
Doxercalciferol Injection
pronounced as (dox'' er kaf sif' er ol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Doxercalciferol injection is used to treat secondary hyperparathyroidism (a condition in which the body produces too much parathyroid hormone [PTH; a natural substance needed to control the amount of calcium in the blood] in people receiving dialysis (medical treatment to clean the blood when the kidneys are not working properly). Doxercalciferol injection is in a class of medications called vitamin D analogs. It works by helping the body to use more of the calcium found in foods or supplements and regulating the body's production of parathyroid hormone.
How should this medicine be used?
Doxercalciferol injection comes as a solution to be injected intravenously 3 times weekly at the end of each dialysis session. You may receive doxercalciferol injection in a dialysis center or you may administer the medication at home. If you receive doxercalciferol injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of doxercalciferol injection and will gradually adjust your dose depending on your body's response to doxercalciferol injection.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using doxercalciferol injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to doxercalciferol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in doxercalciferol injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving doxercalciferol injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medication or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are taking magnesium-containing antacids (Maalox, Mylanta) and are being treated for dialysis. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take magnesium-containing antacids during your treatment with doxercalciferol injection.
the following nonprescription products may interact with doxercalciferol injection: mineral oil; vitamin D supplements; calcium supplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start receiving doxercalciferol injection. Do not start any of these medications while using doxercalciferol injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have high blood levels of calcium or vitamin D. Your doctor will probably tell you not to use doxercalciferol injection.
tell your doctor if you have high levels of phosphorus or if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using doxercalciferol injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Doxercalciferol injection will work only if you get the right amount of calcium from the foods you eat. If you get too much calcium from foods, you may experience serious side effects of doxercalciferol injection. If you do not get enough calcium from foods, doxercalciferol injection will not control your condition. Your doctor will tell you which foods are good sources of these nutrients and how many servings you need each day. If you find it difficult to eat enough of these foods, tell your doctor. In that case, your doctor can prescribe or recommend a supplement.
Your doctor may also prescribe a low-phosphate diet during your treatment with doxercalciferol injection. Follow these directions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you do not receive doxercalciferol injection during your dialysis treatment, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Doxercalciferol injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
heartburn
dizziness
sleep problems
fluid retention
weight gain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using doxercalciferol injection call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
swelling of the face, lips, tongue, and airways
unresponsiveness
chest discomfort
shortness of breath
feeling tired, difficulty thinking clearly, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, constipation, increased thirst, increased urination, or weight loss
Doxercalciferol injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
feeling tired
difficulty thinking clearly
loss of appetite
nausea
vomiting
constipation
increased thirst
increased urination
weight loss
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment with doxercalciferol injection.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Hectorol
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
11/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page