Trabectedin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Trabectedin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615059.html
Trabectedin Injection
pronounced as (tra bek' te din)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Trabectedin injection is used to treat liposarcoma (a cancer that begins in fat cells) or leiomyosarcoma (a cancer that begins in smooth muscle tissue) that has spread to other parts of the body and cannot be treated with surgery in people who have already been treated with certain chemotherapy medications. Trabectedin is in a class of medications called alkylating agents. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells in your body.
How should this medicine be used?
Trabectedin injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid to be injected over 24 hours intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. It is usually given once every 3 weeks for as long as your doctor recommends that you receive treatment.
Your doctor may delay or stop your treatment with trabectedin injection depending on your response to the medication and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment.
Your doctor will probably prescribe a medication for you to take before you receive each dose of trabectedin to help prevent side effects.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving trabectedin injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to trabectedin injection, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in trabectedin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving trabectedin injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses or timing of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal products may interact with trabectedin injection: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start receiving trabectedin injection. Do not start this medication while taking trabectedin injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease.
you should know that trabectedin injection may cause infertility (difficulty becoming pregnant); however, you should not assume that you cannot get pregnant. Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you are female, you should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with trabectedin and for at least 2 months after you stop using the medication. If you are male, you and your female partner should use birth control during your treatment with trabectedin and continue for 5 months after you stop receiving trabectedin injection. If you become pregnant while using trabectedin injection, call your doctor. Trabectedin injection may harm the fetus and increase the risk of a pregnancy loss.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. Do not breastfeed while you are receiving trabectedin injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while receiving this medication.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Trabectedin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
headache
joint pain
constipation
diarrhea
decreased appetite
difficulty sleeping or falling asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
redness, swelling, itchiness and discomfort or leakage at the injection site
swelling of the face
difficulty breathing
chest tightness
wheezing
rash
severe dizziness or lightheadedness
fever
unusual bruising or bleeding
paleness
yellowing of skin and eyes
pain in the upper stomach area
nausea
vomiting
difficulty concentrating
confusion
chest pain
shortness of breath
swelling of your legs, ankles, or feet
muscle pain or weakness
Trabectedin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to trabectedin.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about trabectedin injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Yondelis
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2015
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page