Altretamine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Altretamine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601200.html
Altretamine
pronounced as (al tret' a meen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Altretamine may cause severe nerve damage. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet; weakness in the arms or legs; or loss of ability to move your arms or legs; changes in mood; or loss of consciousness.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to altretamine.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Altretamine is used to treat cancer of the ovaries (cancer that begins in the female reproductive organs where eggs are formed) that has not improved or that has worsened after treatment with other medications. Altretamine is a medication that is in a class of medications called antineoplastic agents. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells in your body.
How should this medicine be used?
Altretamine comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken four times a day (a dose after each meal and a dose at bedtime) for 14 or 21 days in a row. This cycle may be repeated once every 4 weeks depending on your response to the medication. Take altretamine at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take altretamine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may adjust your dose of altretamine depending on your response to treatment and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Do not stop taking altretamine without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking altretamine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to altretamine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in altretamine capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking altretamine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
The following nonprescription products may interact with altretamine: cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking altretamine. Do not start any of these medications while taking altretamine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have nervous system disorders or blood disorders. Your doctor may tell you not to take altretamine.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant or breast-feed while you are taking altretamine. If you become pregnant while taking altretamine, call your doctor. Altretamine may harm the fetus.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Altretamine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
unusual tiredness or weakness
dizziness
pale skin
fainting
skin rash
itching
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, chills, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, or other signs of an infection
unusual bleeding or bruising
bloody or black, tarry stools
bloody vomit
vomited material that looks like coffee grounds
bleeding gums
small, round, red or purple colored spots on the skin
Altretamine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Hexalen
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page