Ribociclib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ribociclib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617008.html
Ribociclib
pronounced as (rye'' boe sye' klib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ribociclib is used in combination with another medication to treat a certain type of hormone receptor–positive (depends on hormones such as estrogen to grow) advanced breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body or has not improved or has worsened after treatment with other therapies. Ribociclib is also used in combination with another medication to treat a certain type of hormone receptor–positive, early breast cancer in people who have already been treated with surgery, radiation, and/or chemotherapy. Ribociclib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of an abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps slow or stop the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Ribociclib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once daily in the morning for the first 21 days of a 28-day cycle. Take ribociclib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take ribociclib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them. Do not take tablets that are broken or crushed.
If you vomit after taking ribociclib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may decrease your dose of ribociclib or permanently or temporarily stop your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with ribociclib.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ribociclib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ribociclib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ribociclib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking ribociclib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with ribociclib: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking ribociclib. Do not start this medication while taking ribociclib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death). Also, tell your doctor if you have had a recent heart attack; if you have a fever, chills, or any other signs of infection; or have or have ever had a slow or irregular heartbeat; abnormal levels of potassium, calcium, phosphorus, or magnesium in your blood; heart failure or other heart problems; high blood pressure; hypothyroidism (condition where the thyroid gland doesn't produce enough thyroid hormone); or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You will need to take a pregnancy test before you start treatment. Use a reliable method of birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 3 weeks after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant while taking ribociclib, call your doctor immediately. Ribociclib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while taking ribociclib and for at least 3 weeks after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking ribociclib.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking ribociclib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ribociclib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
constipation
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
headache
hair loss
back pain
itching
mouth sores
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
rash
blistering or peeling of the skin
burning or blistering of the lips, eyes, or mouth
rapid, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
difficulty breathing or shortness of breath; cough with or without mucus; or chest pain
dizziness
fainting
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark or brown (tea-colored) urine
tiredness
loss of appetite
pain in upper right side of stomach
bleeding or bruising more easily than normal
Ribociclib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to ribociclib. Your doctor may also order an electrocardiogram (ECG; test that measures the electrical activity in the heart) before and during your treatment.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Kisqali
®
Brand names of combination products
Kisqali
®
Femera
®
(as a combination product containing Letrazole and Ribociclib)
Last Revised -
01/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page