Penicillin G Procaine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Penicillin G Procaine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615052.html
Penicillin G Procaine Injection
pronounced as (pen" i sil' in g proe' kane)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Penicillin G procaine injection is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria. Penicillin G procaine injection should not be used to treat gonorrhea (a sexually transmitted disease) or early in the treatment of certain serious infections. Penicillin G procaine injection is in a class of medications called penicillins. It works by killing bacteria that cause infections.
Antibiotics such as penicillin G procaine injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Penicillin G procaine injection comes as a suspension (liquid) in a prefilled syringe to inject into the muscles of the buttocks or thigh by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. It is usually given once a day. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection that you have and how well you respond to the medication.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with penicillin G procaine injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Be sure to keep all appointments to receive penicillin G procaine injection on schedule even if you feel better. If you stop receiving penicillin G procaine injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
You may experience a sudden severe reaction immediately after receiving a dose of penicillin G procaine injection that may last for approximately 15 to 30 minutes. Tell your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms right after your injection: anxiety, confusion, agitation, depression, weakness, seizures, seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist, aggressive behavior, and fear of dying.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving penicillin G procaine injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to penicillin G procaine injection, penicillin antibiotics; cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil, cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefditoren (Spectracef), cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefoxitin, cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftazidime (Fortaz, Tazicef), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Ceftin, Zinacef), and cephalexin (Keflex); procaine; or any other medications. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure if a medication you are allergic to belongs to one of these groups of medications. Also tell your doctor if you are allergic to any of the ingredients in penicillin G procaine injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving penicillin G procaine injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, allergies, hay fever, hives, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving penicillin G procaine injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive penicillin G procaine injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Penicillin G procaine injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
pain, swelling, lump, bleeding, or bruising in the area where the medication was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
sore throat
chills
fever
headache
muscle or joint pain
weakness
fast heartbeat
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) with or without fever and stomach cramps that may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment
sudden onset of lower back pain, muscle weakness, numbness, and tingling
blue or black skin discoloration in the area where the medication was injected
skin blistering, peeling, or shedding in the area where the medication was injected
numbness of the arms or legs in the area where the medication was injected
Penicillin G procaine injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
twitching
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to penicillin G procaine injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about penicillin G procaine injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Duracillin A-S
®
¶
Pfizerpen A-S
®
¶
Other names
APPG
Benzylpenicillin Procaine
Procaine Penicillin G
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
12/15/2015
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page