Familial adenomatous polyposis: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Familial adenomatous polyposis
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/familial-adenomatous-polyposis/
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Description
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an inherited disorder that is characterized by a greatly increased risk of cancer of the large intestine (
colon
) and rectum (collectively known as colorectal cancer). People with FAP have multiple precancerous (benign) growths (
polyps
) in the colon, and one or more of these polyps will likely develop into colorectal cancer. There are two forms of FAP: the classic type and the attenuated type.
The classic type of FAP is the more severe type. People with classic FAP develop colon polyps as early as childhood. By age 35 years, 95 percent of people with classic FAP will have colon polyps. Once polyps appear in people with classic FAP, the number of polyps increases quickly. People with classic FAP may have hundreds to thousands of colon polyps. Unless the colon is removed, one or more of these polyps will become cancerous (malignant). Individuals with classic FAP typically develop colorectal cancer around 40 years old, and at least 90 percent of affected individuals will develop colorectal cancer by age 50 years if they do not have a procedure that removes their colon beforehand (preventative colectomy).
The attenuated type of FAP is the less severe form. People with attenuated FAP tend to have fewer polyps (an average of 30) that develop later in life (early to mid-adulthood) than those with classic FAP. People with attenuated FAP have a 70 percent lifetime risk of colorectal cancer, with cancer typically developing around 55 years old. People with attenuated FAP may or may not be advised to have a preventative colectomy.
Less commonly, people with FAP may develop other types of cancer. Affected individuals are at increased risk of developing cancer of the stomach, pancreas, a gland in the lower neck (thyroid gland), liver (specifically, a form known as hepatoblastoma), brain (specifically, a form known as medulloblastoma), or a section of the small intestine (duodenum).
People with FAP can also have benign growths in their bones (osteomas), in their skin (cysts), or in the small glands located on top of the kidneys called adrenal glands (adrenal masses). Other benign growths called desmoid tumors develop in 10 to 30 percent of people with FAP. These fibrous tumors usually occur in the abdomen or abdominal wall. Desmoid tumors tend to recur after they are surgically removed.
People with FAP may also have dental abnormalities, which can include teeth that do not break through the gums, one or more missing teeth, extra (supernumerary) teeth, and dental cysts.
Individuals with FAP often have an eye problem called congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE). CHRPE is characterized by flat lesions on the light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye (retina) that can be seen during an eye exam. CHRPE does not cause any vision problems and occurs in up to 80 percent of people with FAP.
Frequency
FAP has an incidence of 1 in 8,500 individuals. FAP accounts for about 0.5 percent of all cases of colorectal cancer.
Causes
Variants (also called mutations) in the
APC
gene cause FAP. The
APC
gene provides instructions for making a protein that acts as a tumor suppressor, which means that it keeps cells from growing and dividing too fast or in an uncontrolled way. In particular, the APC protein helps block a signaling pathway that promotes cell growth and division. The APC protein also interacts with parts of the cell to help ensure that the number of chromosomes in a cell is correct after the cell divides.
Most of the
APC
gene variants that cause FAP lead to the production of an abnormally short, nonfunctional version of the APC protein. This shortened protein cannot block the signaling pathway, so cell growth is not controlled. This cell overgrowth leads to the colon polyps, tumors, and colorectal cancer seen in people with FAP. Additionally, the nonfunctional APC protein can impair normal cell division, which may result in an abnormal number of chromosomes in cells and contribute to cancer development in people with FAP.
Learn more about the gene associated with Familial adenomatous polyposis
APC
Inheritance
FAP is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered
APC
gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. Affected individuals have a 50 percent chance of passing on the
APC
gene variant to each child. In 75 to 80 percent of cases, an affected person has one parent with FAP.
Other Names for This Condition
Adenomatous familial polyposis
Adenomatous familial polyposis syndrome
Adenomatous polyposis coli
Familial multiple polyposis syndrome
FAP
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Familial adenomatous polyposis 1
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1; FAP1
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Abbott J, Nathke IS. The adenomatous polyposis coli protein 30 years on. Semin
Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Dec;150-151:28-34. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2023.04.004. Epub
2023 Apr 22.
Citation on PubMed
Ditonno I, Novielli D, Celiberto F, Rizzi S, Rendina M, Ierardi E, Di Leo A,
Losurdo G. Molecular Pathways of Carcinogenesis in Familial Adenomatous
Polyposis. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 16;24(6):5687. doi: 10.3390/ijms24065687.
Citation on PubMed
Joo JE, Viana-Errasti J, Buchanan DD, Valle L. Genetics, genomics and clinical
features of adenomatous polyposis. Fam Cancer. 2025 Apr 16;24(2):38. doi:
10.1007/s10689-025-00460-0.
Citation on PubMed
Kumari R, Ghava D, Rathod R, Panda AK, Kumar S, Behera SK. Molecular Dynamics
of Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) Protein and Its Inhibitors: A Special Insight
to Colorectal Cancer. Crit Rev Oncog. 2025;30(1):91-105. doi:
10.1615/CritRevOncog.v30.i1.110.
Citation on PubMed
Moller P, Ahadova A, Kloor M, Seppala TT, Burn J, Haupt S, Macrae F,
Dominguez-Valentin M, Moslein G, Lindblom A, Sunde L, Winship I, Capella G,
Monahan K, Buchanan DD, Evans DG, Hovig E, Sampson JR. Colorectal carcinogenesis
in the Lynch syndromes and familial adenomatous polyposis: trigger events and
downstream consequences. Hered Cancer Clin Pract. 2025 Jan 23;23(1):3. doi:
10.1186/s13053-025-00305-y.
Citation on PubMed
Weiss JM, Gupta S, Burke CA, Axell L, Chen LM, Chung DC, Clayback KM, Dallas
S, Felder S, Gbolahan O, Giardiello FM, Grady W, Hall MJ, Hampel H, Hodan R, Idos
G, Kanth P, Katona B, Lamps L, Llor X, Lynch PM, Markowitz AJ, Pirzadeh-Miller S,
Samadder NJ, Shibata D, Swanson BJ, Szymaniak BM, Wiesner GL, Wolf A, Yurgelun
MB, Zakhour M, Darlow SD, Dwyer MA, Campbell M. NCCN Guidelines(R) Insights:
Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment: Colorectal, Version 1.2021. J Natl Compr
Canc Netw. 2021 Oct 15;19(10):1122-1132. doi: 10.1164/jnccn.2021.0048.
Citation on PubMed
Yen T, Stanich PP, Axell L, Patel SG. APC-Associated Polyposis
Conditions. 1998 Dec 18 [updated 2022 May 12]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM,
Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1345/
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Cancer--Living with Cancer
Colonic Polyps
Colonoscopy
Colorectal Cancer
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Colorectal cancer
Colorectal polyps
Genetics
Total abdominal colectomy
Related Medical Tests
Colorectal Cancer Screening Tests
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page