Cephalexin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cephalexin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682733.html
Cephalexin
pronounced as (sef a lex' in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cephalexin is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria such as pneumonia and other respiratory tract infections; and infections of the bone, skin, ears, , genital, and urinary tract. Cephalexin is in a class of medications called cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as cephalexin will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Cephalexin comes as a capsule, tablet, and suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food every 6 or 12 hours for 7 to 14 days, depending on the condition being treated. Take cephalexin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take cephalexin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the liquid well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with cephalexin. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Continue to take cephalexin until you finish the prescription even if you feel better. If you stop taking cephalexin too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
Cephalexin is also sometimes used for certain penicillin allergic patients who have a heart condition and are having a dental or upper respiratory tract (nose, mouth, throat, voice box) procedure, in order to prevent them from developing a heart valve infection.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cephalexin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cephalexin; other cephalosporin antibiotic such as cefaclor, cefadroxil cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefdinir, cefditoren (Spectracef), cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefotetan, cefoxitin (Mefoxin), cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftaroline (Teflaro), ceftazidime (Fortaz, Tazicef, in Avycaz), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), and cefuroxime (Zinacef); penicillin antibiotics; or any other medications. Also tell your doctor if you are allergic to any of the ingredients in cephalexin capsules, tablets, or suspension.Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking cephalexin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
you should know that cephalexin may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking cephalexin. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any kind of allergies, gastrointestinal disease (GI; affecting the stomach or intestines), especially colitis (condition that causes swelling in the lining of the colon [large intestine]), or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking cephalexin, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cephalexin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
diarrhea
vomiting
heartburn
stomach pain
rectal or genital itching
dizziness
extreme tiredness
agitation
confusion
headache
joint pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps, or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
rash
itching
hives
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes
difficulty breathing or swallowing
wheezing
a return of fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the capsules and tablets at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Keep liquid medicine in the refrigerator, tightly closed, and dispose of any unused medication after 14 days. .
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
pink, red, or dark brown urine
stomach pain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to cephalexin.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking cephalexin.
If you are diabetic and test your urine for sugar, use Clinistix or TesTape (not Clinitest) to test your urine while taking this medication.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Keflet
®
Tablets
¶
Keflex
®
Keftab
®
Tablets
¶
Panixine
®
Disperdose
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page