Cyclosporine Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cyclosporine Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604009.html
Cyclosporine Ophthalmic
pronounced as (sye' kloe spor een)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ophthalmic cyclosporine is used to increase tear production in people with dry eye disease. Cyclosporine is in a class of medications called immunomodulators. It works by decreasing swelling in the eye to allow for tear production.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic cyclosporine comes as a solution (liquid) and as an emulsion (combination of two unmixable liquids) to instill in the eye. It is usually instilled in each eye twice a day, about 12 hours apart. Instill cyclosporine eye drops at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use cyclosporine eye drops exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of them or use them more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Cyclosporine eye drops should be given at least 15 minutes before or after any other eye drops.
Cyclosporine eye drops are for use only in the eye(s). Do not swallow or apply cyclosporine eye drops to the skin.
Cyclosporine eye drops come in single-use vials (small bottles to be used for one dose) and in a multi-dose bottle (a bottle that can be used more than once). If you are using the single-use vials, the liquid from a vial should be used immediately after opening for one or both eyes.
Be careful not to let the dropper tip touch your eye, fingers, face, or any surface. If the tip does touch another surface, bacteria may get into the eye drops.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
When using the multi-dose bottle for the first time, follow the instructions in the package to prepare the container for use.
When using the emulsion, turn over the vial or bottle a few times until the liquid inside looks white and not see-through.
Open the vial or remove the cap from the multi-use bottle.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
Discard the vial out of the reach of children even if it is not empty. Replace the cap on the multi-use bottle.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using cyclosporine eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cyclosporine (Gengraf, Neoral, Sandimmune), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in cyclosporine eye drops. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking while using cyclosporine eye drops. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using cyclosporine eye drops, call your doctor.
you should know that cyclosporine eye drops should not be used while wearing contact lenses. If you wear contact lenses, remove them before using cyclosporine eye drops and put them back in 15 minutes later. Talk to your doctor about wearing contact lenses if you have dry eye disease.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cyclosporine eye drops may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, itching, stinging, redness, or pain of the eyes
eyelid swelling
eye discharge
blurred vision or other vision changes
feeling that something is in the eye
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives
itching
face, throat, eyes, and tongue swelling
shortness of breath
Cyclosporine eye drops may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Discard each single-use vial after one use in a place that is out of reach of children and pets.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cequa
®
Restasis
®
Vevye
®
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page