Eravacycline Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Eravacycline Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618047.html
Eravacycline Injection
pronounced as (er" a va sye' kleen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Eravacycline injection used to treat infections of the abdomen (stomach area). Eravacycline injection is in a class of medications called tetracycline antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria that cause infection.
Antibiotics such as eravacycline injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Eravacycline comes as a powder to be mixed with fluid and injected into a vein. It is usually given over a period of 60 minutes once every 12 hours for 4 to 14 days. The length of treatment is will depend on your condition and how your body responds to the medication.
You may receive eravacycline injection in a hospital or you may use the medication at home. If you will be using eravacycline injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to infuse the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions. Ask your healthcare provider what to do if you have any problems infusing eravacycline injection.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with eravacycline. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Use eravacycline until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using eravacycline too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving eravacycline injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to eravacycline injection; other tetracycline antibiotics such as demeclocycline, doxycycline (Monodox, Oracea, Vibramcyin), minocycline (Dynacin, Minocin), tetracycline (Achromycin V, in Pylera), and tigecycline (Tygacil); any other medications, or any of the ingredients in eravacycline injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving eravacycline injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while receiving eravacycline injection, call your doctor. Eravacycline may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment and for 4 days after your last dose.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Eravacycline injection may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that when eravacycline injection is used during pregnancy or in babies or children up to age 8, it can cause the teeth to become permanently stained and may affect bone growth. Eravacycline injection should not be used in children under age 8 unless your doctor decides it is needed.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Eravacycline may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
dizziness
pain, redness, or swelling near the place where eravacycline was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
wound healing problems
blistering or peeling skin
rash
hives
itching
tingling or swelling of the face, neck, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes
difficulty breathing or swallowing itching
headache; blurred vision; seeing double; or loss of vision
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area but may spread to the back
sore throat, fever, chills, and other signs of new or worsening infection
Eravacycline injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to eravacycline injection.
If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish eravacycline injection, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xerava
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page