Aducanumab-avwa Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aducanumab-avwa Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621033.html
Aducanumab-avwa Injection
pronounced as (a" due kan' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Aducanumab-avwa injection is used to reduce amyloid beta plaque, a protein found in the brain of people with Alzheimer's disease (a brain disease that slowly destroys the memory and ability to think, learn, communicate and handle daily activities). It is used to treat people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or mild dementia. Aducanumab-avwa injection is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by blocking the formation of amyloid beta in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Aducanumab-avwa injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be given into a vein by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or clinic. It is usually given over an hour once every 4 weeks.
Your doctor may need to interrupt your treatment or stop your treatment depending on your response to the medication and any side effects that you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving aducanumab-avwa injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to aducanumab-avwa, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in aducanumab-avwa injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
Tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving aducanumab-avwa injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive aducanumab-avwa injection, you should call your healthcare provider as soon as possible. Aducanumab-avwa injection doses should be given at least 21 days apart.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Aducanumab-avwa injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
falls
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
headache, confusion, dizziness, vision changes, or nausea
swelling of the face, lips, mouth, or tongue
hives
Aducanumab-avwa injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; a medical test that uses powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body) scans before and during treatment to check your body's response to aducanumab-avwa.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about aducanumab-avwa.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aduhelm
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page