Bromfenac Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bromfenac Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611018.html
Bromfenac Ophthalmic
pronounced as (brome' fen ak)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bromfenac ophthalmic is used to treat eye swelling and redness (inflammation) and pain that can occur after cataract surgery. Bromfenac ophthalmic is in a class of medications called nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). It works by stopping the release of certain natural substances that cause pain and swelling.
How should this medicine be used?
Bromfenac ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eyes. It is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) once or twice a day for 14 days after cataract surgery. Your doctor may also tell you to use bromfenac the day before and on the day of the surgery, depending on the brand of bromfenac ophthalmic your doctor has prescribed. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use bromfenac ophthalmic exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps or the information the manufacturer has provided with the product:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Each bottle of eye drop solution should be used for one eye only. If both of your eyes need to have treatment, you should have a separate bottle for each eye.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using bromfenac eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bromfenac, aspirin other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), any other medications, sulfite or any of the ingredients in bromfenac eye drops. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using bromfenac eye drops. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with bromfenac eye drops: aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, Midol) and naproxen (Aleve). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using bromfenac eye drops. Do not start any of these medications while using bromfenac eye drops without discussing with your healthcare provider.
if you are using another eye drop medication, use the eye medications at least 5 minutes apart.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis (arthritis caused by swelling of the lining of the joints), dry eye disease or any eye problem other than cataracts, any condition that causes you to bleed easily, or if you recently had an eye surgery on the same eye that is being operated on .
tell your doctor if you wear contact lenses. You should remove your contact lenses before instilling bromfenac eye drops and wait at least 10 minutes after using the medication to replace your lenses.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding.
You should know that bromfenac eye drops may slow healing of the eye after surgery. Call your doctor right away if your pain and swelling do not improve.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bromfenac eye drops may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stinging or burning of the eyes
red or itchy eyes
feeling that something is in the eye
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using bromfenac eye drops and call your doctor immediately:
redness or swelling of eyes, lips, tongue, or skin
rash, hives, or other skin changes
difficulty breathing or swallowing
bleeding within the eye
sensitivity of your eyes to light
eye pain
blurry, cloudy, or blocked areas of vision
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows bromfenac eye drops, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bromday
®
¶
Bromsite
®
Prolensa
®
Xibrom
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page