Doxycycline Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Doxycycline Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601141.html
Doxycycline Injection
pronounced as (dox i sye' kleen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Doxycycline injection is used to treat or prevent bacterial infections, including pneumonia and other respiratory tract infections. It is also used to treat certain skin, genital, intestine, and urinary system infections. Doxycycline injection may be used to treat or prevent anthrax (a serious infection that may be spread on purpose as part of a bioterror attack) in people who may have been exposed to anthrax in the air. Doxycycline injection is in a class of medications called tetracycline antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria that cause infections.
Antibiotics such as doxycycline injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking or using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Doxycycline injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid to be injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually given every 12 or 24 hours over a period of 1 to 4 hours. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection you have and how your body responds to the medication.
You may receive doxycycline injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving doxycycline injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with doxycycline injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish doxycycline injection, tell your doctor.
Use doxycycline injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using doxycycline injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving doxycycline injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to doxycycline, minocycline (Dynacin, Minocin, Solodyn, Ximino), tetracycline (Achromycin V, in Pylera), demeclocycline, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in doxycycline injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any of the following: anticoagulants ('blood thinners') such as warfarin (Jantoven), carbamazepine (Epitol, Tegretol, others), penicillin (Bicillin, PfizerPen), phenobarbital, or phenytoin (Phenytek). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had lupus (a disease in which the body attacks many of its own organs).
you should know that doxycycline injection may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, or injections). Talk to your doctor about using another form of birth control.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving doxycycline injection, call your doctor.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Doxycycline injection may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that when doxycycline is used during pregnancy or in babies or children up to age 8, it can cause the teeth to become permanently stained and can cause problems with bone growth. Doxycycline injection should not be used in children under age 8 unless your doctor decides it is needed.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Doxycycline injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
loss of appetite
vomiting
diarrhea
difficulty or pain when swallowing
swollen tongue
swelling, redness, burning, itching, or irritation of the vagina
vaginal discharge
painful or difficult urination
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment
headache
blurred vision
stomach cramps
fever
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the face, eyes, mouth, throat, tongue, or lips
difficulty breathing or swallowing
Doxycycline injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to doxycycline injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about doxycycline injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Doxy 100
®
Doxy 200
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page