Dextromethorphan and Quinidine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dextromethorphan and Quinidine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611048.html
Dextromethorphan and Quinidine
pronounced as (dex'' troe meth or' fan and kwin' i deen )
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine is used to treat pseudobulbar affect (PBA; a condition of sudden, frequent outbursts of crying or laughing that can not be controlled) in people with certain conditions such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, Lou Gehrig's disease; condition in which the nerves that control muscle movement slowly die, causing the muscles to shrink and weaken) or multiple sclerosis (a disease in which the nerves do not function properly and patients may experience weakness, numbness, loss of muscle coordination and problems with vision, speech, and bladder control). Dextromethorphan is in a class of medications called central nervous system agents. The way it works in the brain to treat PBA is not known. Quinidine is in a class of medications called antiarrhythmics. When combined with dextromethorphan, quinidine works by increasing the amount of dextromethorphan in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day for 7 days. After 7 days, it is taken every 12 hours. Do not take more than 2 doses in a 24-hour period. Be sure to allow about 12 hours between each dose. Take dextromethorphan and quinidine at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take the combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may check from time to time to see if this medication is still needed to control your symptoms. Follow these directions carefully.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking dextromethorphan and quinidine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dextromethorphan, quinidine (Quinidex), quinine (Qualaquin), mefloquine (Lariam), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in combination dextromethorphan and quinidine capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with dextromethorphan and quinidine. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with dextromethorphan and quinidine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting dextromethorphan and quinidine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking dextromethorphan and quinidine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: MAO inhibitors including isocarboxazid (Marplan), linezolid (Zyvox), phenelzine (Nardil), rasagiline (Azilect), selegiline (Eldepryl), and tranylcypromine (Parnate).
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had the following conditions while taking quinidine, quinine, or mefloquine: decrease in the number of blood cells in your bone marrow, lupus (a condition in which the body attacks its own tissues causing damage and swelling), or hepatitis (swelling of the liver). Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had abnormal heart rhythms or heart failure. Your doctor will probably tell you not to takedextromethorphan and quinidine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had myasthenia gravis (a disorder of the nervous system that causes muscle weakness), a history of street drug use or prescription drug misuse, high blood pressure, a stroke, low levels of potassium or magnesium in your blood, or heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking the combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking dextromethorphan and quinidine.
you should know that dextromethorphan and quinidine may make you dizzy. It is important to be careful to avoid falls while taking this medication.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking dextromethorphan and quinidine. Alcohol can make the side effects from this medication worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and take the next dose at the regular time. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. Be sure to allow 12 hours between doses.
What side effects can this medication cause?
The combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
vomiting
gas
stomach pain
cough
dry eyes or mouth
weakness
muscle spasms
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
frequent, painful, or difficult urination
cloudy or strong-smelling urine
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fever
unusual bleeding or bruising
muscle or joint pain
rash
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, or lips
swollen lymph nodes
hoarseness
difficulty breathing
lightheadedness
fainting
fast heart beat
The combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children and pets. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
dizziness
headache
ringing in the ears
blurred or double vision
confusion
changes in heart beat
difficulty breathing
loss of consciousness
seizures
changes in muscle reflexes
loss of coordination
unusual excitement
abnormal thinking
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to dextromethorphan and quinidine. Your doctor may also order an electrocardiogram (ECG; test that measures the electrical activity in the heart) before and during your treatment.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nuedexta
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page