PGM3-congenital disorder of glycosylation: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
PGM3-congenital disorder of glycosylation
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pgm3-congenital-disorder-of-glycosylation/
PGM3-congenital disorder of glycosylation
Description
PGM3
-congenital disorder of glycosylation (
PGM3
-CDG) is an inherited condition that primarily affects the immune system but can also involve other areas of the body. The pattern and severity of this disorder's signs and symptoms typically vary.
Most people with
PGM3
-CDG have impaired immune function (immune deficiency). Many have a shortage of white blood cells (leukopenia), which normally protect the body from infection. Because affected individuals lack the necessary immune cells to fight off certain bacteria, viruses, and fungi, they are prone to repeated and persistent infections that often occur in the lungs, ears, skin, or gastrointestinal tract. In severe cases of
PGM3
-CDG, impaired bone marrow function may lead to a decrease in the production of all blood cells, resulting in a condition called bone marrow failure. Affected individuals usually also have allergies, asthma, or an inflammatory skin condition called eczema. People with
PGM3
-CDG may develop autoimmunity, which occurs when the body attacks its own tissues and organs by mistake. Persistent illness may cause affected children to grow more slowly than other individuals.
Additionally, people with
PGM3
-CDG often have abnormally high levels of immune system proteins called antibodies (also known as immunoglobulins), particularly immunoglobulin E (IgE). Antibodies help protect the body against infection by attaching to specific foreign particles and germs, marking them for destruction. The effect of abnormal levels of antibodies in
PGM3
-CDG is unclear.
People with
PGM3
-CDG often have intellectual disability, delayed development, and weak muscle tone (hypotonia). Many affected individuals have skeletal abnormalities involving the ribs or bones in the hands, feet, or spine. Some people with this condition have distinct facial features, such as a flat or sunken appearance of the middle of the face (
midface hypoplasia
), small chin (
micrognathia
), full lips, downturned corners of the mouth, and wide nostrils that open to the front rather than downward.
PGM3
-CDG can also cause problems in the lungs, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys.
Lifespan varies widely in people with
PGM3
-CDG; some do not survive past infancy while others live into late adulthood.
Frequency
PGM3
-CDG is a rare disorder, although its prevalence is unknown. Approximately 40 people with the condition have been described worldwide.
Causes
Mutations in the
PGM3
gene cause
PGM3
-CDG. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called phosphoglucomutase 3 (PGM3). The PGM3 enzyme is involved in a process called glycosylation, which attaches groups of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) to proteins. During this process, complex chains of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) are added to proteins and fats (lipids). Glycosylation modifies proteins and lipids so they can perform a wider variety of functions.
Mutations in the
PGM3
gene lead to the production of a PGM3 enzyme with reduced activity. Without a properly functioning enzyme, glycosylation cannot proceed normally. The wide variety of signs and symptoms in
PGM3
-CDG are likely due to impaired glycosylation of proteins and lipids that are needed for the normal function of many organs and tissues. Immune system proteins are highly dependent on glycosylation to function normally, which likely explains why people with
PGM3
-CDG have immune deficiency.
Learn more about the gene associated with PGM3-congenital disorder of glycosylation
PGM3
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
AGM1 deficiency
CID due to PGM3 deficiency
Combined immunodeficiency due to PGM3 deficiency
Deficiency of N-acetylglucosamine-phosphate mutase 1
Deficiency of phosphoglucomutase 3
Immunodeficiency 23
Immunodeficiency with hyper IgE and cognitive impairment
Immunodeficiency-vasculitis-myoclonus syndrome
PGM3 deficiency
PGM3-CDG
PGM3-related congenital disorder of glycosylation
Phosphoglucomutase 3 deficiency
Phosphoglucomutase deficiency type 3
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Immunodeficiency 23
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
PGM3-CDG
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
IMMUNODEFICIENCY 23; IMD23
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Jaeken J, Lefeber DJ, Matthijs G. Clinical Utility Gene Card for: PGM3
defective congenital disorder of glycosylation. Eur J Hum Genet. 2019
Nov;27(11):1757-1760. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0453-y. Epub 2019 Jun 23.
Citation on PubMed
Lundin KE, Hamasy A, Backe PH, Moens LN, Falk-Sorqvist E, Elgstoen KB, Morkrid
L, Bjoras M, Granert C, Norlin AC, Nilsson M, Christensson B, Stenmark S, Smith
CI. Susceptibility to infections, without concomitant hyper-IgE, reported in
1976, is caused by hypomorphic mutation in the phosphoglucomutase 3 (PGM3) gene.
Clin Immunol. 2015 Dec;161(2):366-72. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2015.10.002. Epub 2015
Oct 19.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Sassi A, Lazaroski S, Wu G, Haslam SM, Fliegauf M, Mellouli F, Patiroglu T,
Unal E, Ozdemir MA, Jouhadi Z, Khadir K, Ben-Khemis L, Ben-Ali M, Ben-Mustapha I,
Borchani L, Pfeifer D, Jakob T, Khemiri M, Asplund AC, Gustafsson MO, Lundin KE,
Falk-Sorqvist E, Moens LN, Gungor HE, Engelhardt KR, Dziadzio M, Stauss H,
Fleckenstein B, Meier R, Prayitno K, Maul-Pavicic A, Schaffer S, Rakhmanov M,
Henneke P, Kraus H, Eibel H, Kolsch U, Nadifi S, Nilsson M, Bejaoui M, Schaffer
AA, Smith CI, Dell A, Barbouche MR, Grimbacher B. Hypomorphic homozygous
mutations in phosphoglucomutase 3 (PGM3) impair immunity and increase serum IgE
levels. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 May;133(5):1410-9, 1419.e1-13. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2014.02.025. Epub 2014 Apr 1.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Stray-Pedersen A, Backe PH, Sorte HS, Morkrid L, Chokshi NY, Erichsen HC,
Gambin T, Elgstoen KB, Bjoras M, Wlodarski MW, Kruger M, Jhangiani SN, Muzny DM,
Patel A, Raymond KM, Sasa GS, Krance RA, Martinez CA, Abraham SM, Speckmann C,
Ehl S, Hall P, Forbes LR, Merckoll E, Westvik J, Nishimura G, Rustad CF,
Abrahamsen TG, Ronnestad A, Osnes LT, Egeland T, Rodningen OK, Beck CR;
Baylor-Johns Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics; Boerwinkle EA, Gibbs RA,
Lupski JR, Orange JS, Lausch E, Hanson IC. PGM3 mutations cause a congenital
disorder of glycosylation with severe immunodeficiency and skeletal dysplasia. Am
J Hum Genet. 2014 Jul 3;95(1):96-107. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.05.007. Epub 2014
Jun 12.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Yang L, Fliegauf M, Grimbacher B. Hyper-IgE syndromes: reviewing PGM3
deficiency. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2014 Dec;26(6):697-703. doi:
10.1097/MOP.0000000000000158.
Citation on PubMed
Zhang Y, Yu X, Ichikawa M, Lyons JJ, Datta S, Lamborn IT, Jing H, Kim ES,
Biancalana M, Wolfe LA, DiMaggio T, Matthews HF, Kranick SM, Stone KD, Holland
SM, Reich DS, Hughes JD, Mehmet H, McElwee J, Freeman AF, Freeze HH, Su HC,
Milner JD. Autosomal recessive phosphoglucomutase 3 (PGM3) mutations link
glycosylation defects to atopy, immune deficiency, autoimmunity, and
neurocognitive impairment. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 May;133(5):1400-9,
1409.e1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.02.013. Epub 2014 Feb 28.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Immune System and Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page