Procainamide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Procainamide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682398.html
Procainamide
pronounced as (proe kane a' mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Procainamide tablets and capsules are not currently available in the United States.
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Antiarrhythmic drugs, including procainamide, may increase the risk of death. Tell your doctor if you have had a heart attack within the past two years. Procainamide should be used only to treat life-threatening arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats).
Procainamide may cause a decrease in the number of cells in your bone marrow. Procainamide may also cause symptoms of lupus.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to procainamide.
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: fever, chills, sore throat, bruising, bleeding, muscle aches or weakness, stomach or chest pain, skin rash, or blisters on the cheek, tongue and lips.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking procainamide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Procainamide is used to treat abnormal heart rhythms. It works by making your heart more resistant to abnormal activity.
How should this medicine be used?
Procainamide comes as a capsule and tablet to take by mouth. Immediate-acting procainamide usually is taken every 3 or 4 hours. The long-acting product is usually taken every 6 or 12 hours. Do not cut, crush, or chew extended-release (long-acting) tablets; swallow them whole. You may see a waxy core in your stool if you are taking the extended-release product; this is normal.
Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take procainamide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Procainamide helps control your condition but will not cure it. Continue to take procainamide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking procainamide without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication should not be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking procainamide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to procainamide, anesthetics, aspirin, or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking procainamide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
in addition to the condition listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, tell your doctor if you have or have ever had lupus, heart disease, high blood pressure, kidney or liver disease, or myasthenia gravis.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking procainamide, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking procainamide.
you should know that this drug may make you dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the dizziness caused by this drug.
talk to your doctor about the use of cigarettes and caffeine-containing beverages. These products may increase the irritability of your heart and interfere with the action of procainamide.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Procainamide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness or lightheadedness
loss of appetite
upset stomach
vomiting
bitter taste
If you experience the following symptom or any of those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
irregular heartbeat
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will need to determine your response to procainamide.
Take procainamide at the same time each day in regularly spaced intervals. Changing the time of your doses prevents procainamide from working effectively.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Procan
®
¶
Procanbid
®
¶
Procapan
®
¶
Pronestyl
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page