Cefotetan Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cefotetan Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a686015.html
Cefotetan Injection
pronounced as (sef' oh tee tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cefotetan injection is used to treat infections of the lungs, skin, bones, joints, stomach area, blood, female reproductive organs, and urinary tract. Cefotetan injection is also used before surgery to prevent infections. Cefotetan injection is in a class of medications called cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as cefotetan injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Cefotetan injection comes as a powder to be added to fluid and injected intravenously (into a vein) or it can be injected into a large muscle. Cefotetan injection is also available as a premixed product to be injected intravenously. It is usually given every 12 or 24 hours. You may receive cefotetan injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving cefotetan injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with cefotetan injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Use cefotetan injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using cefotetan injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using cefotetan injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cefotetan injection; other cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil (Duricef),cefazolin (Ancef), cefdinir (Omnicef), cefditoren (Spectracef), cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefoxitin, cefpodoxime (Vantin), cefprozil (Cefzil), ceftaroline (Teflaro), ceftazidime (Fortaz), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Ceftin, Zinacef), and cephalexin (Keflex); penicillins; or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using cefotetan injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
you should know that cefotetan injection may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while using cefotetan injection. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had hemolytic anemia (condition where a low number of red blood cells occurs because the cells are being destroyed in the body). Your doctor may tell you not to use cefotetan injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had cancer; gastrointestinal disease (GI; affecting the stomach or intestines), especially colitis (condition that causes swelling in the lining of the colon [large intestine]);or gallbladder, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking cefotetan injection, call your doctor.
remember you should not drink alcoholic beverages while using cefotetan injection and for 3 days after receiving cefotetan injection. Drinking alcohol during this time period may cause headache, fast heartbeat, sweating, and flushing (redness of the face).
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cefotetan injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
redness, pain, or swelling at the injection site
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
shortness of breath
fast heartbeat
headache
dizziness
pale skin
confusion
extreme tiredness
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps, or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
unusual bleeding or bruising
hives
skin rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the throat or tongue
a return of fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
Cefotetan injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Your healthcare provider will tell you how to store your medication. Store your medication only as directed. Make sure you understand how to store your medication properly.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to cefotetan injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using cefotetan injection.
If you are diabetic and test your urine for sugar, use Clinistix or TesTape (not Clinitest) to test your urine while taking this medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cefotan
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page