Clesrovimab-cfor Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clesrovimab-cfor Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625082.html
Clesrovimab-cfor Injection
pronounced as ( kles” roe vye’ mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Clesrovimab-cfor is used to prevent lung disease caused by Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) infection in neonates or infants in their first RSV season (usually November through April in most parts of the United States). Clesrovimab-cfor is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by preventing RSV from infecting cells and causing disease.
How should this medicine be used?
Clesrovimab-cfor comes as a solution (liquid) to be given intramuscularly (into a muscle) into the thigh by a healthcare professional. It is usually given as a single dose. However, for children who are receiving heart surgery involving a bypass machine, a second dose may be given.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking clesrovimab-cfor,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if your child is allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms your child had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are giving or plan to give to your child.
tell your doctor if your child has or has ever had any medical conditions.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your child's normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Clesrovimab-cfor may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
swelling or redness at the injection site
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, hives, itching; swelling of the face, tongue, and mouth; difficulty swallowing or breathing
bluish color of skin, lips or fingernails
muscle weakness
Clesrovimab-cfor may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that your child received clesrovimab-cfor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Enflonsia
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page