Oxandrolone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Oxandrolone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604024.html
Oxandrolone
pronounced as (ox an' droe lone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Oxandrolone and similar medications may cause damage to the liver or spleen (a small organ just below the ribs) and tumors in the liver. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: upset stomach; extreme tiredness; unusual bruising or bleeding; lack of energy; loss of appetite; pain in the upper right part of the stomach; yellowing of the skin or eyes; flu-like symptoms; pale, cool, or clammy skin; nausea or vomiting.
Oxandrolone may increase the amount of low density lipoprotein (LDL; 'bad cholesterol') and decrease the amount of high density lipoprotein (HDL; 'good cholesterol') in your blood. This may increase your risk of developing heart disease or cause an accumulation of cholesterol and fats along the walls of your arteries (atherosclerosis). Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had high cholesterol, heart disease, a heart attack, chest pain, or a stroke.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests to check your body's response to oxandrolone.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking oxandrolone.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Oxandrolone is used with a diet program to cause weight gain in people who have lost too much weight due to surgery, injury, chronic (long-lasting) infections, trauma, or who are underweight for unknown reasons. Oxandrolone is also used to treat bone pain in people with osteoporosis (a condition in which the bones become thin and weak and break easily) and to prevent certain side effects in people who take corticosteroids (a group of medications used to treat many conditions that involve inflammation or swelling of part of the body) for a long time. Oxandrolone is in a class of medications called androgenic hormones. It works by increasing the amount of protein made by the body. This protein is used to build more muscle and increase body weight.
How should this medicine be used?
Oxandrolone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken two to four times a day. To help you remember to take oxandrolone, take it around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take oxandrolone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably tell you to take oxandrolone for 2 to 4 weeks. You may need to take oxandrolone for additional time period depending on your condition.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking oxandrolone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to oxandrolone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in oxandrolone tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking while taking oxandrolone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high levels of calcium in your blood, breast cancer, prostate (a male reproductive organ) cancer, or kidney disease. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take oxandrolone.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; a group of diseases that affect the lungs and airways), or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant during your treatment with oxandrolone. If you become pregnant while taking oxandrolone, call your doctor immediately. Oxandrolone may harm the fetus.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Oxandrolone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
enlargement of the breasts
changes in sex drive or ability
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately. Some of these side effects may never go away if they are not treated immediately:
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
new or worsening acne (especially in women and prepubertal men)
enlargement of the clitoris, deepening of voice, increase in facial hair, and baldness(in women)
abnormal or absent menstrual periods
erections of the penis that happen too often or do not go away
enlarged penis
pain, swelling, or decreased size of testes
frequent, difficult, or painful urination
inability to control urination
Oxandrolone may prevent normal growth in children. Children who take oxandrolone may be shorter as adults then they would have been if they had not taken the medication. Oxandrolone is more likely to interfere with the growth of younger children than older children. Your child's doctor will take x-rays regularly to be sure your child is growing normally. Talk to your child's doctor about the risks of giving this medication to your child.
Oxandrolone may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor if your partner plans to become pregnant while you are taking oxandrolone.
Oxandrolone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
What other information should I know?
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking oxandrolone. Oxandrolone may affect the results of certain laboratory tests.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Oxandrolone has not been shown to improve athletic ability. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Oxandrin
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page