Pentazocine and Naloxone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pentazocine and Naloxone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625096.html
Pentazocine and Naloxone
pronounced as ( pen taz′ oh seen)(nal ox′ one)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Pentazocine and naloxone may be habit forming. Take pentazocine and naloxone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it, take it more often, stop taking it suddenly, or take it in a different way than directed by your doctor. Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family drinks or has ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, uses or has ever used street drugs, or has overused prescription medications, or has had an overdose, or if you have or have ever had depression or another mental illness.
Pentazocine and naloxone may cause serious or life-threatening breathing problems, especially during the first 24 to 72 hours of your treatment and any time your dose is increased. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment: slowed breathing, long pauses between breaths, or shortness of breath.
Pentazocine and naloxone may harm or cause death to other people who take your medication, especially children. Keep pentazocine and naloxone in a safe place so that no one else can take it accidentally or on purpose.
Taking certain other medications, drinking alcohol, or using street drugs other medications with pentazocine and naloxone may increase the risk that you will develop serious or life-threatening breathing problems, sedation, or coma. Tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medication and will monitor you carefully.
Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you take pentazocine and naloxone regularly during your pregnancy, your baby may experience life-threatening withdrawal symptoms after birth.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with pentazocine and naloxine and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risk(s) of taking pentazocine and naloxone.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pentazocine and naloxone is used to relieve severe pain. Pentazocine is in a class of medications called opiate (narcotic) analgesics. Naloxone is in a class of medications called opiate antagonists. Pentazocine works by changing the way the brain and nervous system respond to pain. Naloxone works by blocking the effects of opiates to relieve dangerous symptoms caused by high levels of opiates in the blood.
How should this medicine be used?
Pentazocine and naloxone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take every 3 to 4 hours as needed.
Your doctor may adjust your dose of pentazocine and naloxone during your treatment, depending on how well your pain is controlled and on the side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment with pentazocine and naloxone. Tell your doctor if you feel that your pain is not controlled or if your pain increases, becomes worse, or if you have new pain or an increased sensitivity to pain during your treatment with pentazocine and naloxone. Do not take more of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about access to rescue medicines, naloxone or nalmefene, while taking pentazocine and naloxone. Rescue medications can reverse the life-threatening effects of an opioid overdose and are available over the counter or with a prescription. Make sure that you and your family members and people usually around you know how to recognize an overdose, how to use naloxone or nalmefene, and what to do until emergency medical help arrives. Your doctor or pharmacist will show you and others how to use it. If symptoms of an overdose occur, they should give the first dose of naloxone, call 911 immediately, and stay with you and watch you closely until emergency medical help arrives. If your symptoms return, the person should give you another dose of the rescue medication. Additional doses may be given every 2 to 3 minutes, if symptoms return before medical help arrives.
Do not stop taking pentazocine and naloxone without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop taking pentazocine and naloxone, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as restlessness, teary eyes, runny nose, yawning, sweating, chills, hair standing on end, muscle pain, widened pupils (black circles in the middle of the eyes), irritability, anxiety, back or joint pain, weakness, stomach cramps, difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep, nausea, loss of appetite, vomiting, diarrhea, fast breathing, or fast heartbeat. Your doctor will probably decrease your dose gradually.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking pentazocine and naloxone,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with pentazocine and naloxone. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with pentazocine and naloxone. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting pentazocine and naloxone with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking pentazocine and naloxone, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with pentazocine and naloxone: St. John's wort and tryptophan. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using pentazocine and naloxone. Do not start these medications while using pentazocine and naloxone without discussing it with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: isocarboxazid, linezolid, methylene blue, phenelzine, selegiline, or tranylcypromine.
tell your doctor if you have slowed breathing, asthma, chronic pulmonary disease (COPD), or other lung problems; a blockage or narrowing of your stomach or intestines, or paralytic ileus (condition in which digested food does not move through the intestines). Your doctor may tell you not to take pentazocine and naloxone.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a brain tumor, or any condition that increases the amount of pressure in your brain; seizures; liver, kidney, thyroid, gallbladder, pancreas, or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking pentazocine and naloxone, call your doctor.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking pentazocine and naloxone.
you should know that pentazocine and naloxone may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking pentazocine and naloxone. Alcohol can make the side effects from pentazocine and naloxone worse.
you should know that pentazocine and naloxone may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking pentazocine and naloxone. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that pentazocine and naloxone may cause constipation. Talk to your doctor about changing your diet and using other medications to treat or prevent constipation.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication usually is taken as needed. If your doctor has told you to take pentazocine and naloxone regularly, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pentazocine and naloxone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS sections are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting
headache
sweating
decreased sexual desire, inability to get or keep an erection
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
chest pain, changes in heartbeat
agitation, hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist), fever, sweating, confusion, fast heartbeat, shivering, severe muscle stiffness or twitching, loss of coordination, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, weakness, or dizziness
rash; hives; hoarseness; difficulty breathing or swallowing; or swelling of the face, mouth, tongue or throat
new pain or pain from touch or doing ordinary tasks such as combing your hair
seizures
difficulty swallowing, regurgitation (bringing up swallowed food into throat and mouth), pain in the chest area
extreme drowsiness
unusual snoring or long pauses during breaths during sleep
Pentazocine and naloxone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of any medication that is outdated or no longer needed through a medicine take-back program. If you do not have a take-back program nearby or one that you can access promptly, flush any pentazocine and naloxone tablets that are outdated or no longer needed down the toilet. Talk to your pharmacist about the proper disposal of your medication.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
slow or shallow breathing, difficulty breathing, unusual snoring
sleepiness, unable to respond or wake up
cold, clammy skin
narrowed or widened pupils (dark circles in the middle of the eyes)
slowed heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking pentazocine and naloxone.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Talwin NX
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page