Ofloxacin Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ofloxacin Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602029.html
Ofloxacin Ophthalmic
pronounced as (oh flox' a sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ophthalmic ofloxacin ophthalmic is used to treat bacterial infections of the eye, including conjunctivitis (pink eye) and ulcers of the cornea. Ofloxacin is in a class of medications called quinolone antibiotics. It works by killing bacterial cells that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic ofloxacin comes as an solution (liquid) to instill in the eye. It is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) four or more times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use ofloxacin exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
If you are to use more than one drop in the same eye, wait at least 5 minutes before instilling the next drop.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using ofloxacin eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ofloxacin, benzalkonium chloride, ciprofloxacin (Cipro), enoxacin (Penetrex), levofloxacin (Levaquin), lomefloxacin (Maxaquin), norfloxacin (Noroxin), sparfloxacin (Zagam), cinoxacin (Cinobac), nalidixic acid (NegGram), or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking. Be sure to mention any of the following: anticoagulants ('blood thinners') such as warfarin (Coumadin), cyclosporine (Neoral, Sandimmune), and theophylline (Theo-Dur). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using ofloxacin ophthalmic, call your doctor.
you should know that ofloxacin solution contains benzalkonium chloride, which can be absorbed by soft contact lenses. Remove your contact lenses before instilling ofloxacin and put them back in 10 minutes after you instill the medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking coffee and other beverages containing caffeine while using this medicine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ofloxacin eye drops may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye burning or discomfort
eye stinging or redness
tearing eyes
sensitivity to light
blurred vision
dry eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
skin rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Ofloxacin eye drops may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ocuflox
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page