Transcobalamin deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Transcobalamin deficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/transcobalamin-deficiency/
Transcobalamin deficiency
Description
Transcobalamin deficiency is a disorder that impairs the transport of cobalamin (also known as vitamin B12) within the body. Cobalamin is obtained from the diet; this vitamin is found in animal products such as meat, eggs, and shellfish. An inability to transport cobalamin within the body results in cells that lack cobalamin, which they need for many functions including cell growth and division (proliferation) and DNA production. The absence of cobalamin leads to impaired growth, a shortage of blood cells, and many other signs and symptoms that usually become apparent within the first weeks or months of life.
The first signs of transcobalamin deficiency are typically a failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive), vomiting, diarrhea, and open sores (ulcers) on the mucous membranes such as the lining inside the mouth. Neurological function is impaired in affected individuals, and they can experience progressive stiffness and weakness in their legs (paraparesis), muscle twitches (myoclonus), or intellectual disability.
People with transcobalamin deficiency often develop a blood disorder called
megaloblastic anemia
. Megaloblastic anemia results in a shortage of red blood cells, and the remaining red blood cells are abnormally large. Individuals with transcobalamin deficiency may also have a shortage of white blood cells (neutropenia), which can lead to reduced immune system function. Decreased cellular cobalamin can lead to a buildup of certain compounds in the body, resulting in metabolic conditions known as methylmalonic aciduria or
homocystinuria
.
Frequency
The prevalence of transcobalamin deficiency is unknown. At least 45 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
Causes
Mutations in the
TCN2
gene cause transcobalamin deficiency. The
TCN2
gene provides instructions for making a protein called transcobalamin. This protein attaches (binds) to cobalamin and transports the vitamin to cells throughout the body. Within cells, cobalamin helps certain enzymes carry out chemical reactions. Cobalamin plays a role in the processes that produce the building blocks of DNA (
nucleotides
) and break down various compounds such as fatty acids; these processes are needed for cell proliferation and the production of cellular energy.
Most
TCN2
gene mutations that cause transcobalamin deficiency lead to a complete or near-complete lack (deficiency) of transcobalamin. Other
TCN2
gene mutations result in a transcobalamin protein that cannot transport cobalamin to cells. The resulting lack of cobalamin within cells interferes with the functioning of certain enzymes, which impacts many cell activities. As a result, a wide range of signs and symptoms can develop including impaired growth, blood cell shortages, and neurological problems.
Learn more about the gene associated with Transcobalamin deficiency
TCN2
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
TC deficiency
TC II deficiency
TCN2 deficiency
Transcobalamin II deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Transcobalamin II deficiency
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Transcobalamin deficiency
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
TRANSCOBALAMIN II DEFICIENCY; TCN2D
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Haberle J, Pauli S, Berning C, Koch HG, Linnebank M. TC II deficiency:
avoidance of false-negative molecular genetics by RNA-based investigations. J Hum
Genet. 2009 Jun;54(6):331-4. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.34. Epub 2009 Apr 17.
Citation on PubMed
Nissen PH, Nordwall M, Hoffmann-Lucke E, Sorensen BS, Nexo E. Transcobalamin
deficiency caused by compound heterozygosity for two novel mutations in the TCN2
gene: a study of two affected siblings, their brother, and their parents. J
Inherit Metab Dis. 2010 Dec;33 Suppl 3:S269-74. doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9145-z.
Epub 2010 Jul 6.
Citation on PubMed
Prasad C, Rosenblatt DS, Corley K, Cairney AE, Rupar CA. Transcobalamin (TC)
deficiency--potential cause of bone marrow failure in childhood. J Inherit Metab
Dis. 2008 Dec;31 Suppl 2:S287-92. doi: 10.1007/s10545-008-0864-3. Epub 2008 Oct
29.
Citation on PubMed
Ratschmann R, Minkov M, Kis A, Hung C, Rupar T, Muhl A, Fowler B, Nexo E,
Bodamer OA. Transcobalamin II deficiency at birth. Mol Genet Metab. 2009
Nov;98(3):285-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.06.003. Epub 2009 Jun 6.
Citation on PubMed
Unal S, Tezol O, Oztas Y. A novel mutation of the transcobalamin II gene in an
infant presenting with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Int J Hematol.
2014;99(5):659-62. doi: 10.1007/s12185-014-1545-7. Epub 2014 Feb 22.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
B Vitamins
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia
Vitamin B12 level
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page