Eptinezumab-jjmr Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Eptinezumab-jjmr Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620022.html
Eptinezumab-jjmr Injection
pronounced as (ep" ti nez' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Eptinezumab-jjmr injection is used to help prevent migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that may cause nausea and sensitivity to sound or light). Eptinezumab-jjmr injection is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by blocking the action of a certain natural substance in the body that causes migraine headaches.
How should this medicine be used?
Eptinezumab-jjmr injection comes as a solution (liquid) to inject intravenously (into a vein) over 30 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility or infusion center. It is usually given every 3 months.
Your doctor may need to interrupt or stop your infusion if you experience certain side effects. Tell your doctor immediately if you experiences any of the following symptoms during your infusion: itching, rash, flushing, shortness of breath, wheezing, or face swelling.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving eptinezumab-jjmr injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure or circulation problems in your fingers and toes such as Raynaud's disease (fingers and toes feel numb and change skin color to white or blue when exposed to cold temperatures or stress).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using eptinezumab-jjmr injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Eptinezumab-jjmr injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nasal congestion
sore throat
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash; hives; itching; flushing of the face; swelling of your face, mouth, tongue, or throat; difficulty breathing
numb, cold, painful, or discolored fingers or toes
Eptinezumab-jjmr injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches. Be sure to share this information with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vyepti
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page