Choline Magnesium Trisalicylate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Choline Magnesium Trisalicylate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602021.html
Choline Magnesium Trisalicylate
pronounced as (koe' leen) (mag nee' zhum)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Choline magnesium trisalicylate is used to relieve the pain, tenderness, inflammation (swelling), and stiffness caused by arthritis and painful shoulder. It is also used to relieve pain and lower fever. Choline magnesium trisalicylate is in a class of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) called salicylates. It works by stopping the body's production of a substance that causes pain, fever, and inflammation.
How should this medicine be used?
Choline magnesium trisalicylate comes as a tablet and a liquid to take by mouth. It is usually taken one to three times a day. To help you remember to take choline magnesium trisalicylate, take it around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take choline magnesium trisalicylate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking choline magnesium trisalicylate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to choline magnesium trisalicylate, aspirin, choline salicylate (Arthropan), diflunisal (Dolobid), magnesium salicylate (Doan's, others), salsalate (Argesic, Disalcid, Salgesic), or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking choline magnesium trisalicylate. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with choline magnesium trisalicylate: salicylate pain relievers such as aspirin, choline salicylate (Arthropan), diflunisal (Dolobid), magnesium salicylate (Doan's, others), and salsalate (Argesic, Disalcid, Salgesic). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking choline magnesium trisalicylate. Do not start any of these medications while taking choline magnesium trisalicylate without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had stomach problems such as ulcers or kidney or liver disease.
you should know that choline magnesium trisalicylate should not be taken by children and teenagers with chicken pox or the flu, because of the risk of Reye Syndrome, a rare but serious disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking choline magnesium trisalicylate, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking choline magnesium trisalicylate.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking choline magnesium trisalicylate. Alcohol can make the side effects from choline magnesium trisalicylate worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Choline magnesium trisalicylate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
vomiting
heartburn
diarrhea
constipation
stomach pain
headache
lightheadedness
dizziness
drowsiness
lack of energy
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
ringing in the ears
hearing loss
black and tarry stools
red blood in stools
bloody vomit
vomiting material that looks like coffee grounds
Choline magnesium trisalicylate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
headache
dizziness
ringing in the ears
hearing loss
confusion
drowsiness
sweating
vomiting
diarrhea
rapid breathing
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to choline magnesium trisalicylate.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking choline magnesium trisalicylate.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Trilisate
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page