Leukoencephalopathy with thalamus and brainstem involvement and high lactate: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Leukoencephalopathy with thalamus and brainstem involvement and high lactate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/leukoencephalopathy-with-thalamus-and-brainstem-involvement-and-high-lactate/
Leukoencephalopathy with thalamus and brainstem involvement and high lactate
Description
Leukoencephalopathy with thalamus and brainstem involvement and high lactate (LTBL) is a disorder that affects the
brain
. LTBL is one of a group of genetic disorders called leukodystrophies, which feature abnormalities of the nervous system's white matter. White matter consists of nerve fibers covered by a fatty substance, called
myelin
, that insulates nerve fibers and promotes the rapid transmission of nerve impulses.
LTBL is characterized by distinct changes in the brain, which can be seen using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These abnormalities typically involve white matter in
regions of the brain
known as the cerebrum and cerebellum. Abnormalities can also be seen in other regions of the brain, including the brainstem, which is the part that connects to the spinal cord. Affected brain regions include the thalamus, midbrain, pons, and medulla oblongata. Thinning of the tissue that connects the left and right halves of the brain (the corpus callosum) also occurs in people with LTBL. In addition, most affected individuals have a high level of a substance called lactate in the brain and elsewhere in the body.
The severity of the condition varies. Mildly affected individuals usually develop signs and symptoms after the age of 6 months. Loss of mental and movement abilities (psychomotor regression), muscle stiffness (spasticity), and extreme irritability are common, and some people with mild LTBL develop seizures. However, after age 2, the signs and symptoms of the condition improve: affected children regain some psychomotor abilities, seizures are reduced or disappear, MRI results become more normal, and lactate levels drop.
Severely affected individuals have features that begin soon after birth. These infants typically have delayed development of mental and movement abilities (psychomotor delay), weak muscle tone (hypotonia), involuntary muscle tensing (dystonia), muscle spasticity, and seizures. Some have extremely high levels of lactate (lactic acidosis), which can cause serious breathing problems and an abnormal heartbeat. Liver failure occurs in some severely affected infants. In severe cases, the signs and symptoms do not improve and can be life-threatening. In some people with LTBL, the features fall between mild and severe.
Frequency
LTBL is a rare condition. While its prevalence is unknown, at least 19 cases have been described in the medical literature.
Causes
LTBL is caused by mutations in the
EARS2
gene, which provides instructions for making an enzyme called mitochondrial glutamyl-tRNA synthetase. This enzyme is important in the production (synthesis) of proteins in cellular structures called
mitochondria
, the energy-producing centers in cells. While most protein synthesis occurs in the fluid surrounding the cell nucleus (
cytoplasm
), some proteins are synthesized in the mitochondria.
During
protein synthesis
, in either the mitochondria or the cytoplasm, building blocks called amino acids are connected together in a specific order, creating a chain of amino acids that forms the protein. Mitochondrial glutamyl-tRNA synthetase plays a role in adding the amino acid glutamate at the proper place in mitochondrial proteins.
Mutations in the
EARS2
gene likely reduce the amount of mitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase protein, which hinders the addition of glutamate to mitochondrial proteins. Researchers speculate that impaired protein assembly disrupts mitochondrial energy production. However, it is unclear how a reduction of mitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase specifically affects certain brain regions, causing LTBL.
Learn more about the gene associated with Leukoencephalopathy with thalamus and brainstem involvement and high lactate
EARS2
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 12
COXPD12
LTBL
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Leukoencephalopathy-thalamus and brainstem anomalies-high lactate syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Leukoencephalopathy with thalamus and brainstem involvement and high lactate
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
COMBINED OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION DEFICIENCY 12; COXPD12
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Biancheri R, Lamantea E, Severino M, Diodato D, Pedemonte M, Cassandrini D,
Ploederl A, Trucco F, Fiorillo C, Minetti C, Santorelli FM, Zeviani M, Bruno C.
Expanding the Clinical and Magnetic Resonance Spectrum of Leukoencephalopathy
with Thalamus and Brainstem Involvement and High Lactate (LTBL) in a Patient
Harboring a Novel EARS2 Mutation. JIMD Rep. 2015;23:85-9. doi:
10.1007/8904_2015_434. Epub 2015 Apr 9.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Danhauser K, Haack TB, Alhaddad B, Melcher M, Seibt A, Strom TM, Meitinger T,
Klee D, Mayatepek E, Prokisch H, Distelmaier F. EARS2 mutations cause fatal
neonatal lactic acidosis, recurrent hypoglycemia and agenesis of corpus callosum.
Metab Brain Dis. 2016 Jun;31(3):717-21. doi: 10.1007/s11011-016-9793-2. Epub 2016
Jan 16.
Citation on PubMed
Kevelam SH, Klouwer FC, Fock JM, Salomons GS, Bugiani M, van der Knaap MS.
Absent Thalami Caused by a Homozygous EARS2 Mutation: Expanding Disease Spectrum
of LTBL. Neuropediatrics. 2016 Jan;47(1):64-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1568987. Epub
2015 Nov 30.
Citation on PubMed
Steenweg ME, Ghezzi D, Haack T, Abbink TE, Martinelli D, van Berkel CG, Bley
A, Diogo L, Grillo E, Te Water Naude J, Strom TM, Bertini E, Prokisch H, van der
Knaap MS, Zeviani M. Leukoencephalopathy with thalamus and brainstem involvement
and high lactate 'LTBL' caused by EARS2 mutations. Brain. 2012 May;135(Pt
5):1387-94. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws070. Epub 2012 Apr 4.
Citation on PubMed
Taskin BD, Karalok ZS, Gurkas E, Aydin K, Aydogmus U, Ceylaner S, Karaer K,
Yilmaz C, Pearl PL. Early-Onset Mild Type Leukoencephalopathy Caused by a
Homozygous EARS2 Mutation. J Child Neurol. 2016 Jun;31(7):938-41. doi:
10.1177/0883073816630087. Epub 2016 Feb 18.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Leukodystrophies
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Head MRI
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page