Ceftolozane and Tazobactam Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ceftolozane and Tazobactam Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615010.html
Ceftolozane and Tazobactam Injection
pronounced as (sef tol' oh zane) and (taz'' oh bak' tam )
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of ceftolozane and tazobactam is used to treat certain infections including urinary tract infections and infections of the abdomen (stomach area). It is also used to treat certain types of pneumonia that developed in people who are on ventilators or who were in a hospital. Ceftolozane is in a class of antibiotics called cephalosporins. It works by killing bacteria. Tazobactam is in a class called beta-lactamase inhibitor. It works by preventing bacteria from destroying ceftolozane. Antibiotics will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections.
How should this medicine be used?
Ceftolozane and tazobactam injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected intravenously (into a vein) over approximately 1 hour every 8 hours for 4 to 14 days. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection that you have and how well you respond to the medication. You may receive ceftolozane and tazobactam injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving ceftolozane and tazobactam injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of your treatment with ceftolozane and tazobactam injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, tell your doctor. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish ceftolozane and tazobactam injection, tell your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving ceftolozane and tazobactam injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ceftolozane; tazobactam; piperacillin and tazobactam (Zosyn); cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil, cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefditoren (Spectracef), cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefoxitin, cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftazidime (Fortaz, Tazicef), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Ceftin, Zinacef), and cephalexin (Keflex); penicillin antibiotics; any other medications; or any of the ingredients in ceftolozane and tazobactam injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving ceftolozane and tazobactam injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ceftolozane and tazobactam injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
headache
constipation
vomiting
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
stomach pain
anxiety
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
rash
itching
hives
difficulty breathing or swallowing
fever and other signs of new or worsening infection
Ceftolozane and tazobactam injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to ceftolozane and tazobactam injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zerbaxa
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page