Probenecid: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Probenecid
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682395.html
Probenecid
pronounced as (proe ben' e sid)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Probenecid is used to treat chronic gout and gouty arthritis. It is used to prevent attacks related to gout, not treat them once they occur. It acts on the kidneys to help the body eliminate uric acid. Probenecid is also used to make certain antibiotics more effective by preventing the body from passing them in the urine.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Probenecid comes in a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken two times a day when prescribed for chronic gout or gouty arthritis and four times a day when prescribed with antibiotics to make them more effective. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take probenecid exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Probenecid may increase the frequency of gout attacks during the first 6 to 12 months that you take it, although it will eventually prevent them. Another drug, such as colchicine, may be prescribed to decrease this effect.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking probenecid,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to probenecid or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking probenecid. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with probenecid: aspirin, salsalate (Disalcid) or other salicylates; acetaminophen (Tylenol); nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking probenecid. Do not start any of these medications while taking probenecid without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had ulcers, kidney stones, a kidney disorder, or a blood disorder.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking probenecid, call your doctor immediately.
tell your doctor if you plan to have surgery involving a general anesthetic.
if you are having any urine tests done, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking probenecid because it may affect the results of the test.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Drink at least six to eight full glasses of water a day while taking probenecid to prevent kidney stones, unless directed to do otherwise by your doctor.
Probenecid may cause an upset stomach. Take with food or antacids.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Probenecid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
upset stomach
vomiting
loss of appetite
dizziness
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
severe skin rash
difficulty breathing or swallowing
unusual bleeding or bruising
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to probenecid.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Benemid
®
¶
Probalan
®
Brand names of combination products
Colbenemid
®
(containing Colchicine, Probenecid)
Proben-C
®
(containing Colchicine, Probenecid)
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page