Clonidine Transdermal Patch: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clonidine Transdermal Patch
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608049.html
Clonidine Transdermal Patch
pronounced as (kloe' ni deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Transdermal clonidine is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat high blood pressure. Clonidine is in a class of medications called centrally acting alpha-agonist hypotensive agents. It works by decreasing your heart rate and relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can flow more easily through the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Transdermal clonidine comes as a patch to apply to the skin. It is usually applied to the skin every 7 days. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use the clonidine patch exactly as directed. Do not apply it more or less often than prescribed by your doctor.
Apply clonidine patches to clean, dry skin on a hairless area on the upper, outer arm or upper chest. Choose an area where it will not be rubbed by tight clothing. Do not apply patches to skin that has wrinkles or folds or to skin that is cut, scraped, irritated, scarred or recently shaved. You may bathe, swim, or shower while you are wearing a clonidine patch.
If the clonidine patch loosens while wearing it, apply the adhesive cover that comes with the patch. The adhesive cover will help to keep the clonidine patch on until it is time for the patch to be replaced. If the clonidine patch significantly loosens or falls off, replace it with a new one in a different area. Replace the new patch on your next scheduled patch change day.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of clonidine patch and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every week.
Clonidine patch controls high blood pressure but does not cure it. It may take 2-3 days before the full benefit of clonidine patch is seen in your blood pressure readings. Continue to use clonidine patch even if you feel well. Do not stop using clonidine patch without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop using clonidine patch, it can cause a rapid rise in blood pressure and symptoms such as nervousness, headache, and confusion. Your doctor will probably decrease your dose gradually over 2 to 4 days.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient and read it carefully. To apply the patch, follow the directions in the patient instructions. Be sure to ask your pharmacist or doctor if you have any questions about how to use this medication.
Other uses for this medicine
Clonidine patch is also sometimes used as an aid in smoking cessation therapy and for the treatment of menopausal hot flashes. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using clonidine patch,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to clonidine, any of the ingredients in clonidine patch, or any other medications. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients in clonidine patch.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using clonidine patch. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a stroke, a recent heart attack, or heart or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using clonidine patch, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of using clonidine patch if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually use clonidine patch because it is not as safe as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using clonidine patch.
you should know that clonidine patch may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are using clonidine patch. Alcohol can make the side effects from clonidine patch worse.
you should know that clonidine patch may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start using clonidine patch. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that clonidine patch can cause burns on your skin if you are having magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; a radiology technique designed to show the images of body structures). Tell your doctor that you are using clonidine patch if you are to have an MRI scan.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Your doctor may prescribe a low-salt or low-sodium diet. Follow these directions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Remove the old patch and apply a new patch to a different spot as soon as you remember it. Replace the new patch on your next scheduled patch change day. Do not apply two patches to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Clonidine patch may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, are severe or do not go away:
redness, burning, swelling, or itching in the place where you applied a patch
change in skin color in the place where you applied a patch
dry mouth or throat
change in taste
constipation
nausea
tiredness
headache
nervousness
decreased sexual ability
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash anywhere on the body
blisters or inflammation in the place where you applied a patch
hives
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
difficulty swallowing or breathing
hoarseness
Clonidine patch may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of any patches that are outdated or no longer needed by opening the pouch and folding each patch in half with the sticky sides together. Dispose of the folded patch carefully, making sure that it is out of the reach of children and pets.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone applies extra clonidine patches, remove the patches from the skin. Then call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
fainting
slow heart rate
difficulty breathing
shivering
slurred speech
tiredness
confusion
cold, pale skin
drowsiness
weakness
smaller pupils (black circles in the middle of the eyes)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly to determine your response to the clonidine patch.
Your doctor may ask you to check your pulse (heart rate) daily and will tell you how rapid it should be. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to teach you how to take your pulse. If your pulse is slower or faster than it should be, call your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Catapres-TTS
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page