Indinavir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Indinavir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a696028.html
Indinavir
pronounced as (in din' a veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Notice:
Indinavir has been discontinued in the US. Because this drug is no longer available in the US market, the material in this monograph is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers’ labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Indinavir is used along with other medications to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Indinavir is in a class of medications called protease inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood. Although indinavir does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses such as serious infections or cancer. Taking these medications along with practicing safer sex and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of transmitting the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Indinavir comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken every 8 hours (three times a day). Take indinavir at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take indinavir exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Take indinavir on an empty stomach, 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after meals, with water, skim or nonfat milk, juice, coffee, or tea. However, if indinavir upsets your stomach, it may be taken with a light meal, such as dry toast or cornflakes with skim or nonfat milk. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about what foods may be taken with indinavir.
Do not crush or chew the capsule, but it may be opened and mixed with fruit puree (such as banana).
Continue to take indinavir even if you feel well. Do not stop taking indinavir without talking to your doctor.
Your doctor may need to interrupt your treatment if you experience certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with indinavir.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
Indinavir is also used sometimes in combination with other medications to treat healthcare workers and other individuals exposed to HIV infection after accidental contact with HIV-contaminated blood, tissues, or other body fluids. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this drug for your condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking indinavir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to indinavir, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in indinavir capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with indinavir. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with indinavir. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting indinavir with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking indinavir, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following herbal product may interact with indinavir: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking indinavir. Do not start this medication while taking indinavir without discussing with your healthcare provider.
if you are taking didanosine (Videx®), take it at least one hour before or after indinavir.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had hemophilia (bleeding disorder in which the blood does not clot properly), diabetes, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking indinavir, call your doctor. You should not breastfeed if you are infected with HIV or if you are taking indinavir.
you should know that your body fat may increase or move to different areas of your body such as your breasts, upper back, neck, chest, and stomach area. Loss of fat from the legs, arms, and face can also happen.
you should know that you may experience hyperglycemia (increases in your blood sugar) while you are taking this medication, even if you do not already have diabetes. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking indinavir: extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, or weakness. It is very important to call your doctor as soon as you have any of these symptoms, because high blood sugar that is not treated can cause a serious condition called ketoacidosis. Ketoacidosis may become life-threatening if it is not treated at an early stage. Symptoms of ketoacidosis include dry mouth, nausea and vomiting, shortness of breath, breath that smells fruity, and decreased consciousness.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections. If you have new or worsening symptoms at any time during your treatment with indinavir, be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Drink at least 48 ounces (1.5 liters), which is approximately six 8-ounce (240-milliliter) glasses, of water or other liquids every 24 hours.
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose by less than 2 hours, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if you miss a dose by more than 2 hours, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Indinavir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if this symptom is severe or does not go away:
change in sense of taste
Indinavir may cause side effects. Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
hives
itching
peeling or blistering skin
back pain
pain in the side of your body
middle to lower stomach pain
blood in urine
muscle pain or weakness
nausea
excessive tiredness
unusual bleeding or bruising
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of your stomach
flu-like symptoms
dark yellow or brown urine
yellowing of the skin or eyes
shortness of breath
fast heartbeat
confusion
dizziness
headache
paleness
Indinavir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. A desiccant (drying agent) is included with your capsules; keep this in your medicine bottle at all times. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
pain in the side of your body
blood in urine
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to indinavir.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Crixivan
®
Other names
IDV
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page