Regorafenib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Regorafenib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613004.html
Regorafenib
pronounced as (re'' goe raf' e nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Regorafenib may cause liver damage, which may be severe or life-threatening. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: yellowing of the skin or eyes, nausea, vomiting, dark colored urine, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, extreme tiredness, unusual bleeding or bruising, lack of energy, loss of appetite, flu-like symptoms, or a change in sleep habits.
Keep all appointments with the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to be sure that it is safe for you to take regorafenib and to check your body's response to the medication.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Regorafenib is used to treat colon and rectal cancer (cancer that begins in the large intestine or the rectum) that has spread to other parts of the body in people who have not been treated successfully with certain other medications. It is also used to treat gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST; a type of tumor that grows in the stomach, intestine [bowel], or esophagus [tube that connects the throat with the stomach]) in people who were not treated successfully with certain other medications. Regorafenib is also used to treat hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC; a type of liver cancer) in people who were previously treated with sorafenib (Nexafar). Regorafenib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of an abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps to slow or stop the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Regorafenib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with a low-fat meal (containing under 600 calories and less than 30% of calories from fat) once a day for 3 weeks and then skipped for 1 week. This treatment period is called a cycle, and the cycle may be repeated for as long as your doctor recommends. Take regorafenib at the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take regorafenib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor may decrease your dose of regorafenib or tell you to stop taking regorafenib for a period of time during your treatment. This will depend on how well the medication works for you and any side effects you may experience. Continue to take regorafenib even if you feel well. Do not stop taking regorafenib without talking to your doctor.
Regorafenib is not available at retail pharmacies. Your medication will be mailed to you or to your doctor from a specialty pharmacy. Ask your doctor if you have any questions about how you will receive your medication.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking regorafenib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to regorafenib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in regorafenib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements, you are taking or plan to take while taking regorafenib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with regorafenib: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking regorafenib. Do not start this medication while taking regorafenib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have a wound that has not healed or if you have or have ever had bleeding problems, high blood pressure, chest pain, or heart, kidney or liver disease. Also tell your doctor if you recently had surgery.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you are a female, you should not become pregnant while you are taking regorafenib and for up to 2 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you are male, you and your female partner should use birth control during your treatment and continue to use birth control for 2 months after your final dose. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking regorafenib, call your doctor. Regorafenib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with regorafenib and for up to 2 weeks after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking regorafenib. Your doctor probably will tell you to stop taking regorafenib at least 2 weeks before your surgery. Your doctor will tell you when it is safe for you to start taking regorafenib again after your surgery.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose of regorafenib, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it on that day. Do not take two doses on the same day to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Regorafenib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
weakness
loss of appetite
diarrhea
swelling, pain, and redness of the lining of your mouth or throat
weight loss
hoarseness or other change in the sound of your voice
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
chest pain
shortness of breath
unusual vaginal discharge or irritation
burning or pain when urinating
dizziness or feeling faint
fever, cough, sore throat, chills, and other signs of infection
swelling of the abdomen
high fever
chills
severe diarrhea
severe headache
seizure
confusion
changes in vision
dry mouth, muscle cramps, or decreased urination
redness, pain, blisters, bleeding, or swelling on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet
rash
vomiting blood or vomiting material that looks like coffee grounds
pink or brown urine
red or black (tarry) stools
coughing up blood or blood clots
abnormally heavy menstrual bleeding (periods)
unusual vaginal bleeding
frequent nosebleeds
Regorafenib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Do not place the tablets in other containers, such as daily or weekly pill boxes, and do not remove the desiccant (drying agent) from the container. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of any unused tablets 7 weeks after the bottle is first opened.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
rash or other skin changes
voice changes or hoarseness
diarrhea
swelling inside the nose or mouth
dry mouth
decreased appetite
tiredness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will check your blood pressure before you begin taking regorafenib and regularly during your treatment.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Stivarga
®
Last Revised -
05/24/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page