Motixafortide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Motixafortide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624066.html
Motixafortide Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Motixafortide injection is used with filgrastim to help get cells ready for stem cell transplant in patients withmultiple myeloma. Motixafortide is in a class of medications called hematopoietic stem cell mobilizers. It works by increasing the number of stem cells in blood stream to be available for removal as part of the stem cell transplant process.
How should this medicine be used?
Motixafortide comes as a solution (liquid) to be given subcutaneously (under the skin). It is usually given by a doctor or nurse 10 to 14 hours before your first stem cell collection. You may receive an additional dose 10 to 14 hours before your third stem cell collection. Your doctor or nurse will monitor you for one hour after you receive your dose.
Your doctor will prescribe you medicines to be taken 30 to 60 minutes before you will receive motixafortide to help reduce the risk of having a reaction to the medication.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving motixafortide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to motixafortide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in motixafortide injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have leukemia (a blood cancer). Your doctor may tell you not to receive motixafortide.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. Motixafortide may harm the fetus. You should not receive motixafortide if you are pregnant. For females, your doctor will perform a pregnancy test before you receive motixafortide. You should use effective birth control while receiving motixafortide and for 8 days after receiving it. Talk to your doctor about what contraception is right for you. You should also not breastfeed while receiving motixafortide and for 8 days after receiving it.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Motixafortide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
back pain
numbess, tingling, prickling or burning feeling of the skin
nausea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
itching; flushing; redness or rash of skin; swelling of tongue, lips, or face; feeling faint; swelling or tightness in throat; difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
pain, redness, bruising, mass, swelling or itching at site of injection
Motixafortide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to motixafortide.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aphexda
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page