Isoetharine Oral Inhalation: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Isoetharine Oral Inhalation
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682862.html
Isoetharine Oral Inhalation
pronounced as (eye soe eth' a reen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Isoetharine is no longer available in the U.S.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Isoetharine is used to prevent and treat wheezing, shortness of breath, coughing, and chest tightness caused by asthma, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and other lung diseases. It relaxes and opens air passages in the lungs, making it easier to breathe.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Isoetharine comes as an aerosol and a solution to inhale by mouth. It is used as needed to relieve symptoms but usually should not be used more than every 4 hours. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use isoetharine exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Isoetharine controls symptoms of asthma and other lung diseases but does not cure them. Do not stop using isoetharine without talking to your doctor.
Before you use isoetharine the first time, read the written instructions that come with it. Ask your doctor, pharmacist, or respiratory therapist to demonstrate the proper technique. Practice using the inhaler while in his or her presence.
To use the inhaler, follow these steps:
Shake the inhaler well.
Remove the protective cap.
Exhale (breathe out) as completely as possible through your nose while keeping your mouth shut.
Open Mouth Technique:
Open your mouth wide, and place the open end of the mouthpiece about 1 to 2 inches from your mouth.
Closed Mouth Technique:
Place the open end of the mouthpiece well into your mouth, past your front teeth. Close your lips tightly around the mouthpiece.
Take a slow, deep breath through the mouthpiece and, at the same time, press down on the container to spray the medication into your mouth. Be sure that the mist goes into your throat and is not blocked by your teeth or tongue. Adults giving the treatment to young children may hold the child's nose closed to be sure that the medication goes into the child's throat.
Hold your breath for 5-10 seconds, remove the inhaler, and exhale slowly through your nose or mouth. If you take 2 puffs, wait 2 minutes and shake the inhaler well before taking the second puff.
Replace the protective cap on the inhaler.
If you have difficulty getting the medication into your lungs, a spacer (a special device that attaches to the inhaler) may help; ask your doctor, pharmacist, or respiratory therapist.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using isoetharine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to isoetharine or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using isoetharine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with isoetharine: ephedrine, phenylephrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using isoetharine. Do not start any of these medications while using isoetharine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an irregular heartbeat, increased heart rate, glaucoma, heart disease, high blood pressure, an overactive thyroid gland, diabetes, or seizures.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using isoetharine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using isoetharine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Isoetharine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tremor
nervousness
headache
upset stomach
dry mouth
throat irritation
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
increased difficulty breathing
rapid or increased heart rate
irregular heartbeat
chest pain or discomfort
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not use the liquid if it is pink, yellow, or dark in color or if it contains floating particles. Avoid puncturing the aerosol container, and do not discard it in an incinerator or fire.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to isoetharine.
To relieve dry mouth or throat irritation, rinse your mouth with water, chew gum, or suck sugarless hard candy after using isoetharine.
Inhalation devices require regular cleaning. Once a week, remove the drug container from the plastic mouthpiece, wash the mouthpiece with warm tap water, and dry it thoroughly.
Do not let any one else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Beta-2
®
¶
Bronkosol
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page