Tolterodine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tolterodine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a699026.html
Tolterodine
pronounced as (tole ter' a deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tolterodine is used to treat overactive bladder (a bladder condition that causes sudden urges to urinate that may be hard to control). Tolterodine is in a class of medications called antimuscarinics. It works by relaxing the bladder muscles.
How should this medicine be used?
Tolterodine comes as a tablet and an extended-release (long-acting) capsule to take by mouth. The tablet is usually taken twice a day. The extended-release capsule is usually taken once a day with liquids.
Take tolterodine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the extended-release capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tolterodine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking tolterodine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glaucoma (a serious eye condition that can cause vision loss), urinary retention (trouble fully emptying your bladder or at all), or gastric retention (slow emptying of your stomach). Your doctor may tell you not to take tolterodine.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause an irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death). or if you have or have ever had bladder problems, stomach or bowel problems, like constipation, myasthenia gravis (a nerve problem that makes muscles weak), or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking tolterodine, call your doctor.
you should know that tolterodine may make you dizzy, drowsy, or cause blurry vision. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tolterodine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth, eyes, or skin
headache
constipation
abdominal pain
excessive tiredness
difficulty emptying the bladder
painful urination
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms stop taking tolterodine and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes
difficulty swallowing or breathing
Tolterodine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
confusion
dry mouth
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Detrol
®
Detrol
®
LA
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page