Miglustat: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Miglustat
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604015.html
Miglustat
pronounced as (mig' loo stat)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Miglustat is used to treat Gaucher disease type 1 (a condition in which a certain fatty substance is not broken down normally in the body and instead builds up in some organs and causes liver, spleen, bone, and blood problems). Miglustat is also used in combination with another medication known as cipaglucosidase alfa-atga (Pombilti) to treat late onset Pompe disease (a genetic condition that causes deficiency in lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase, which can lead to muscle weakness and wasting) in adult patients who weigh 92 pounds (40 kg) or more and who have not been improving on their enzyme therapy. Miglustat is in a class of medications called enzyme inhibitors. It works by preventing the body from producing the fatty substance so that less of it will build up in the body and cause symptoms.
How should this medicine be used?
Miglustat comes as a capsule to take by mouth. For treatment of Gaucher disease (Zavesca), it is usually taken with or without food and with plenty of water up to three times a day. For treatment of Pompe disease (Opfolda), it is usually taken every other week approximately 1 hour before the planned administration of cipaglucosidase alfa-atga (Pombilti). Take it at around the same time(s) every day. For Pompe disease, miglustat (Opfolda) should be taken with unsweetened beverages such as water, coffee, or tea (with no sugar, cream or sweeteners) at least 2 hours before or after eating or drinking any other beverage. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take miglustat exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Miglustat controls Gaucher and Pompe disease but does not cure it. Continue to take miglustat even if you feel well. Do not stop taking miglustat without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking miglustat,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to miglustat, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in miglustat. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a tremor (shaking of your hands that you cannot control); pain, burning, tingling, or numbness in your hands or feet; any disease that affects your nervous system; or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should use effective birth control to prevent pregnancy while you are taking miglustat and for 60 days after your last dose. If you become pregnant while taking miglustat, call your doctor immediately. Miglustat may harm the fetus. Breastfeeding while receiving miglustat is not recommended.
you should know that miglustat may damage sperm. Men should continue to use effective birth control.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Miglustat may cause diarrhea and weight loss. If you experience these side effects, your doctor will tell you how to change your diet to improve your symptoms. You may be told to avoid foods that are high in carbohydrates. Follow these instructions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If taking miglustat for Gaucher disease (Zavesca), skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. If taking miglustat for Pompe disease (Opfolda) and you miss the dose of miglustat, you should call and reschedule your cipaglucosidase alfa-atga and then take the miglustat dose an hour before the newly scheduled cipaglucosidase alfa-atga.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Miglustat may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
stomach pain or bloating
gas
loss of appetite
weight loss
upset stomach
vomiting
constipation
indigestion
dry mouth
weakness
muscle cramps, especially in the legs
feeling of heaviness in the arms or legs
unsteadiness when walking
back pain
dizziness
nervousness
headache
memory problems
difficult or irregular menstruation (period)
tiredness
fever
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
pain, burning, numbness or tingling in your hands, arms, legs, or feet
shaking hands that you cannot control
changes in vision
easy bruising or bleeding
Miglustat may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Keep all appointments for cipaglucosidase alfa-atga infusion if you are receiving miglustat for Pompe disease.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zavesca
®
Opfolda
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page