Vimseltinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Vimseltinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625067.html
Vimseltinib
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Vimseltinib is used to treat tenosynovial giant cell tumors (tumor in or around a joint that can cause pain and reduce movement). Vimseltinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of an abnormal protein that may help the tumor to shrink.
How should this medicine be used?
Vimseltinib comes as a capsule to take by mouth. Take with or without food two times a week at least 72 hours (3 days) apart. Take vimseltinib on the same days and around the same times every week.
Take vimseltinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you vomit within 30 minutes after taking a dose, take another dose as soon as possible. Take your next dose on the next scheduled day.
Your doctor may decrease your dose or interrupt or stop your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with vimseltinib.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with vimseltinib and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking vimseltinib,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking vimseltinib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high cholesterol, high blood pressure, or kidney or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are taking vimseltinib. You may be required to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment. You or your partner should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 1 month after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you or your partner can use during your treatment. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking vimseltinib, call your doctor immediately.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while taking vimseltinib and for 1 month after your final dose.
this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking vimseltinib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose within 48 hours of the time it is usually taken, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if you miss a dose by more than 48 hours, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Vimseltinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
numbness, burning, or tingling in the arms, hands, feet, or leg
swelling in or around the eye
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
yellow eyes or skin, dark urine, loss of appetite, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, fever, or pain or discomfort in right upper stomach area
rash, itching, hives, or trouble breathing
Vimseltinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the blister pack it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not remove capsules from the blister pack until you are ready to take them. Do not store capsules in a pillbox or pill-organizer.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment with vimseltinib to check your body's response to the medication.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking vimseltinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Romvimza
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page