Travoprost Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Travoprost Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602027.html
Travoprost Ophthalmic
pronounced as (tra' voe prost)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Travoprost ophthalmic is used to treat glaucoma (a condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision) and ocular hypertension (a condition which causes increased pressure in the eye). Travoprost is in a class of medications called prostaglandin analogs. It lowers pressure in the eye by increasing the flow of natural eye fluids out of the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Travoprost ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eye. It is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) once a day in the evening. To help you remember to use travoprost, use it around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use travoprost exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Travoprost ophthalmic also comes as an implant to be inserted into the white part of your eye as a single dose, by a doctor in a medical office or clinic.
Before you receive a travoprost implant, your doctor will clean your eye to prevent infection and numb your eye to reduce discomfort during the implant.
Travoprost controls glaucoma and ocular hypertension but does not cure them. Continue to use travoprost even if you feel well. Do not stop using travoprost without talking to your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using travoprost eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to travoprost, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in travoprost ophthalmic solution or insert. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking.
if you are using another topical eye medication, instill it at least 5 minutes before or after you instill travoprost eye drops.
tell your doctor if you have an infection in or around your eyes or problems with your cornea (clear tissue that covers the front of the eye) or if you have ever had a corneal transplant, Your doctor may not want you to receive a travoprost implant.
tell your doctor if you have inflammation (swelling) of the eye or a torn or missing lens.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using travoprost, call your doctor.
if you have an eye injury, infection, or eye surgery while using travoprost eye drops, ask your doctor if you should continue using the same eye drops container.
you should know that travoprost eye drops should not be instilled while wearing contact lenses. If you wear contact lenses, remove them before instilling travoprost eye drops. You may put them back in 15 minutes later.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Travoprost ophthalmic may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye pain or irritation
blurred vision
dry eyes
eye tearing
feeling that something is in the eye
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
sensitivity to light
abnormal vision
pink eye
redness or swelling of the eyelid
Travoprost ophthalmic may change the color of your eye (to brown) and darken the skin around the eye. It may also cause your eyelashes to grow longer and thicker and darken in color. These changes usually occur slowly, but they may be permanent. If you use travoprost eye drops in only one eye, you should know that there may be a difference between your eyes after using travoprost eye drops. Call your doctor if you notice these changes.
Travoprost may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; a medical test that uses powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body), tell your doctor and the testing personnel that you have a travoprost implant in your eye. Travoprost implant may affect MRI studies.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
iDose
®
TR
Travatan Z
®
Last Revised -
08/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page