Iron Sucrose Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Iron Sucrose Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614017.html
Iron Sucrose Injection
pronounced as (eye' urn) (soo' krose)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Iron sucrose injection is used treat iron-deficiency anemia (a lower than normal number of red blood cells due to too little iron) in people with chronic kidney disease (damage to the kidneys which may worsen over time and may cause the kidneys to stop working). Iron sucrose injection is in a class of medications called iron replacement products. It works by replenishing iron stores so that the body can make more red blood cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Iron sucrose injection comes as a solution (liquid) to inject intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or hospital outpatient clinic. It is usually injected over 2 to 5 minutes or may be mixed with another fluid and infused slowly over 15 minutes to 4 hours depending on your dose of medication. Your doctor will determine how often you receive iron sucrose injection and your total number of doses based on your condition and how well you respond to the medication. If your iron levels become low after you finish your treatment, your doctor may prescribe this medication again.
Iron sucrose injection may cause severe or life-threatening reactions while you receive the medication. Your doctor will watch you carefully while you receive each dose of iron sucrose injection and for at least 30 minutes afterwards. Tell your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms during or after your injection: shortness of breath; difficulty swallowing or breathing; hoarseness; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes; hives; itching; rash; fainting; lightheadedness; dizziness; cold, clammy skin; rapid, weak pulse; slow heartbeat; headache; nausea; vomiting; joint or muscle pain; stomach pain; pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet; swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs; loss of consciousness; or seizures. If you experience a severe reaction, your doctor will slow or stop your infusion immediately and provide emergency medical treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving iron sucrose injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to iron sucrose injection; any other iron injection such as ferumoxytol (Feraheme), iron dextran (Dexferrum, Infed, Proferdex), or sodium ferric gluconate (Ferrlecit); any other medications; or any of the ingredients in iron sucrose injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving iron sucrose injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving iron sucrose injection treatment, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive iron sucrose injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Iron sucrose injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
arm, leg, or back pain
muscle cramps
loss of energy
changes in taste
ear pain
fever
pain, redness, or swelling in the joints, especially the big toe
soreness, redness, or burning at the injection site
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience the following symptom or those listed in the HOW section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment.
chest pain
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will check your blood pressure and order certain lab tests to check your body's response to iron sucrose injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Venofer
®
Other names
Iron Saccharate
Iron Sucron Complex
Last Revised -
04/15/2014
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page