Early-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Early-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/early-onset-myopathy-with-fatal-cardiomyopathy/
Early-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy
Description
Early-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy (EOMFC) is an inherited muscle disease that affects
the skeletal muscles
, which are used for movement, and
the heart (cardiac) muscle
. This condition is characterized by skeletal muscle weakness that becomes apparent in early infancy. Affected individuals have delayed development of motor skills, such as sitting, standing, and walking. Beginning later in childhood, people with EOMFC may also develop joint deformities called contractures that restrict the movement of the neck and back.
Scoliosis
, which is an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine, also develops in late childhood.
A form of heart disease called dilated cardiomyopathy is another feature of EOMFC. Dilated cardiomyopathy enlarges and weakens the cardiac muscle, preventing the heart from pumping blood efficiently. Signs and symptoms of this condition can include an irregular heartbeat (
arrhythmia
), shortness of breath, extreme tiredness (fatigue), and swelling of the legs and feet. The heart abnormalities associated with EOMFC usually become apparent in childhood, after the skeletal muscle abnormalities. The heart disease worsens quickly, and it often causes heart failure and sudden death in adolescence or early adulthood.
Frequency
EOMFC appears to be a rare disorder, although its prevalence is unknown. It has been reported in a small number of families of Moroccan and Sudanese descent.
Causes
EOMFC is caused by variants (also known as mutations) in the
TTN
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called titin, which plays an important role in
skeletal
and
cardiac
muscle function.
Within muscle cells, titin is an essential component of structures called
sarcomeres
and is critical for muscles to tense (contract) normally . Sarcomeres are the basic units of muscle contraction; they are made of proteins that generate the mechanical force needed for muscles to contract. Titin has several functions within sarcomeres. One of this protein's most important jobs is to provide structure, flexibility, and stability to these cell structures. Titin also plays a role in chemical signaling and in assembling new sarcomeres.
The
TTN
gene variants involved in EOMFC lead to the production of an abnormally short version of titin. The abnormal protein
disrupts the function of sarcomeres
, which prevents skeletal and cardiac muscle from contracting normally. These muscle abnormalities underlie the features of EOMFC, including skeletal muscle weakness and dilated cardiomyopathy.
Learn more about the gene associated with Early-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy
TTN
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have variants. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
EOMFC
Salih CMD
Salih congenital muscular dystrophy
Salih myopathy
Titinopathy & early-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Early-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CONGENITAL MYOPATHY 5 WITH CARDIOMYOPATHY; CMYO5
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Carmignac V, Salih MA, Quijano-Roy S, Marchand S, Al Rayess MM, Mukhtar MM,
Urtizberea JA, Labeit S, Guicheney P, Leturcq F, Gautel M, Fardeau M, Campbell
KP, Richard I, Estournet B, Ferreiro A. C-terminal titin deletions cause a novel
early-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy. Ann Neurol. 2007
Apr;61(4):340-51. doi: 10.1002/ana.21089.
Citation on PubMed
Hackman P, Savarese M, Di Feo MF, Udd B, Salih MA. Salih Myopathy. 2012 Jan 12
[updated 2025 Apr 3]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK83297/
Citation on PubMed
Salih MA, Al Rayess M, Cutshall S, Urtizberea JA, Al-Turaiki MH, Ozo CO,
Straub V, Akbar M, Abid M, Andeejani A, Campbell KP. A novel form of familial
congenital muscular dystrophy in two adolescents. Neuropediatrics. 1998
Dec;29(6):289-93. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-973579.
Citation on PubMed
Savarese M, Sarparanta J, Vihola A, Udd B, Hackman P. Increasing Role of Titin
Mutations in Neuromuscular Disorders. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2016 Aug
30;3(3):293-308. doi: 10.3233/JND-160158.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Subahi SA. Distinguishing cardiac features of a novel form of congenital
muscular dystrophy (Salih cmd). Pediatr Cardiol. 2001 Jul-Aug;22(4):297-301. doi:
10.1007/s002460010233.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Cardiomyopathy
Genetic Disorders
Muscle Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page