Ibalizumab-uiyk Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ibalizumab-uiyk Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618020.html
Ibalizumab-uiyk Injection
pronounced as (eye" ba liz' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ibalizumab-uiyk is used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in people whose HIV could not be successfully treated with other medications, including their current therapy. Ibalizumab-uiyk is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by blocking HIV from infecting cells in the body.
Although ibalizumab-uiyk does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses Taking these medications and making other life-style changes may decrease the risk of giving the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Ibalizumab-uiyk comes as solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) over 15 to 30 minutes by a doctor or nurse. It is given once every 2 weeks. A doctor or nurse will watch you carefully for side effects while the medication is being infused, and for up to 1 hour afterwards.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving ibalizumab-uiyk injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while receiving ibalizumab-uiyk injection, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are receiving ibalizumab-uiyk injection.
you should know that while you are receiving medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections. If you have new or worsening symptoms during your treatment with ibalizumab-uiyk injection, be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ibalizumab-uiyk injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
rash
dizziness
Ibalizumab-uiyk injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to ibalizumab-uiyk injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Trogarzo
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page