Unoprostone Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Unoprostone Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613036.html
Unoprostone Ophthalmic
pronounced as (ue noe prost' one)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Unoprostone ophthalmic is used to treat glaucoma (a condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision) and ocular hypertension (a condition which causes increased pressure in the eye). It is in a class of medications called prostaglandin analogs. Unoprostone lowers pressure in the eye by increasing the flow of natural eye fluids out of the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Unoprostone comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eye. The solution is instilled in the affected eye(s) twice a day. Use unoprostone at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use unoprostone exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Unoprostone controls glaucoma and ocular hypertension but does not cure them. Continue to use unoprostone even if you feel well. Do not stop using unoprostone without talking to your doctor.
Unoprostone ophthalmic is for use only in the eye(s). Do not swallow unoprostone solution.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eyedrops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking unoprostone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to unoprostone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in unoprostone solution. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
If unoprostone is used with other topical eye medications, allow at least 5 minutes between each medication.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any other eye medications.
tell your doctor if you have inflammation (swelling) of the eye, a torn or missing lens, or other eye conditions, and if you have or have ever had any other medical problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using unoprostone, call your doctor.
Tell your doctor if you wear soft contact lenses. Wait at least 15 minutes after using the medicine to put in soft contact lenses.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Unoprostone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, stinging, or itching of the eye
dry eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
redness, swelling, discharge, or pain of the eye or eyelid
changes in color vision, blurred vision, or other changes in vision
Unoprostone may change your eye color to brown or a deeper shade of brown. This color change usually occurs slowly, but it may be permanent. Unoprostone also may cause darkening of the color of the eyelid and skin around your eyes, an increase in the length, thickness, color, or number of your eyelashes, or fine hair on your eyelids. The eyelash changes and any darkening of the skin around your eyes usually go away when you stop using unoprostone.
Unoprostone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Rescula
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page