Amiloride and Hydrochlorothiazide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Amiloride and Hydrochlorothiazide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601014.html
Amiloride and Hydrochlorothiazide
pronounced as (a mil' oh ride) (hye'' droe klor'' oh thye' a zide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat high blood pressure and heart failure in patients who have low amounts of potassium in their bodies or for whom low potassium levels in the body could be dangerous. Amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide are in a class of medications called diuretics ('water pills'). They work by causing the kidneys to get rid of unneeded water and salt from the body into the urine.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken once a day in the morning with food. To help you remember to take amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide, take it around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
This medication controls high blood pressure and heart failure but does not cure these conditions. Continue to take amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medicine is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to amiloride, hydrochlorothiazide, sulfonamide containing medications, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the patient information for a list of the ingredients.
Some medications should not be taken with amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist..
if you are taking cholestyramine or colestipol, take them 1 hour before or 4 hours after taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide.
The following nonprescription products may interact with amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide: potassium supplements. potassium containing medication supplements,hydrocortisone, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)[ ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn, others)]. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide. Do not start any of these medications while taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have kidney disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, gout, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide, call your doctor immediately.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide.
you should know that amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. Alcohol can add to these side effects.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
If your doctor prescribes a low-salt or low-sodium diet, or to eat or drink increased amounts of potassium-rich foods (e.g., bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice) in your diet, follow these instructions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
diarrhea
loss of appetite
stomach pain
gas
headache
If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical treatment:
dry mouth; thirst; nausea; vomiting; weakness, tiredness; drowsiness; restlessness; confusion; muscle weakness, pain, or cramps; fast heartbeat and other signs of dehydration and electrolyte imbalance
slow or irregular heartbeat
unusual bleeding or bruising
yellowing of the skin or eyes
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly, and blood tests should be done occasionally.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Hydro-ride
®
¶
Moduretic
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page