Ozenoxacin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ozenoxacin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618010.html
Ozenoxacin
pronounced as (oz en ox' a sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Ozenoxacin has been discontinued in the US. Because this drug is no longer available in the US market, the material in this monograph is no longer updated. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers’ labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ozenoxacin is used to treat impetigo (a skin infection caused by bacteria) in adults and children 2 months of age and older. Ozenoxacin is in a class of medications called antibacterials. It works by killing and stopping the growth of bacteria on the skin.
How should this medicine be used?
Ozenoxacin comes as a cream to be applied in a thin layer to the skin. It is usually used twice a day for 5 days. Apply ozenoxacin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use ozenoxacin exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The infected area of the skin should begin to look better during the first few days of treatment with ozenoxacin. If your condition does not improve after using this medication for 3 days or gets worse, call your doctor.
Ozenoxacin is for use only on the infected area of the skin. Do not let ozenoxacin cream get into your eyes, or inside your mouth, or nose, or inside the female genital area. Do not swallow this medication.
After applying the cream, you may cover the treated area with a clean bandage or gauze.
Wash your hands after applying ozenoxacin if your hands are not the area that is being treated.
Use ozenoxacin for as long as your doctor recommends, even if the infection looks better. If you stop using ozenoxacin too soon or skip doses, the infection may not be completely gone and the bacteria could become difficult to treat with another antibiotic.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ozenoxacin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ozenoxacin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ozenoxacin cream. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking ozenoxacin, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra cream to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ozenoxacin may cause side effects. Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately:
a new rash or infection at or near the area being treated
Ozenoxacin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xepi
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page