Pacritinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pacritinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622043.html
Pacritinib
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pacritinib is used to treat adults with certain types of myelofibrosis (MF; a cancer of the bone marrow in which the bone marrow is replaced by scar tissue and causes decreased blood cell production). Pacritinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop or slow the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Pacritinib comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day, with or without food. Take pacritinib at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take pacritinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not open, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor will order blood tests before and during your treatment to see how you are affected by this medication. Your doctor may increase or decrease your dose of pacritinib during your treatment, or may tell you to stop taking pacritinib temporarily or permanently. This depends on how well the medication works for you, your lab test results, and if you experience side effects. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking pacritinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pacritinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pacritinib capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with pacritinib. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with pacritinib. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting pacritinib with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking pacrinib, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.you should know that pacritinib may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking pacritinib. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you smoke or if you have ever smoked, if you often get any type of infection or if you think you may have any type of infection now, or if you have diarrhea or often have loose stools. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had cancer, bleeding problems, low blood levels of potassium, a heart attack or other heart problems, a stroke, a blood clot in your legs or lungs, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes, or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking pacritinib, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking pacritinib and for 2 weeks after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking pacritinib.
tell your doctor if you have recently had surgery or if you plan to have surgery, including dental surgery. If you are scheduled to have surgery, your doctor will stop your treatment with pacritinib 7 days before the surgery.
you should know that pacritinib often causes diarrhea, which can be severe. Your doctor will probably tell you to drink plenty of liquids and to take anti-diarrhea medication to prevent dehydration (loss of too much water from your body) when you first experience diarrhea or loose stools. Call your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms of dehydration: extreme thirst, dry mouth or skin, decreased urination, or fast heartbeat.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pacritinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
nosebleeds or bleeding from your gums; coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds; unusual bleeding or bruising; increased menstrual flow or vaginal bleeding; pink, red, or dark brown urine; or red or tarry black bowel movements
lightheadedness, fainting, or irregular heartbeat
crushing chest pain or chest heaviness; pain in the arms, back, neck, jaw, or stomach; or breaking out in cold sweat
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
slow or difficult speech; sudden weakness or numbness of the face, arm or leg; sudden headache; sudden vision problems; or sudden difficulty walking
swelling, pain, tenderness, warmth or redness in one or both legs
shortness of breath, coughing up blood, fast heartbeat, fast breathing, pain when breathing deeply
fever, chills, cough, painful or frequent urination, sores or blisters on the skin, or other signs of infection
shortness of breath, fast heartbeat, headache, dizziness, pale skin, confusion, or tiredness
Pacritinib may increase your risk of developing other cancers, such as lymphoma (cancer that begins in the cells that fight infection). Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving this medication.
Pacritinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
blurred vision
dizziness
unusual bleeding or bruising
fever, chills, or other signs of infection
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking pacritinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vonjo
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page