Trofinetide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Trofinetide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623019.html
Trofinetide
pronounced as (troe fin' e tide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Trofinetide is used to treat Rett syndrome (a genetic condition that causes severe developmental and nervous system problems) in adult and children 2 years of age or older. Trofinetide is an analog of glycine-proline-glutamate (GPE), a protein that occurs naturally in the brain. It is not known exactly how trofinetide works, but it may improve nerve function and structure.
How should this medicine be used?
Trofinetide comes as an solution (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, with or without food. Take trofinetide at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take trofinetide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Use an oral syringe or dosing cup (measuring device) to accurately measure and take your dose of trofinetide solution; do not use a household spoon or cup. Ask your pharmacist for an oral syringe or cup if one is not included with your medication.
If you vomit after taking trofinetide, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule the next day.
If you have a nasogastric (NG) tube, your doctor or pharmacist will explain how to give trofinetide solution through a NG tube.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking trofinetide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to trofinetide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in trofinetide solution. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking laxatives. Your doctor will tell you to stop taking laxatives before you start taking trofinetide and not to take any laxative medications while you are taking trofinetide.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking trofinetide, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Trofinetide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting
decreased appetite
fever
runny nose, sore throat
tiredness
anxiety
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking trofinetide and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
diarrhea
dry mouth, dark urine, decreased sweating, dry skin, and other signs of dehydration
weight loss
Trofinetide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the bottle upright in a refrigerator, and dispose of any unused medication after 14 days. Do not freeze.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Daybue
®
Last Revised -
05/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page