Immune Globulin Intramuscular (Human): MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Immune Globulin Intramuscular (Human)
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624079.html
Immune Globulin Intramuscular (Human)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Immune globulin intramuscular (IMIG) may cause blood clots. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any conditions that affect blood clotting or history of a blood clot or if you have a catheter placed into a vein, high blood pressure, high cholesterol levels, diabetes, or if you are overweight or obese, an older adult, or are bedridden. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking or using any type of estrogen medication. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor or get emergency care immediately: pain and/or swelling of an arm or leg with warmth over the affected area, discoloration of an arm or leg, unexplained shortness of breath, acute chest pain or discomfort that worsens on deep breathing, unexplained rapid pulse, numbness or weakness on one side of the body.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Immune globulin intramuscular (IMIG) is used to provide antibodies (protein produced by the body to fight infections) to help prevent disease after being exposed to hepatitis A (if exposed <2 weeks ago), or measles (if exposed <6 days ago and are not vaccinated against measles or had measles recently), varicella (chicken pox). IMIG is also used to provide antibodies after being exposed to rubella (German measles) to lessen the chance of harm to the fetus in pregnant women who will not consider having an abortion. IMIG is in a class of medications called immune globulins. It works by providing antibodies to fight infections.
How should this medicine be used?
IMIG comes as a solution to be given intramuscularly (into a muscle) into your upper arm or upper thigh by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or facility. It is usually given as a single dose, but additional doses may be given when used to prevent hepatitis A if traveling for more than 2 months to areas where the disease is common.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving IMIG,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to immune globulin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in IMIG. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.tell your doctor if you are an IgA-deficient patient with antibodies to IgA and a history of allergic reactions.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any of the conditions listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while after or while receiving IMIG, call your doctor.
do not have any vaccinations (live vaccines such as measles, mumps and rubella) without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
IMIG may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
nausea
pain, swelling, or redness at the place of injection
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical care:
fever, chills, tiredness, and other signs of infection
IMIG may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Gamastan
®
Other names
IMIG
Last Revised -
12/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page