Mesalamine Rectal: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mesalamine Rectal
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614021.html
Mesalamine Rectal
pronounced as (me sal' a meen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rectal mesalamine is used to treat ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum), proctitis (swelling in the rectum), and proctosigmoiditis (swelling in the rectum and sigmoid colon [last section of the colon]). Rectal mesalamine is in a class of medications called anti-inflammatory agents. It works by stopping the body from producing a certain substance that may cause inflammation.
How should this medicine be used?
Rectal mesalamine comes as a suppository and an enema to use in the rectum. The suppository and the enema are usually used once a day at bedtime. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use rectal mesalamine exactly as directed. Do not use it more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days or weeks of your treatment with rectal mesalamine. Continue to use rectal mesalamine until you finish your prescription, even if you feel better at the beginning of your treatment. Do not stop using rectal mesalamine without talking to your doctor.
Mesalamine suppositories and enemas may stain clothing and other fabrics, flooring, and painted, marble, granite, enamel, vinyl, and other surfaces. Take precautions to prevent staining when you use these medications.
Drink plenty of fluids while using mesalamine suppositories and enemas.
If using a mesalamine enema, follow these steps:
Try to have a bowel movement. The medication will work best if your bowels are empty.
Use scissors to cut the seal of the protective foil pouch that holds seven bottles of medication. Be careful not to squeeze or cut the bottles. Remove one bottle from the pouch.
Look at the liquid inside the bottle. It should be off-white or tan colored. The liquid may darken slightly if the bottles are left out of the foil pouch for a time. You may use liquid that has darkened a little bit, but do not use liquid that is dark brown.
Shake the bottle well to make sure the medication is mixed.
Remove the protective cover from the applicator tip. Be careful to hold the bottle by the neck so that the medication will not leak out of the bottle.
Lie on your left side with your lower (left) leg straight and your right leg bent toward your chest for balance. You can also kneel on a bed, resting your upper chest and one arm on the bed.
Gently insert the applicator tip into your rectum, pointing it slightly toward your navel (belly button).
Hold the bottle firmly and tilt it slightly so that the nozzle is aimed toward your back. Squeeze the bottle slowly and steadily to release the medicine.
Withdraw the applicator. Remain in the same position for at least 30 minutes to allow the medicine to spread through your intestine. Try to keep the medicine inside of your body for about 8 hours (while you sleep).
Dispose of the bottle safely, so that is out of the reach of children and pets. Each bottle contains only one dose and should not be reused.
If using a mesalamine suppository, follow these steps:
Try to have a bowel movement just before using the suppository. The medication will work best if your bowels are empty.
Separate one suppository from the strip of suppositories. Hold the suppository upright and use your fingers to peel off the plastic wrapper. Try to handle the suppository as little as possible to avoid melting it with the heat of your hands.
Lie down on your left side and raise your right knee to your chest. (If you are left-handed, lie on your right side and raise your left knee.)
Using your finger, insert the suppository into the rectum, pointed end first. Use gentle pressure to insert the suppository completely. Try to keep it in place for 1 to 3 hours or longer if possible.
Wash your hands thoroughly before you resume your normal activities.
If you will be using mesalamine enemas or suppositories, ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient that comes with the medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using mesalamine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to mesalamine, salicylate pain relievers such as aspirin, diflunisal, magnesium salicylate (Doan's, others); sulfasalazine (Azulfidine); any other medications; or to any of the ingredients found in mesalamine enemas or suppositories. Tell your doctor if you are allergic to sulfites (substances used as food preservatives and found naturally in some foods) or any foods, dyes, or preservatives. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you more carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had myocarditis (swelling of the heart muscle), pericarditis (swelling of the sac around the heart), asthma, allergies, or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using rectal mesalamine, call your doctor.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to the sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Mesalamine may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that mesalamine may cause a serious reaction. Many of the symptoms of this reaction are similar to the symptoms of ulcerative colitis, so it may be difficult to tell if you are experiencing a reaction to the medication or a flare (episode of symptoms) of your disease. Call your doctor if you experience some or all of the following symptoms: stomach pain or cramping, bloody diarrhea, fever, headache, weakness, or rash.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rectal mesalamine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
leg, back, or joint pain
heartburn
gas
dizziness
hemorrhoids
acne
pain in the rectum
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately:
rash, hives, itching, or peeling or blistering skin
mouth sores or blisters
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, mouth, or throat
fever or flu-like symptoms
swollen glands
red, itchy, irritated, or watery eyes
chest pain
shortness of breath
side or back pain
decreased urination
swelling of the legs, ankles, or feet
difficult or painful urination, pink or red colored urine, or blood in urine
extreme tiredness
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the right upper part of the stomach
pale stools
Mesalamine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). You may store mesalamine suppositories in the refrigerator. Once you open the foil package of mesalamine enemas use all the bottles promptly, as directed by your doctor.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
abdominal pain
fast or shallow breathing
ringing in the ears
headache
dizziness
confusion
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using mesalamine.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Canasa
®
Rowasa
®
sfRowasa
®
Other names
5-ASA
mesalazine
Last Revised -
01/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page