Nitroglycerin Spray: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nitroglycerin Spray
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615006.html
Nitroglycerin Spray
pronounced as (nye troe gli' ser in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nitroglycerin spray is used to treat episodes of angina (chest pain) in people who have coronary artery disease (narrowing of the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart). The spray may also be used just before activities that may cause episodes of angina in order to prevent the angina from occurring. Nitroglycerin is in a class of medications called vasodilators. It works by relaxing the blood vessels so the heart does not need to work as hard and therefore does not need as much oxygen.
How should this medicine be used?
Nitroglycerin comes as a spray to use on or under the tongue. The spray is usually used as needed, either 5 to 10 minutes before activities that may cause attacks of angina or at the first sign of an attack. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use nitroglycerin exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Nitroglycerin may not work as well after you have used it for some time or if you have used many doses. Use the fewest number of sprays needed to relieve the pain of your attacks. If your angina attacks happen more often, last longer, or become more severe at any time during your treatment, call your doctor.
Talk to your doctor about how to use nitroglycerin spray to treat angina attacks. Your doctor will probably tell you to sit down and use one dose of nitroglycerin when an attack begins. If your symptoms do not improve very much or if they worsen after you use this dose you may be told to call for emergency medical help right away. If your symptoms do not go away completely after you use the first dose, your doctor may tell you to use a second dose after 5 minutes have passed and a third dose 5 minutes after the second dose. Call for emergency medical help right away if your chest pain has not gone away completely 5 minutes after you use the third dose.
To use the spray, follow these steps:
Sit down if possible, and hold the container without shaking it. Remove the plastic cap.
If you are using the container for the first time, hold the container upright so that it is pointed away from yourself and others, and press the button 10 times when using Nitromist or 5 times when using Nitrolingual pumpspray to prime the container. If you are not using the container for the first time but have not used it within 6 weeks, press the button 2 times to reprime the container when using Nitromist or 1 time when using Nitrolingual pumpspray. If Nitrolingual has not been used in 3 months or longer, press the button up to 5 times to re-prime the container.
Open your mouth. Hold the container upright, as close to your mouth as possible.
Use your forefinger to press the button firmly. This will release a spray into your mouth. Do not inhale the spray.
Close your mouth. Do not spit out the medication or rinse your mouth for 5 to 10 minutes.
Replace the plastic cap on the container.
Check the level of liquid in the container from time to time to be sure that you will always have enough medication on hand. Hold the container upright while you are checking. If the liquid reaches the top or middle of the hole on the side of the container, you should order more medication. If the liquid is at the bottom of the hole, the container will no longer dispense full doses of medication.
Do not try to open the container of nitroglycerin spray. This product may catch fire, so do not use near an open flame, and do not allow the container to be burned after use.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using nitroglycerin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nitroglycerin patches, tablets, ointment, or spray; any other medications; or any of the ingredients in nitroglycerin tablets or spray. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with nitroglycerin spray. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with nitroglycerin spray. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before using nitroglycerin spray with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using nitroglycerin spray, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription product may interact with nitroglycerin spray: aspirin. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start using nitroglycerin spray. Do not start this medication while using nitroglycerin spray without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you think you have anemia (a lower than normal number of red blood cells), or have had any condition that increases the pressure in your brain or skull. Your doctor may tell you not to use nitroglycerin.
tell your doctor if you think you may be dehydrated, if you have recently had a heart attack, and if you have or have ever had low blood pressure, heart failure, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (thickening of the heart muscle).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using nitroglycerin, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using nitroglycerin.
you should know that you may experience headaches during your treatment with nitroglycerin. These headaches may be a sign that the medication is working as it should. Do not try to change the times that you use nitroglycerin in order to avoid headaches because then the medication may not work as well.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are using nitroglycerin. Alcohol can make the side effects from nitroglycerin worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Nitroglycerin spray is usually used as needed to treat episodes of angina; do not use it on a regularly scheduled basis.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nitroglycerin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section are severe or do not go away:
flushing
fast or pounding heartbeat
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, blistering, or peeling of the skin
nausea
vomiting
weakness
sweating
pale skin
Nitroglycerin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
headache
confusion
fever
dizziness
changes in vision
slow or pounding heartbeat
nausea
vomiting
bloody diarrhea
fainting
shortness of breath
sweating
flushing
cold, clammy skin
loss of ability to move the body
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nitrolingual
®
Pumpspray
Nitromist
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page