Omidenepag Isopropyl Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Omidenepag Isopropyl Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622073.html
Omidenepag Isopropyl Ophthalmic
pronounced as (oh" mi den' e pag eye" soe proe' pil)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Omidenepag isopropyl ophthalmic is used to treat glaucoma (a condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision) and ocular hypertension (a condition which causes increased pressure in the eye). Omidenepag isopropyl is in a class of medications called prostaglandin agonists. It lowers pressure in the eye by increasing the flow of natural eye fluids out of the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Omidenepag isopropyl ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eye. It is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) once a day in the evening. If omidenepag isopropyl is used with other topical eye medications, allow at least 5 minutes between each medication. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use omidenepag isopropyl exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Omidenepag isopropyl controls glaucoma and ocular hypertension but does not cure them. Continue to use omidenepag isopropyl eye drops even if you feel well. Do not stop using omidenepag isopropyl eye drops without talking to your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper cap to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Shake the bottle gently before each use.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Blink you eye a few times to help spread the solution over your entire eye.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure for 2 minutes.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using omidenepag isopropyl,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to omidenepag isopropyl, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in omidenepag isopropyl eye drops. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have had cataract surgery or if you have or ever had macular edema (swelling of the back of the eye) or other inflammation of the eye, including iritis (uveitis; swelling and irritation inside the eye). Also, tell your doctor immediately if you have an eye injury or eye infection.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using omidenepag isopropyl eye drops, call your doctor.
if you are having eye surgery, tell the doctor that you are using omidenepag isopropyl eye drops.
you should know that omidenepag isopropyl may cause blurred vision or other problems with your eyesight and may make your eyes sensitive to bright light. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
if you wear contact lenses, remove them before instilling omidenepag isopropyl. You may put them back in 15 minutes after you instill the drops.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Omidenepag isopropyl may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry eyes
pain after instilling the medication
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
new or worsening eye pain, headache, sensitivity to light, blurred vision, vision changes, redness or swelling of the eye or eyelid, or change in appearance of the eyes
Omidenepag isopropyl may change your eye color to brown or a deeper shade of brown. This color change usually occurs slowly, but it may be permanent. Omidenepag isopropyl also may cause darkening of the eyelid and skin around your eyes and an increase in the length, thickness, color, or number of your eyelashes or fine hair on your eyelids. The eyelash changes and any darkening of the skin around the eyes usually goes away when you stop using omidenepag isopropyl eye drops. If you use omidenepag isopropyl eye drops in only one eye, you should know that there may be a difference in color between your eyes after using the medication. Call your doctor if you notice these changes.
Omidenepag isopropyl may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the bottle it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store unopened bottles in the refrigerator. Opened bottles can be stored at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of the bottle 31 days after opening, even if there is some solution left in the bottle.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will order certain eye tests to check your response to omidenepag isopropyl eye drops.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Omlonti
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page