Anauxetic dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Anauxetic dysplasia
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/anauxetic-dysplasia/
Anauxetic dysplasia
Description
Anauxetic dysplasia is a disorder characterized by extremely short stature (dwarfism) and other skeletal abnormalities, an unusually large range of joint movement (hypermobility), dental problems, and distinctive facial features. Mild intellectual disability can also occur in this disorder.
People with anauxetic dysplasia have dwarfism with unusually short limbs for their height (disproportionate short stature) beginning before birth. Dislocation of the bones at the top of the spine (atlantoaxial subluxation) can also occur in this disorder, and may cause pinching (compression) of the spinal cord. As a result, affected individuals may experience neurological symptoms including pain, tingling, numbness, coordination problems, weakness, and paralysis. In severe cases, the spinal cord compression may lead to paralysis of the muscles needed for breathing, which can be life-threatening during early childhood.
Other skeletal abnormalities in anauxetic dysplasia include a barrel-shaped chest and a rounded upper back that also curves to the side (
kyphoscoliosis
). Without surgical correction, the kyphoscoliosis can constrict the lungs and cause difficulty breathing. People with anauxetic dysplasia can also have an exaggerated curvature of the lower back (hyperlordosis), dislocation of the hips, and soles of the feet that are rounded outward (
rocker-bottom feet
).
Typical facial features in anauxetic dysplasia include closely spaced eyes (
hypotelorism
), a flat or sunken appearance of the middle of the face (midface hypoplasia), an unusually large tongue (macroglossia), and a protruding chin (
prognathism
). Affected individuals can also have fewer teeth than normal (hypodontia).
Frequency
Anauxetic dysplasia is a very rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown.
Causes
Anauxetic dysplasia can be caused by mutations in the
RMRP
gene. Unlike many genes, the
RMRP
gene does not contain instructions for making a protein. Instead, a molecule called a noncoding RNA, a chemical cousin of DNA, is produced from the
RMRP
gene. Several proteins attach (bind) to this RNA molecule, forming an enzyme complex called mitochondrial RNA-processing endoribonuclease, or RNase MRP.
The RNase MRP enzyme is thought to be involved in several important functions in the cell, including processing
ribosomal RNA
. This form of RNA is associated with cell structures called ribosomes, which assemble protein building blocks (
amino acids
) into proteins.
The
RMRP
gene mutations that cause anauxetic dysplasia alter the noncoding RNA produced from the gene, and the RNase MRP enzyme containing the altered noncoding RNA is impaired in its ribosomal RNA processing function. Although the specific mechanism is unknown, impairment of this function likely disrupts skeletal development, leading to the signs and symptoms of anauxetic dysplasia.
Mutations in at least one gene that provides instructions for making a protein component of the RNase MRP enzyme complex can also cause anauxetic dysplasia.
Learn more about the gene associated with Anauxetic dysplasia
RMRP
Additional Information from NCBI Gene:
POP1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
AD
Spondylometaepiphyseal dysplasia, anauxetic type
Spondylometaepiphyseal dysplasia, Menger type
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Anauxetic dysplasia
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
ANAUXETIC DYSPLASIA 1; ANXD1
ANAUXETIC DYSPLASIA 2; ANXD2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Barraza-Garcia J, Rivera-Pedroza CI, Hisado-Oliva A, Belinchon-Martinez A,
Sentchordi-Montane L, Duncan EL, Clark GR, Del Pozo A, Ibanez-Garikano K, Offiah
A, Prieto-Matos P, Cormier-Daire V, Heath KE. Broadening the phenotypic spectrum
of POP1-skeletal dysplasias: identification of POP1 mutations in a mild and
severe skeletal dysplasia. Clin Genet. 2017 Jul;92(1):91-98. doi:
10.1111/cge.12964. Epub 2017 Feb 22.
Citation on PubMed
Elalaoui SC, Laarabi FZ, Mansouri M, Mrani NA, Nishimura G, Sefiani A. Further
evidence of POP1 mutations as the cause of anauxetic dysplasia. Am J Med Genet A.
2016 Sep;170(9):2462-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37839. Epub 2016 Jul 6.
Citation on PubMed
Glazov EA, Zankl A, Donskoi M, Kenna TJ, Thomas GP, Clark GR, Duncan EL, Brown
MA. Whole-exome re-sequencing in a family quartet identifies POP1 mutations as
the cause of a novel skeletal dysplasia. PLoS Genet. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1002027. doi:
10.1371/journal.pgen.1002027. Epub 2011 Mar 24.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Horn D, Rupprecht E, Kunze J, Spranger J. Anauxetic dysplasia, a
spondylometaepiphyseal dysplasia with extreme dwarfism. J Med Genet. 2001
Apr;38(4):262-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.38.4.262. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Thiel CT, Horn D, Zabel B, Ekici AB, Salinas K, Gebhart E, Ruschendorf F,
Sticht H, Spranger J, Muller D, Zweier C, Schmitt ME, Reis A, Rauch A. Severely
incapacitating mutations in patients with extreme short stature identify
RNA-processing endoribonuclease RMRP as an essential cell growth regulator. Am J
Hum Genet. 2005 Nov;77(5):795-806. doi: 10.1086/497708. Epub 2005 Sep 29.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Thiel CT, Mortier G, Kaitila I, Reis A, Rauch A. Type and level of RMRP
functional impairment predicts phenotype in the cartilage hair
hypoplasia-anauxetic dysplasia spectrum. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;81(3):519-29.
doi: 10.1086/521034. Epub 2007 Aug 6.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Thiel CT, Rauch A. The molecular basis of the cartilage-hair
hypoplasia-anauxetic dysplasia spectrum. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2011 Feb;25(1):131-42. doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2010.08.004.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Dwarfism
Genetic Disorders
Scoliosis
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page