Orlistat: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Orlistat
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601244.html
Orlistat
pronounced as (or' li stat)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Orlistat (prescription and nonprescription) is used with an individualized low-calorie, low-fat diet and exercise program to help people lose weight. Prescription orlistat is used in overweight people who may also have high blood pressure, diabetes, high cholesterol, or heart disease. Orlistat is also used after weight-loss to help people keep from gaining back that weight. Orlistat is in a class of medications called lipase inhibitors. It works by preventing some of the fat in foods eaten from being absorbed in the intestines. This unabsorbed fat is then removed from the body in the stool.
How should this medicine be used?
Orlistat comes as a capsule and a nonprescription capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken three times a day with each main meal that contains fat. Take orlistat during a meal or up to 1 hour after a meal. If a meal is missed or does not have fat, you may skip your dose. Follow the directions on your prescription label or the package label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take orlistat exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor or stated on the package.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient if orlistat is prescribed for you. For additional information about the nonprescription product, visit
http://www.MyAlli.com
.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking orlistat,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to orlistat or any other medications.
talk to your doctor if you are taking medications that suppress the immune system such as cyclosporine (Neoral, Sandimmune). If you are taking cyclosporine (Neoral, Sandimmune), take it 3 hours after orlistat. If you are taking levothyroxine, take it at least 4 hours apart from orlistat. If you are taking fat-soluble vitamins and beta-carotene, take it at least 2 hours before or 2 hours after orlistat.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking orlistat. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with orlistat: vitamin E acetate; beta-carotene. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking orlistat. Do not start any of these medications while taking orlistat without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have if you have had an organ transplant or if you have cholestasis (condition in which the flow of bile from the liver is blocked) or malabsorption syndrome (problems absorbing food). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take orlistat.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an eating disorder such as anorexia nervosa or bulimia, diabetes, kidney stones, pancreatitis (inflammation or swelling of the pancreas), or gallbladder or thyroid disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. Do not take orlistat if you are pregnant or breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Follow the diet program your doctor has given you. You should evenly divide the amount of daily fat, carbohydrates, and protein you eat over three main meals. If you take orlistat with a diet high in fat (a diet with more than 30% of the total daily calories from fat), or with one meal very high in fat, you are more likely to experience side effects from the medication.
While you are taking orlistat, you should avoid foods that have more than 30% fat. Read the labels on all the foods you buy. When eating meat, poultry (chicken) or fish, eat only 2 or 3 ounces (55 or 85 grams) (about the size of a deck of cards) for a serving. Choose lean cuts of meat and remove the skin from poultry. Fill up your meal plate with more grains, fruits, and vegetables. Replace whole-milk products with nonfat or 1% milk and reduced- or low-fat dairy items. Cook with less fat. Use vegetable oil spray when cooking. Salad dressings; many baked items; and prepackaged, processed, and fast foods are usually high in fat. Use the low- or nonfat versions of these foods and/or cut back on serving sizes. When dining out, ask how foods are prepared and request that they be prepared with little or no added fat.
Orlistat blocks your body's absorption of some fat-soluble vitamins and beta carotene. Therefore, when you use orlistat you should take a daily multivitamin that contains vitamins A, D, E, K, and beta-carotene. Read the label to find a multivitamin product that contains these vitamins. Take the multivitamin once a day, 2 hours before or 2 hours after taking orlistat, or take the multivitamin at bedtime. Ask your doctor or pharmacist any questions you might have about taking a multivitamin while you are taking orlistat.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it unless it is more than 1 hour since you ate a main meal. If it is longer than 1 hour since you ate a main meal, skip the missed dose and continue on your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Orlistat may cause side effects. The most common side effect of orlistat is changes in bowel movement (BM) habits. This generally occurs during the first weeks of treatment; however, it may continue throughout your use of orlistat. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
oily spotting on underwear or on clothing
gas with oily spotting
urgent need to have a bowel movement
loose stools
oily or fatty stools
increased number of bowel movements
difficulty controlling bowel movements
pain or discomfort in the rectum (bottom)
stomach pain
irregular menstrual periods
headache
anxiety
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
severe or continuous stomach pain
excessive tiredness or weakness
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark-colored urine
light-colored stools
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
Orlistat may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems during your treatment with orlistat.
Some people who took orlistat developed severe liver damage. There is not enough information to tell whether the liver damage was caused by orlistat. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking orlistat.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat, moisture (not in the bathroom), and light.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
You should also follow a program of regular physical activity or exercise while you are taking orlistat. However, before you start any new activity or exercise program, talk with your doctor or health care professional.
Do not let anyone else take your prescription medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Alli
®
Xenical
®
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page