Leniolisib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Leniolisib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623016.html
Leniolisib
pronounced as (len" i oh lis' ib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Leniolisib is used to treat adults and children 12 years of age and older who have activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta syndrome (APDS; an genetic condition that decreases the activity of the immune system and can result in recurrent infections, swollen lymph nodes and spleen, and a certain type of lymphoma [a type of blood cancer]). Leniolisib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the signals that cause abnormalities in the immune system, which improves the functions of the immune system.
How should this medicine be used?
Leniolisib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food twice a day, about 12 hours apart. Take leniolisib at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take leniolisib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you vomit with 1 hour after you take leniolisib, take another dose as soon as possible. If you vomit more than 1 hour after you take leniolisib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking leniolisib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to leniolisib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in leniolisib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with leniolisib: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your healthcare provider know that you are taking this medication before you start taking leniolisib. Do not start this medication while taking leniolisib without talking to your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You will need to take a pregnancy test before you take leniolisib. You should not become pregnant while you are taking leniolisib. You should use effective birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with leniolisib and for 1 week after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant while taking leniolisib, call your doctor immediately. Leniolisib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while receiving leniolisib and for 1 week after your final dose.
do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is less than 6 hours before your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Leniolisib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
nasal congestion, runny nose
dry and itchy skin
red or scaly rash
diarrhea
tiredness
neck or back pain
hair loss
fever
fast heartbeat
Leniolisib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Joenja
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page