Azithromycin ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Azithromycin ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624056.html
Azithromycin ophthalmic
pronounced as (az ith roe mye' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Azithromycin ophthalmic is used to treat certain bacterial infections of the eye. Azithromycin ophthalmic is in a class of medications called macrolide antibiotics. It works by slowing the growth of bacteria that cause infections.
How should this medicine be used?
Azithromycin ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eyes. It is usually placed in the infected eye(s) twice daily (about 8 to 12 hours apart) for 2 days and then once daily for the next 5 days. Use azithromycin ophthalmic around the same times each day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use azithromycin ophthalmic exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with azithromycin ophthalmic. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Use azithromycin ophthalmic until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using azithromycin ophthalmic too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
To use the eye drops follow these steps:
Wash your hands with soap and water
Turn the bottle upside down and shake once
Remove the tan cap of the bottle
Tilt the head back and with bottle still upside down, squeeze bottle to instill 1 drop into the eye(s)
Do not allow the tip of the bottle to touch your eye or touching with your finger or anything else. If the tip does touch another surface, bacteria may get into the eye drops. Using eye drops that are contaminated with bacteria may cause serious damage to the eye or loss of vision. If you think your eye drops have become contaminated, call your doctor or pharmacist.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using azithromycin ophthalmic,
Avoid wearing contact lens until the infection has resolved.
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in azithromycin ophthalmic. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using azithromycin ophthalmic, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Azithromycin ophthalmic may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye irritation
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
facial swelling, hives, rash, itching
Azithromycin ophthalmic may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the bottle in the refrigerator until time to use. Once opened, store at room temperature for 14 days and then throw away any you haven't used.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the azithromycin ophthalmic, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Azasite
®
Last Revised -
10/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page