Pyle disease: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Pyle disease
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pyle-disease/
Pyle disease
Description
Pyle disease is a disorder of the bones. Its hallmark feature is an abnormality of the long bones in the arms and legs in which the ends (metaphyses) of the bones are abnormally broad; the shape of the bones resembles a boat oar or paddle. The broad metaphyses are due to enlargement of the spongy inner layer of bone (trabecular bone). Although trabecular bone is expanded, the dense outermost layer of bone (cortical bone) is thinner than normal. As a result, the bones are fragile and fracture easily. The bone abnormalities in the legs commonly cause knock knees (
genu valgum
) in affected individuals.
Other bone abnormalities can also occur in Pyle disease. Affected individuals may have widened collar bones (clavicles), ribs, or bones in the fingers and hands. Dental problems are common in Pyle disease, including delayed appearance (eruption) of permanent teeth and misalignment of the top and bottom teeth (malocclusion).
Frequency
Pyle disease is thought to be a rare disorder, although its prevalence is unknown. More than 25 cases have been described in the medical literature.
Causes
Pyle disease is caused by mutations in the
SFRP4
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that blocks (inhibits) a process called Wnt signaling, which is involved in the development of several tissues and organs throughout the body. In particular, regulation of Wnt signaling by the SFRP4 protein is critical for normal bone development and remodeling. Bone remodeling is a normal process in which old bone is broken down and new bone is created to replace it. Mutations in the
SFRP4
gene are thought to prevent the production of functional SFRP4 protein. The resulting dysregulation of Wnt signaling leads to the bone abnormalities characteristic of Pyle disease.
Learn more about the gene associated with Pyle disease
SFRP4
Inheritance
Pyle disease is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the
SFRP4
gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene. While they do not develop the condition, they may have mild abnormalities of the long bones.
Other Names for This Condition
Metaphyseal dysplasia, Pyle type
Pyle metaphyseal dysplasia
Pyle's disease
Pyle's metaphyseal dysplasia syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Pyle metaphyseal dysplasia
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Pyle disease
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
PYLE DISEASE; PYL
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Galada C, Shah H, Shukla A, Girisha KM. A novel sequence variant in SFRP4
causing Pyle disease. J Hum Genet. 2017 Apr;62(5):575-576. doi:
10.1038/jhg.2016.166. Epub 2017 Jan 19.
Citation on PubMed
Haraguchi R, Kitazawa R, Mori K, Tachibana R, Kiyonari H, Imai Y, Abe T,
Kitazawa S. sFRP4-dependent Wnt signal modulation is critical for bone remodeling
during postnatal development and age-related bone loss. Sci Rep. 2016 Apr
27;6:25198. doi: 10.1038/srep25198.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Kiper POS, Saito H, Gori F, Unger S, Hesse E, Yamana K, Kiviranta R, Solban N,
Liu J, Brommage R, Boduroglu K, Bonafe L, Campos-Xavier B, Dikoglu E, Eastell R,
Gossiel F, Harshman K, Nishimura G, Girisha KM, Stevenson BJ, Takita H, Rivolta
C, Superti-Furga A, Baron R. Cortical-Bone Fragility--Insights from sFRP4
Deficiency in Pyle's Disease. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 30;374(26):2553-2562. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa1509342.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Wonkam A, Makubalo N, Roberts T, Chetty M. Pyle metaphyseal dysplasia in an
African child: Case report and review of the literature. S Afr Med J. 2016 May
25;106(6 Suppl 1):S110-3. doi: 10.7196/SAMJ.2016.v106i6.11011.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Bone Diseases
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page