Ferric Carboxymaltose Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ferric Carboxymaltose Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614037.html
Ferric Carboxymaltose Injection
pronounced as (fer' ik) (kar box'' ee mawl' tose)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ferric carboxymaltose injection is used to treat certain patients with a type of anemia (a lower than normal number of red blood cells) caused by too little iron in the body. Ferric carboxymaltose injection is also used to treat a lack of iron in the body to improve exercise ability in certain adults with congestive heart failure (a condition when your heart cannot pump enough blood to the other parts of the body). Ferric carboxymaltose injection is in a class of medications called iron replacement products. It works by providing iron to help the body make more red blood cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Ferric carboxymaltose injection comes as a solution (liquid) to inject intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or hospital outpatient clinic. Your doctor will tell you how many doses and how often you will receive ferric carboxymaltose injection. The schedule depends on the condition you have and how your body responds to the medication.
Ferric carboxymaltose injection may cause severe or life-threatening reactions during and shortly after you receive the medication. Your doctor will watch you carefully while you receive each dose of ferric carboxymaltose injection and for at least 30 minutes afterwards. Your doctor will also check your blood pressure frequently during this time. Tell your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms during or after your injection: shortness of breath; wheezing; difficulty swallowing or breathing; hoarseness; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes; hives; rash; itching; fainting; lightheadedness; dizziness; flushing of the face; nausea; cold, clammy skin; rapid, weak pulse; chest pain; or loss of consciousness. If you experience a severe reaction, your doctor will stop your injection immediately and provide emergency medical treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving ferric carboxymaltose injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Also, tell your doctor if you are taking iron supplements that are taken by mouth. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have low blood levels of phosphate or are unable to eat a healthy diet. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a stomach or intestinal disorder in which you are unable to absorb certain vitamins, a vitamin D deficiency, inflammatory bowel disease, high blood pressure, or parathyroid disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving ferric carboxymaltose injection, call your doctor. Ferric carboxymaltose injection may harm the fetus.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive ferric carboxymaltose injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ferric carboxymaltose injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
changes in taste
headache
pain, swelling, itching, bleeding, or bruising in the area where medication was injected
brown discoloration of the skin in the area where the medication was injected that may be long-lasting
hot flashes or flushing
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency treatment:
muscle weakness or pain, bone or joint pain, fatigue, or broken bones or fractures
Ferric carboxymaltose injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
joint problems
difficulty walking
muscle weakness
bone pain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to ferric carboxymaltose injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving ferric carboxymaltose injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Injectafer
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page