Sofpironium: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sofpironium
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624052.html
Sofpironium
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sofpironium is used to treat excessive underarm sweating in adults and children 9 years of age and older. Sofpironium is in a class of medications called anticholinergics. It works by blocking the activity of a certain natural substance that triggers the sweat glands to produce sweat.
How should this medicine be used?
Sofpironium comes as a gel to apply to the underarm skin. It is usually applied once daily at bedtime. Use sofpironium at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use sofpironium exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Apply this medication to clean, dry, intact skin only. Do not apply to broken skin. Do not cover the treated area with a plastic dressing.
Sofpironium gel is flammable. Do not use this medication near smoking or a source of heat or open flame.
Before applying sofpironium gel, make sure that you do not shave or apply deodorant to your underarms within 8 hours. Also do not exercise or shower or wash your underarms within 30 minutes before application.
To apply the gel to your underarm areas, follow these steps:
If you are using the bottle for the first time, hold the bottle over a sink and press the pump down one or two times until you see gel coming out. Use water to wash the gel down the sink. Do not touch any gel in the sink.
Remove all clothing around both underarms.
Dry both underarms with a clean towel.
Put one full pump of gel onto the top of the applicator.
Spread the gel around your underarm using the applicator. Be careful not to touch the gel or get it on other areas of your body.
Repeat the application to your other underarm.
Let both underarms dry for 5 minutes. Keep clothing away from the area until it dries.
Rinse and dry applicator.
Wash your hands with soap and water.
Do not shower or wash your underarms for at least 8 hours after application.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using sofpironium,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to sofpironium, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in sofpironium gel. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
> tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using sofpironium gel. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glaucoma (increased pressure in the eye that may lead to vision loss), any type of blockage in the digestive system, ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum), any other bowel problems associated with ulcerative colitis, myasthenia gravis (a disorder of the nervous system that causes muscle weakness), or Sjogren syndrome (disorder of the immune system that causes dry eyes and mouth). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take sofpironium.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had difficulty urinating, urinary obstruction (a blockage of urine flowing out of the bladder), benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH, enlargement of the prostate), or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking sofpironium, call your doctor.
you should know that using sofpironium may cause you to have blurred vision. If you develop blurred vision during your treatment, stop using the medication and call your doctor. Do not drive, operate machinery, or do hazardous work until your vision improves.
you should know that using sofpironium reduces the body's ability to cool off by sweating. When in very hot temperatures, stop using sofpironium if you notice that you are not sweating. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: hot, red skin; decreased alertness; loss of consciousness; fast, weak pulse; fast, shallow breathing; or fever.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra sofpironium gel to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sofpironium may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth
blurred vision
widened pupils (black circles in the middle of the eyes)
pain, redness, itching, irritation, or rash in the underarm area
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
difficulty urinating, or urinating in a weak stream or drips
Sofpironium may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sofdra
®
Last Revised -
09/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page