Niraparib and Abiraterone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Niraparib and Abiraterone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623037.html
Niraparib and Abiraterone
pronounced as (nye rap' a rib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Niraparib and abiraterone is used in combination with prednisone to treat a certain type of prostate cancer that has already been treated with other medications and has spread to other parts of the body. Niraparib is in a class of medications called poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. It works by killing cancer cells. Abiraterone is in a class of medications called androgen biosynthesis inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of certain hormones in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Niraparib and abiraterone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken on an empty stomach once a day, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal for as long as your doctor recommends treatment. Take niraparib and abiraterone at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take niraparib and abiraterone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with water; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Continue to take niraparib and abiraterone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking niraparib and abiraterone or prednisone without talking to your doctor.
Your doctor may need to stop or delay your treatment or decrease your dose if you experience certain severe side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking niraparib and abiraterone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to niraparib, abiraterone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in niraparib and abiraterone tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with niraparib and abiraterone: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking niraparib and abiraterone. Do not start this medication while taking niraparib and abiraterone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have an infection, a low level of potassium in your blood, are experiencing unusual stress, or have had a recent heart attack. Also, tell your doctor if you have or have ever had adrenal problems such as Cushing's syndrome, Addison's disease, or adrenal or pituitary tumors; diabetes; heart failure; an irregular heartbeat, including QT prolongation (an irregular heart rhythm that can lead to fainting, loss of consciousness, seizures, or sudden death); high blood pressure; or heart, kidney, or liver disease.
you should know that niraparib and abiraterone is only for use in men. Women should not take this medication, especially if they are or may become pregnant or are breast feeding. If taken by pregnant women, niraparib and abiraterone may harm the fetus. Women who are, could become, or may be pregnant should not touch niraparib and abiraterone tablets without protective gloves. If a pregnant woman takes or touches niraparib and abiraterone tablets, she should call her doctor immediately.
men taking abiraterone must use effective contraception during treatment and for 4 months weeks after the final dose before sexual activity with a female partner. Talk to your doctor about the types of birth control that are right for you.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking niraparib and abiraterone.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking niraparib and abiraterone.
you should know that niraparib and abiraterone may cause an increase in blood glucose. If you have diabetes or high blood sugar, check your blood sugar as often as directed by your doctor. If your blood sugar is higher than usual, call your doctor. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking niraparib and abiraterone: headache, drowsiness, dizziness, feeling jittery, extreme hunger, irritability, fast heartbeat, sweating, confusion, or weakness. Your doctor may need to change your diet or medication to help control your blood sugar while you are taking niraparib and abiraterone.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it on the same day. However, if it is the next day, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Niraparib and abiraterone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
muscle or bone pain
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
nausea
vomiting
constipation
loss of appetite
rash
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
pale skin
shortness of breath
weakness
tiredness
weight loss
bruising or bleeding easily
blood in urine or stool
burning feeling when you urinate
frequent or urgent need to urinate
fever, cough, runny nose, or other signs of infection
dizziness
feeling faint or lightheaded
headache
confusion
fast or irregular heartbeats
muscle weakness
leg pain
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
lack of energy
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
bone fracture
headache, vision changes, confusion, or seizure
Niraparib and abiraterone may increase the risk that you will develop other cancers. Talk to your doctor about this risk.
Niraparib and abiraterone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
fast or irregular heartbeats
shortness of breath
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order a blood test to help decide if this medication is right for you. Your doctor will check your blood pressure regularly and order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to niraparib and abiraterone.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Akeega
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page