Epinephrine Nasal Spray: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Epinephrine Nasal Spray
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624049.html
Epinephrine Nasal Spray
pronounced as (ep'' i nef' rin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Epinephrine nasal spray is used to treat symptoms of an anaphylacticreaction (severe, life-threatening allergic reaction where symptoms can include face or mouth or throat swelling, rash or hives and difficulty breathing) in adults and some children. Epinephrine nasal spray is in a class of medications called alpha- and beta-adrenergic agonists (sympathomimetic agents). It works by relaxing the muscles in the airways and tightening the blood vessels.
How should this medicine be used?
Epinephrine nasal spray comes as a solution (liquid) to spray in the nose. It is usually given as one spray in one nostril at the first sign of an anaphylactic reaction. If after 5 minutes symptoms do not improve or worsen, then a second spray can be given in the same nostril.
After using epinephrine nasal spray, you should report for emergency care for evaluation to determine if any additional treatment is needed.
Each epinephrine nasal spray is for single use. If you use an epinephrine nasal spray, it is important that you replace it with a new one right away. It is recommended that anyone prescribed epinephrine nasal spray always carry it with them and always have two doses of it available.
Give a dose of epinephrine nasal spray by fully inserting the nozzle of one nasal spray into the nostril. Making sure to keep the nozzle straight in the nose, press the plunger down firmly. Avoid sniffing while receiving epinephrine nasal spray.
Review the instructions for use that comes with epinephrine nasal spray and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any other questions.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using epinephrine nasal spray,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to epinephrine, sulfites, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in epinephrine nasal spray. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking epinephrine nasal spray. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
use of epinephrine nasal spray may cause increased side absorption of other nasal spray medications increasing risk of experiences side effects for up to 2 weeks after using epinephrine nasal spray. Make sure to ask your doctor or pharmacist about using any of the following nasal sprays if you have to use a dose of epinephrine nasal spray: fluticasone nasal spray (Flonase), azelastine nasal spray (Astepro), triamcinolone nasal spray (Nasacort), budesonide nasal spray (Rhinocort), oxymetazoline nasal spray (Afrin).
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had nasal polyps (non-cancerous growth on inside of nose), history of surgery or procedure on nose or history of injury or fracture of the nose. Your doctor may tell you not to use epinephrine nasal spray.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had chest pain, irregular heartbeat, high blood pressure, or heart disease; asthma; diabetes; hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid); depression; Parkinson's disease; or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Epinephrine nasal spray may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
throat irritation
tingling nose, nasal discomfort, sneezing, itchy nose, nasal congestion or runny nose
headache
feeling jittery or excited, nervous or anxious
shakiness or dizziness
headache
stomach pain or nausea or vomiting
Epinephrine nasal spray may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not allow to freeze.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
If someone swallows epinephrine nasal spray, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
feeling slow or racing heart rate or of irregular heart beat
rapid breathing or difficulty breathing
pale and clammy skin
difficulty urinating
loss of consciousness
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Neffy
®
Last Revised -
09/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page