NGLY1-congenital disorder of deglycosylation: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
NGLY1-congenital disorder of deglycosylation
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/ngly1-congenital-disorder-of-deglycosylation/
NGLY1-congenital disorder of deglycosylation
Description
NGLY1
-congenital disorder of deglycosylation (
NGLY1
-CDDG) is an inherited condition that affects many parts of the body. The severity of the signs and symptoms varies widely among people with the condition.
Individuals with
NGLY1
-CDDG typically develop features of the condition during infancy. They often have delayed development of speech and motor skills, such as sitting and walking, and weak muscle tone (hypotonia). Many affected individuals have movement abnormalities, such as uncontrolled movements of the limbs (choreoathetosis), and some develop seizures that are difficult to treat. Individuals with
NGLY1
-CDDG may also have problems with
liver
function. Some affected individuals have
eye
abnormalities, including degeneration of the nerves that carry information from the eyes to the brain (optic atrophy) and changes in the light-sensing tissue at the back of the eye (the retina). A reduction or absence of tears (hypolacrima or alacrima) is a common feature of
NGLY1
-CDDG.
Frequency
NGLY1
-CDDG is a rare disorder. At least 46 individuals with the condition have been described in the medical literature.
Causes
NGLY1
-CDDG is caused by mutations in the
NGLY1
gene. The enzyme produced from this gene, called
N
-glycanase 1, helps cells get rid of abnormal proteins. It removes chains of sugars (glycans) from misfolded proteins through a process called deglycosylation, which is thought to be an essential step for certain abnormal proteins to be broken down. The gene mutations that cause
NGLY1
-CDDG impair production of the
N
-glycanase 1 enzyme, resulting in a severe reduction or absence of the enzyme's function. Without the removal of glycans, the misfolded proteins cannot be broken down. It is thought that the abnormal proteins accumulate and form clumps (aggregates) in cells. These aggregates may damage cells in the brain, liver, and eyes, leading to the signs and symptoms of
NGLY1
-CDDG.
Learn more about the gene associated with NGLY1-congenital disorder of deglycosylation
NGLY1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Congenital disorder of deglycosylation
Deficiency of N-glycanase 1
NGLY1-CDDG
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital disorder of deglycosylation
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Alacrimia-choreoathetosis-liver dysfunction syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF DEGLYCOSYLATION 1; CDDG1
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Enns GM, Shashi V, Bainbridge M, Gambello MJ, Zahir FR, Bast T, Crimian R,
Schoch K, Platt J, Cox R, Bernstein JA, Scavina M, Walter RS, Bibb A, Jones M,
Hegde M, Graham BH, Need AC, Oviedo A, Schaaf CP, Boyle S, Butte AJ, Chen R, Chen
R, Clark MJ, Haraksingh R; FORGE Canada Consortium; Cowan TM, He P, Langlois S,
Zoghbi HY, Snyder M, Gibbs RA, Freeze HH, Goldstein DB. Mutations in NGLY1 cause
an inherited disorder of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation
pathway. Genet Med. 2014 Oct;16(10):751-8. doi: 10.1038/gim.2014.22. Epub 2014
Mar 20.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
He P, Grotzke JE, Ng BG, Gunel M, Jafar-Nejad H, Cresswell P, Enns GM, Freeze
HH. A congenital disorder of deglycosylation: Biochemical characterization of
N-glycanase 1 deficiency in patient fibroblasts. Glycobiology. 2015
Aug;25(8):836-44. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwv024. Epub 2015 Apr 21.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Huang C, Harada Y, Hosomi A, Masahara-Negishi Y, Seino J, Fujihira H,
Funakoshi Y, Suzuki T, Dohmae N, Suzuki T. Endo-beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase forms
N-GlcNAc protein aggregates during ER-associated degradation in Ngly1-defective
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 3;112(5):1398-403. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1414593112. Epub 2015 Jan 20.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Lam C, Ferreira C, Krasnewich D, Toro C, Latham L, Zein WM, Lehky T, Brewer C,
Baker EH, Thurm A, Farmer CA, Rosenzweig SD, Lyons JJ, Schreiber JM, Gropman A,
Lingala S, Ghany MG, Solomon B, Macnamara E, Davids M, Stratakis CA, Kimonis V,
Gahl WA, Wolfe L. Prospective phenotyping of NGLY1-CDDG, the first congenital
disorder of deglycosylation. Genet Med. 2017 Feb;19(2):160-168. doi:
10.1038/gim.2016.75. Epub 2016 Jul 7.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Metabolic Disorders
Movement Disorders
Tears
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Hypotonia
Movement - uncontrolled or slow
Seizures
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page