Ofloxacin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ofloxacin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a691005.html
Ofloxacin
pronounced as (oh floks' a sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Taking ofloxacin increases the risk that you will develop tendinitis (swelling of a fibrous tissue that connects a bone to a muscle) or have a tendon rupture (tearing of a fibrous tissue that connects a bone to a muscle) during your treatment or for up to several months afterward. These problems may affect tendons in your shoulder, your hand, the back of your ankle, or in other parts of your body. Tendinitis or tendon rupture may happen to people of any age, but the risk is highest in people over 60 years of age. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a kidney, heart, or lung transplant; kidney disease; a joint or tendon disorder such as rheumatoid arthritis (a condition in which the body attacks its own joints, causing pain, swelling, and loss of function); or if you participate in regular physical activity. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking oral or injectable steroids such as dexamethasone , methylprednisolone (Medrol), or prednisone (Rayos). If you experience any of the following symptoms of tendinitis, stop taking ofloxacin, rest, and call your doctor immediately: pain, swelling, tenderness, stiffness, or difficulty in moving a muscle. If you experience any of the following symptoms of tendon rupture, stop taking ofloxacin and get emergency medical treatment: hearing or feeling a snap or pop in a tendon area, bruising after an injury to a tendon area, or inability to move or bear weight on an affected area.
Taking ofloxacin may cause changes in sensation and nerve damage that may not go away even after you stop taking ofloxacin. This damage may occur soon after you begin taking ofloxacin. Tell your doctor if you have ever had peripheral neuropathy (a type of nerve damage that causes tingling, numbness, and pain in the hands and feet). If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking gemifloxacin and call your doctor immediately: numbness, tingling, pain, burning, or weakness in the arms or legs; or a change in your ability to feel light touch, vibrations, pain, heat, or cold.
Taking ofloxacin may affect your brain or nervous system and cause serious side effects. This can occur after the first dose of ofloxacin. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had seizures, epilepsy, cerebral arteriosclerosis (narrowing of blood vessels in or near the brain that can lead to stroke or ministroke), stroke, changed brain structure, or kidney disease. If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking ofloxacin and call your doctor immediately: seizures; tremors; dizziness; lightheadedness; headaches that won't go away (with or without blurred vision); difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep; nightmares; not trusting others or feeling that others want to hurt you; hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist); thoughts or actions towards hurting or killing yourself; feeling restless, anxious, nervous, depressed, memory problems, or confused, or other changes in your mood or behavior.
Taking ofloxacin may worsen muscle weakness in people with myasthenia gravis (a disorder of the nervous system that causes muscle weakness) and cause severe difficulty breathing or death. Tell your doctor if you have myasthenia gravis. Your doctor may tell you not to take ofloxacin. If you have myasthenia gravis and your doctor tells you that you should take ofloxacin, call your doctor immediately if you experience muscle weakness or difficulty breathing during your treatment.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking ofloxacin.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with ofloxacin. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs
) or check the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ofloxacin is used to treat certain infections including pneumonia, and infections of the skin, bladder, reproductive organs, and prostate (a male reproductive gland). Ofloxacin may also be used to treat bronchitis and urinary tract infections but should not be used for bronchitis and some types of urinary tract infections if other treatments are available. Ofloxacin is in a class of antibiotics called fluoroquinolones. It works by killing bacteria that cause infections.
Antibiotics such as ofloxacin will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Ofloxacin comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food twice a day for 3 days to 6 weeks. The length of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated. Your doctor will tell you how long to take ofloxacin. Take ofloxacin at around the same times every day and try to space your doses 12 hours apart. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take ofloxacin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of your treatment with ofloxacin. If your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse, call your doctor.
Take ofloxacin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. Do not stop taking ofloxacin without talking to your doctor unless you experience certain serious side effects that are listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING and SIDE EFFECT sections. If you stop taking ofloxacin too soon or if you skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
Ofloxacin is also sometimes used to treat other types of infection, including Legionnaires' disease (type of lung infection), certain sexually transmitted diseases, infections of the bones and joints and of the stomach and intestines. Ofloxacin may also be used to treat or prevent anthrax or plague (serious infections that may be spread on purpose as part of a bioterror attack) in people who may have been exposed to the germs that cause these infections in the air. Ofloxacin may also be used to treat or prevent travelers' diarrhea in certain patients. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using ofloxacin to treat your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ofloxacin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic or have had a severe reaction to ofloxacin; other quinolone or fluoroquinolone antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin (Cipro), gemifloxacin (Factive), levofloxacin (Levaquin), and moxifloxacin (Avelox); any other medications; or any of the ingredients in ofloxacin tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking ofloxacin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking antacids containing aluminum, calcium, or magnesium (Maalox, Mylanta, Tums, others); or certain medications such as didanosine (Videx) solution; sucralfate (Carafate); or supplements or multivitamins containing iron or zinc, take ofloxacin 2 hours before or 2 hours after you take these medications.
the following nonprescription products may interact with ofloxacin: cimetidine (Tagamet); nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking ofloxacin. Do not start any of these medications while taking ofloxacin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death). Also, tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an irregular or slow heartbeat, a heart attack, an aortic aneurysm (swelling of the large artery that carries blood from the heart to the body), high blood pressure, peripheral vascular disease (poor circulation in the blood vessels), Marfan syndrome (a genetic condition that can affect the heart, eyes, blood vessels and bones), Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (a genetic condition that can affect skin, joints, or blood vessels), or have a low level of potassium or magnesium in your blood. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes or problems with low blood sugar or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking ofloxacin, call your doctor.
do not drive a car, operate machinery, or participate in activities requiring alertness or coordination until you know how ofloxacin affects you.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and ultraviolet light (tanning beds and sunlamps) and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Ofloxacin may make your skin sensitive to sunlight or ultraviolet light. If your skin becomes reddened, swollen, or blistered, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Make sure you drink plenty of water or other fluids every day while you are taking ofloxacin.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one and do not take more than two doses of ofloxacin in one day.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ofloxacin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
diarrhea
constipation
gas
vomiting
stomach pain or cramps
change in ability to taste food
loss of appetite
dry mouth
excessive tiredness
pale skin
pain, swelling, or itching of the vagina
If you experience any of the following symptoms, or any of the symptoms described in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, stop taking ofloxacin and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical help:
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
rash
hives
itching
peeling or blistering of the skin
fever
swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, lips, tongue, throat, hands, feet, ankles or lower legs
hoarseness or throat tightness
difficulty breathing or swallowing
ongoing or worsening cough
yellowing of the skin or eyes; pale skin; dark urine; or light colored stool
extreme thirst or hunger; pale skin; feeling shaky or trembling; fast or fluttering heartbeat; sweating; frequent urination; trembling; blurred vision; or unusual anxiety
fainting or loss of consciousness
unusual bruising or bleeding
sudden pain in the chest, stomach, or back
Ofloxacin may cause problems with bones, joints, and tissues around joints in children. Ofloxacin should not be given to children younger than 18 years of age.
Ofloxacin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
drowsiness
nausea
dizziness
hot and cold flushes
numbness and swelling of the face
slurred speech
confusion
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to ofloxacin.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking ofloxacin. If you have diabetes, your doctor may ask you to check your blood sugar more often while taking ofloxacin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish taking ofloxacin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Floxin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page