Erythromycin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Erythromycin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682381.html
Erythromycin
pronounced as (er ith roe mye' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Erythromycin is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria, such as infections of the respiratory tract, including bronchitis, pneumonia, Legionnaires' disease (a type of lung infection), and pertussis (whooping cough; a serious infection that can cause severe coughing); diphtheria (a serious infection in the throat); sexually transmitted diseases (STD), including syphilis; and ear, intestine, gynecological, urinary tract, and skin infections. It also is used to prevent recurrent rheumatic fever. Erythromycin is in a class of medications called macrolide antibiotics. It works by stopping the growth of bacteria.
Antibiotics such as erythromycin will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Erythromycin comes as a capsule, tablet, delayed-release (releases the medication in the intestine to prevent break-down of the medication by stomach acids) capsule, delayed-release tablet, and an oral suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. It usually is taken with or without food every 6 hours (four times a day), every 8 hours (three times a day), or every 12 hours (twice a day). Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take erythromycin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the suspension well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
If you are taking the suspension, do not use a household spoon to measure your dose. Use the measuring spoon, dropper, or cup that came with the medication or use a spoon made especially for measuring medication.
Swallow the capsules and tablets whole with a full glass of water; do not chew or crush them.
Continue to take erythromycin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking erythromycin without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Erythromycin is also used sometimes used to prevent heart infection in people having dental or other procedures. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking erythromycin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to erythromycin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in erythromycin capsules, tablets, or suspension. Ask your pharmacist or check the manufacturer's patient information for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with erythromycin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with erthromycin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting erthromycin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking erythromycin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause fainting or irregular heartbeat), an irregular heartbeat, low levels of magnesium or potassium in your blood, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking erythromycin, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking erythromycin.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Erythromycin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
diarrhea
vomiting
stomach pain
loss of appetite
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
itching
hives
difficulty breathing or swallowing
wheezing
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark urine
pale stools
unusual tiredness
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
seizures
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to erythromycin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the erythromycin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
EES
®
¶
ERY-C
®
Ery-Tab
®
Erythrocin
®
PCE
®
Pediamycin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page