Spastic paraplegia type 2: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Spastic paraplegia type 2
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spastic-paraplegia-type-2/
Spastic paraplegia type 2
Description
Spastic paraplegia type 2 belongs to a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by muscle stiffness (spasticity) and weakness that worsens over time and paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complex. The pure (also called uncomplicated) types only involve the legs. The complex (also called complicated) types involve the lower limbs and can also affect the upper limbs to a lesser degree. The complex type can also affect the structure or function of the brain. It can also affect the network of nerves (the peripheral nervous system) that connects the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound.
Spastic paraplegia type 2 can be classified as either pure or complex, depending on the signs and symptoms. The pure type of this condition is more common. The complex type of spastic paraplegia type 2 is sometimes called hypomyelination of early myelinating structures (HEMS).
People with the pure type of spastic paraplegia type 2 experience spasticity in the leg muscles. Over time, affected individuals may lose the ability to walk. Some affected individuals may also have poor bladder control. The signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 2 usually appear between the ages of 1 and 5 years, but it can develop later in life. Individuals with spastic paraplegia type 2 typically have a normal lifespan.
In addition to leg spasticity and poor bladder control, people with HEMS can also experience problems with movement and balance (ataxia); involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus); and involuntary, rhythmic shaking (tremor). They may also have mild intellectual disabilities and degeneration (atrophy) of the optic nerves, which carry information from the eyes to the brain. The signs and symptoms of HEMS also typically appear between the ages of 1 and 5 years. Individuals with HEMS usually survive into mid to late adulthood.
Frequency
There are more than 80 different types of hereditary spastic paraplegia, and the combined prevalence of all these types is estimated to be 1 to 18 in 100,000 people worldwide. Spastic paraplegia type 2 likely accounts for only a small percentage of all hereditary spastic paraplegia cases.
Causes
Variants (also called mutations) in the
PLP1
gene cause spastic paraplegia type 2. The
PLP1
gene provides instructions for producing proteolipid protein 1 and a modified version (isoform) of that protein, called DM20. Proteolipid protein 1 and DM20 are primarily located in the brain and spinal cord (the central nervous system) and are the main proteins found in myelin, the fatty covering that insulates nerve fibers.
The variants in the
PLP1
gene that cause spastic paraplegia type 2 cause cells to produce a smaller amount of functional proteolipid protein 1. These changes typically affect the production of proteolipid protein 1 but not DM20. As a result, the central nervous system is able to form some myelin, though it produces less myelin than normal (hypomyelination). People with HEMS typically have more severe hypomyelination than people with the pure type of spastic paraplegia type 2. If nerve fibers are not properly myelinated during development, the nervous system does not function as it should, resulting in the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 2.
Learn more about the gene associated with Spastic paraplegia type 2
PLP1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an X-linked pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the altered gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two
sex chromosomes
in each cell. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a variant in the only copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
In females (who have two copies of the X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene may or may not cause the features of the condition. For females with a
PLP1
gene variant who are affected, signs and symptoms typically develop later in adulthood and, in addition to the features of spastic paraplegia, may include a decline in intellectual functioning (dementia).
Other Names for This Condition
Hereditary spastic paraplegia type 2
PLP1 hereditary spastic paraplegia
Spastic paraparesis type 2
Spastic paraplegia 2
SPG2
X-linked spastic paraplegia 2
X-linked spastic paraplegia type 2
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia 2
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Hereditary spastic paraplegia
Spastic paraplegia type 2
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 2, X-LINKED; SPG2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Boespflug-Tanguy O. Inborn errors of brain myelin formation. Handb Clin
Neurol. 2013;113:1581-92. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-59565-2.00027-7.
Citation on PubMed
Cailloux F, Gauthier-Barichard F, Mimault C, Isabelle V, Courtois V, Giraud G,
Dastugue B, Boespflug-Tanguy O. Genotype-phenotype correlation in inherited brain
myelination defects due to proteolipid protein gene mutations. Clinical European
Network on Brain Dysmyelinating Disease. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;8(11):837-45.
doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200537.
Citation on PubMed
Cao Y, Zheng H, Zhu Z, Yao L, Tian W, Cao L. Clinical and Genetic Spectrum in
a Large Cohort of Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia. Mov Disord. 2024
Apr;39(4):651-662. doi: 10.1002/mds.29728. Epub 2024 Jan 31.
Citation on PubMed
Hedera P. Uncomplicated (Pure) Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview. 2000
Aug 15 [updated 2025 Jun 5]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace
SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1509/
Citation on PubMed
Khalaf G, Mattern C, Begou M, Boespflug-Tanguy O, Massaad C, Massaad-Massade
L. Mutation of Proteolipid Protein 1 Gene: From Severe Hypomyelinating
Leukodystrophy to Inherited Spastic Paraplegia. Biomedicines. 2022 Jul
15;10(7):1709. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10071709.
Citation on PubMed
Wolf NI, van Spaendonk RML, Hobson GM. PLP1-Related Disorders. 1999
Jun 15 [updated 2025 Jun 12]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA,
Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1182/
Citation on PubMed
Yao L, Zhu Z, Zhang C, Tian W, Cao L. PLP1 gene mutations cause spastic
paraplegia type 2 in three families. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2023
Mar;10(3):328-338. doi: 10.1002/acn3.51722. Epub 2023 Jan 9.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Neurologic Diseases
Neuromuscular Disorders
Paralysis
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Spasticity
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page