Pitolisant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pitolisant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619055.html
Pitolisant
pronounced as (pi tol' i sant)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pitolisant is used to treat excessive daytime sleepiness caused by narcolepsy (a condition that causes excessive daytime sleepiness) in adults and children 6 years of age and older and to treat cataplexy (episodes of muscle weakness that begin suddenly and last for a short time) in adults with narcolepsy. Pitolisant is in a class of medications called H
3
blockers. It works by changing the amounts of certain natural substances in the area of the brain that controls sleep and wakefulness.
How should this medicine be used?
Pitolisant comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food as soon as you wake up in the morning. Take pitolisant at the same time every day. Do not change the time of day that you take pitolisant without talking to your doctor. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take pitolisant exactly as directed.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of pitolisant and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 7 days.
Pitolisant may decrease your sleepiness, but it will not cure your sleep disorder. It may take 8 weeks or longer before you feel the full benefit of pitolisant. Continue to take pitolisant even if you feel well-rested. Do not stop taking pitolisant without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking pitolisant,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pitolisant, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pitolisant tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking pitolisant. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have liver disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take pitolisant.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death) or a fast, slow, or irregular heartbeat; and if you have low levels of magnesium or potassium in your blood; and if you have kidney disease.
you should know that pitolisant may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, injections, and intrauterine devices). Use another form of birth control while taking pitolisant and for 21 days after you stop taking it. Talk to your doctor about types of birth control that will work for you during and after your treatment with pitolisant.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking pitolisant, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pitolisant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
nausea
stomach pain
loss of appetite
upper respiratory infection
muscle or joint pain
sleep talking, sleep terrors, or difficulty moving when sleeping or upon waking
muscle weakness that begins suddenly and lasts for a short time
rash
dry mouth
anxiety
irritability
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
difficulty breathing or swallowing
fainting
hallucinating (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
Pitolisant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Wakix
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page