Calcium Acetate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Calcium Acetate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620017.html
Calcium Acetate
pronounced as (kal' see um as' e tate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Calcium acetate is used to control high blood levels of phosphorus in people with kidney disease who are on dialysis (medical treatment to clean the blood when the kidneys are not working properly). Calcium acetate is in a class of medications called phosphate binders. It binds phosphorus that you get from foods in your diet and prevents it from being absorbed into your blood stream.
How should this medicine be used?
Calcium acetate comes as a capsule, tablet, and a solution (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken along with each meal (e.g., 3 times a day if you eat 3 meals a day) as directed by your doctor. Take calcium acetate at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take calcium acetate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you are using the solution, do not use a household spoon to measure your dose. Use the dosing cup that comes with the medication to measure your dose. Ask your pharmacist if you have any question about how much medication you should take or how to use the dosing cup.
Your doctor will probably adjust your dose based on your phosphorus blood levels, not more often than once every 2 to 3 weeks.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking calcium acetate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to calcium acetate, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in calcium acetate preparations. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking calcium acetate. Your doctor may need to change the doses of medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
Take a fluoroquinolone antibiotic such as ciprofloxacin (Cipro), gemifloxacin (Factive), levofloxacin, or moxifloxacin (Avelox) at least 2 hours before or 6 hours after taking calcium acetate. Also, take levothyroxine (Euthyrox, Synthroid, Tirosint) at least 4 hours before or 4 hours after taking calcium acetate. Take a tetracycline antibiotic such as demeclocycline, doxycycline (Monodox, Oracea, Vibramcyin), minocycline (Dynacin, Minocin, Solodyn), or tetracycline (Achromycin V, in Pylera) at least 1 hour before taking calcium acetate.
tell your doctor if you are taking calcium supplements or calcium antacids (Tums). Do not take supplements or antacids containing calcium while taking calcium acetate.
tell your doctor if you have high levels of calcium in the blood. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take calcium acetate.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking calcium acetate, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule with your next meal. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Calcium acetate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
constipation
loss of appetite
itching
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
confusion, feeling disoriented, feeling faint, or loss of consciousness
Calcium acetate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
confusion
feeling disoriented
feeling faint
loss of consciousness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to calcium acetate.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
PhosLo
®
Phoslyra
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page