Furosemide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Furosemide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682858.html
Furosemide
pronounced as (fyoor oh' se mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Furosemide is used alone or with other medications to treat high blood pressure. Furosemide is used to treat edema excess fluid held in body tissues caused by various medical problems. Furosemide is in a class of medications called diuretics ('water pills'). It works by causing the kidneys to get rid of unneeded water and salt from the body.
High blood pressure is a common condition. When not treated, it can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. This damage may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. Making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Furosemide comes as a tablet and as a solution (liquid) to take by mouth. It usually is taken once or twice a day. When used to treat edema, furosemide may be taken daily or only on certain days of the week. When used to treat hypertension, take furosemide at around the same time(s) every day.
Take furosemide exactly as directed. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Furosemide controls high blood pressure and edema but does not cure these conditions. Continue to take furosemide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking furosemide without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medicine is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking furosemide,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking furosemide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking sucralfate (Carafate®), take it 2 hours before or after you take furosemide.
the following nonprescription products may interact with furosemide: aspirin and other salicylates; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil®, Motrin®, others) and naproxen (Aleve®). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking furosemide. Do not start any of these medications while taking furosemide without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have kidney disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take furosemide.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any condition that stops your bladder from emptying completely, diabetes, gout, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE, a chronic inflammatory condition), or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking furosemide, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. Furosemide may affect your milk supply.
if you are having surgery, tell the doctor that you are using furosemide.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Furosemide may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that furosemide may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking furosemide. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. Alcohol can add to these side effects.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
If your doctor prescribes a low-salt or low-sodium diet, or to eat or drink increased amounts of potassium-rich foods (e.g., bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice) in your diet, follow these instructions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
frequent urination
blurred vision
headache
constipation
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you have any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical treatment:
decreased urination; dry mouth; thirst; nausea; vomiting; weakness; drowsiness; confusion; muscle pain or cramps; or rapid or pounding heartbeats
fever
ringing in the ears, loss of hearing
itching, rash, hives, blisters or peeling skin, difficulty breathing or swallowing
yellowing of the skin or eyes
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of unused furosemide solution after 90 days.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website (
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
) for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
extreme thirst
dry mouth
dizziness
confusion
extreme tiredness
vomiting
stomach cramps
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly, and blood tests should be done occasionally.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking furosemide.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lasix
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page