Lenacapavir Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lenacapavir Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623005.html
Lenacapavir Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
If you are receiving lenacapavir to help prevent you from getting HIV, your doctor will test you to see if you have HIV before you begin your treatment. Tell your doctor if you have had any of these symptoms in the last month or if you have any of the following symptoms while taking lenacapavir to help prevent you from getting HIV: fever, tiredness, joint or muscle pain, rash, night sweats, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, sore throat, swollen neck or groin area. Tell your doctor if you think you may have been exposed to HIV. Lenacapavir does not always prevent HIV. Your doctor will order HIV tests while you are taking lenacapavir to see if you have become infected with HIV.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to lenacapavir.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lenacapavir injection is used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Lenacapavir is also used along with practicing safer sex (e.g., condom use) to reduce the risk of HIV infection. Lenacapavir is in a class of medications called HIV capsid inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood.
Although lenacapavir does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Taking these medications along with practicing safer sex and making other life-style changes may decrease the risk of giving the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Lenacapavir comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected subcutaneously (under the skin) into the abdomen (stomach) or thigh by a doctor or nurse. You will receive lenacapavir injection every 6 months. When you first start lenacapavir injection or if you are unable to receive your scheduled injections you may need to take lenacapavir tablets as directed by your doctor.
Lenacapavir controls HIV but does not cure it. Continue to take lenacapavir even if you feel well. Do not stop lenacapavir without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking lenacapavir, your HIV may become more difficult to treat.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving lenacapavir injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with lenacapavir. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with lenacapavir. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting lenacapavir with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping or changing any medications while taking lenacapavir, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with lenacapavir: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking lenacapavir. Do not start any of these medications while taking lenacapavir without discussing you're your healthcare provider.
Lenacapavir may affect any other medications you take for up to 9 months after your last injection so it is important to let your doctor or pharmacist know when you last received lenacapavir before you start any new medications.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any type of infection that does not go away or that comes and goes such as tuberculosis (TB; a type of lung infection) or cytomegalovirus (CMV; a viral infection that may cause symptoms in patients with weak immune systems).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking lenacapavir, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are taking lenacapavir.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
It is important to keep all scheduled appointments to receive lenacapavir injection. If you miss or plan to miss a scheduled dose of lenacapavir injection, call your doctor. If too much time passes between lenacapavir injections, the medication may not work as well against the virus.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lenacapavir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
swelling, pain, redness, itching or lumps at the site of injection
nausea
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
any new symptoms or signs of infection such as fever, rash, swelling, fatigue, body aches, and joint pain
Lenacapavir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sunlenca
®
Yeztugo
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page