Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/bosma-arhinia-microphthalmia-syndrome/
Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome
Description
Bosma arhinia
microphthalmia
syndrome (BAMS) is a rare condition characterized by abnormalities of the nose and eyes and problems with puberty.
The key feature of BAMS is arhinia, which is the absence of an external nose. While most people with BAMS are born without a nose, some affected individuals have a severely underdeveloped (hypoplastic) nose. Affected individuals may also be missing the brain structure involved in the sense of smell (
olfactory bulb
). Because of these abnormalities, people with BAMS have an impaired ability to smell and, consequently, to taste.
In most people with BAMS, the eyeballs are abnormally small (microphthalmia) or absent (anophthalmia), which causes severe vision impairment or blindness. Additional eye abnormalities common in BAMS include a gap or hole in one of several structures of the eye (
coloboma
) and clouding of the lenses of the eyes (
cataracts
).
Additional head and face abnormalities that can occur in people with BAMS include a high arch or opening in the roof of the mouth (
high-arched
or
cleft palate
), absence of the sinuses behind the nose (
paranasal sinuses
), blockage of the nasal passages (choanal atresia), narrowing of the tear ducts (nasolacrimal duct stenosis), or a small upper jaw (hypoplastic maxilla). Many of these abnormalities contribute to difficulty breathing, particularly in affected babies. Some affected individuals have abnormal external ears.
Individuals with BAMS also have hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, which is a condition caused by reduced production of hormones that direct sexual development. Without treatment, these hormone problems often result in delayed puberty. Affected males may also have underdeveloped reproductive tissues and undescended testes (cryptorchidism).
Frequency
BAMS is a very rare condition with an unknown prevalence. Fewer than 100 cases of the condition have been described in the medical literature. BAMS has been found in several different populations.
Causes
BAMS is usually caused by mutations in the
SMCHD1
gene. Other, unknown genes may be rare causes of the condition.
The
SMCHD1
gene provides instructions for making a protein involved in regulating gene activity by altering the structure of DNA. Specifically, the SMCHD1 protein plays a role in turning off (silencing) certain genes. Among other functions, the SMCHD1 protein appears to be important for development of the nose, eyes, and other structures of the head and face.
Researchers are unsure how
SMCHD1
gene mutations affect the protein's function and lead to the development problems characteristic of BAMS. Changes in this gene may lead to abnormal silencing of genes involved in development of the head and face, which could underlie
arhinia
, microphthalmia, and other characteristic facial abnormalities of BAMS. Problems with nasal development may affect gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons, which are nerve cells that control the release of reproductive hormones. GnRH neurons originate in the developing nose and then move to the brain. Impaired development of these neurons could explain hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in affected individuals.
Some people with an
SMCHD1
gene mutation have arhinia without other features of BAMS (isolated arhinia) or less severe abnormalities of the nose, leading researchers to suspect that additional genetic factors contribute to the severity of the symptoms. These additional factors are not yet known.
Learn more about the gene associated with Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome
SMCHD1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered
SMCHD1
gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
Most cases result from
new mutations
in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. The parent often has milder symptoms, such as a reduced sense of smell (anosmia), arhinia without other features of BAMS, or less severe abnormalities of the nose.
Other Names for This Condition
Arhinia choanal atresia microphthalmia
Arhinia, choanal atresia, and microphthalmia
Arhinia, choanal atresia, microphthalmia, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
BAM syndrome
BAMS
Bosma syndrome
Gifford-Bosma syndrome
Hyposmia-nasal and ocular hypoplasia-hypogonadotropic hypogonadism syndrome
Ruprecht Majewski syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Arrhinia with choanal atresia and microphthalmia syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Arrhinia-choanal atresia-microphthalmia syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
BOSMA ARHINIA MICROPHTHALMIA SYNDROME; BAMS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Brasseur B, Martin CM, Cayci Z, Burmeister L, Schimmenti LA. Bosma arhinia
microphthalmia syndrome: Clinical report and review of the literature. Am J Med
Genet A. 2016 May;170A(5):1302-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37572. Epub 2016 Feb 3.
Citation on PubMed
Gordon CT, Xue S, Yigit G, Filali H, Chen K, Rosin N, Yoshiura KI, Oufadem M,
Beck TJ, McGowan R, Magee AC, Altmuller J, Dion C, Thiele H, Gurzau AD, Nurnberg
P, Meschede D, Muhlbauer W, Okamoto N, Varghese V, Irving R, Sigaudy S, Williams
D, Ahmed SF, Bonnard C, Kong MK, Ratbi I, Fejjal N, Fikri M, Elalaoui SC,
Reigstad H, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschke P, Ragge N, Levy N, Tuncbilek G, Teo AS,
Cunningham ML, Sefiani A, Kayserili H, Murphy JM, Chatdokmaiprai C, Hillmer AM,
Wattanasirichaigoon D, Lyonnet S, Magdinier F, Javed A, Blewitt ME, Amiel J,
Wollnik B, Reversade B. De novo mutations in SMCHD1 cause Bosma arhinia
microphthalmia syndrome and abrogate nasal development. Nat Genet. 2017
Feb;49(2):249-255. doi: 10.1038/ng.3765. Epub 2017 Jan 9.
Citation on PubMed
Jansz N, Chen K, Murphy JM, Blewitt ME. The Epigenetic Regulator SMCHD1 in
Development and Disease. Trends Genet. 2017 Apr;33(4):233-243. doi:
10.1016/j.tig.2017.01.007. Epub 2017 Feb 20.
Citation on PubMed
Shaw ND, Brand H, Kupchinsky ZA, Bengani H, Plummer L, Jones TI, Erdin S,
Williamson KA, Rainger J, Stortchevoi A, Samocha K, Currall BB, Dunican DS,
Collins RL, Willer JR, Lek A, Lek M, Nassan M, Pereira S, Kammin T, Lucente D,
Silva A, Seabra CM, Chiang C, An Y, Ansari M, Rainger JK, Joss S, Smith JC,
Lippincott MF, Singh SS, Patel N, Jing JW, Law JR, Ferraro N, Verloes A, Rauch A,
Steindl K, Zweier M, Scheer I, Sato D, Okamoto N, Jacobsen C, Tryggestad J,
Chernausek S, Schimmenti LA, Brasseur B, Cesaretti C, Garcia-Ortiz JE, Buitrago
TP, Silva OP, Hoffman JD, Muhlbauer W, Ruprecht KW, Loeys BL, Shino M, Kaindl AM,
Cho CH, Morton CC, Meehan RR, van Heyningen V, Liao EC, Balasubramanian R, Hall
JE, Seminara SB, Macarthur D, Moore SA, Yoshiura KI, Gusella JF, Marsh JA, Graham
JM Jr, Lin AE, Katsanis N, Jones PL, Crowley WF Jr, Davis EE, FitzPatrick DR,
Talkowski ME. SMCHD1 mutations associated with a rare muscular dystrophy can also
cause isolated arhinia and Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome. Nat Genet. 2017
Feb;49(2):238-248. doi: 10.1038/ng.3743. Epub 2017 Jan 9.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Craniofacial Abnormalities
Eye Diseases
Genetic Disorders
Taste and Smell Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Smell - impaired
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page