Aripiprazole: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aripiprazole
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603012.html
Aripiprazole
pronounced as (ay ri pip' ray zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Important warning for older adults with dementia:
Older adults with dementia (loss of memory and brain function) may have an increased chance of death if treated with antipsychotic medications such as aripiprazole. Older adults with dementia may also have an increased risk of a stroke or ministroke during treatment with antipsychotics.
Aripiprazole is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of behavior problems in older adults with dementia.
Important warning for people who have depression:
Children, teenagers, and young adults who take antidepressants to treat depression or other mental illnesses have a greater risk of becoming suicidal. This is especially of concern at the beginning of treatment and any time that your dose is changed. You, your family, or your caregiver should call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: new or worsening depression; thinking about harming or killing yourself, or planning or trying to do so; extreme worry; agitation; panic attacks; difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep; aggressive behavior; irritability; acting without thinking; severe restlessness; and mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood). Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
The doctor or pharmacist will give you the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with aripiprazole. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You also can obtain the Medication Guide from the FDA website:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking aripiprazole.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Aripiprazole is used to treat:
schizophrenia (a mental illness that affects how a person thinks, feels and behaves),
bipolar disorder (a disease that causes depression, mania, and other abnormal moods),
major depressive disorder,
irritability symptoms (aggression, temper tantrums, mood changes) in those with autistic disorder (a developmental problem that affects how individuals communicate, learn and behave),
Tourette's disorder (a condition causing involuntary, repetitive movements or sounds).
Aripiprazole is in a class of medications called atypical antipsychotics. It works by changing the activity of certain natural substances in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Aripiprazole comes as a tablet and a solution (liquid) to take by mouth, an orally disintegrating tablet—a tablet that dissolves quickly in the mouth), and a film to place on the tongue. Take once a day with or without food. Take aripiprazole at around the same time every day.
Take aripiprazole exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Use an oral syringe or dosing cup (measuring device) to accurately measure and take your dose of aripiprazole solution. Do not use a household spoon or cup. Ask your pharmacist for a measuring device if one is not included with your medication.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not divide, crush, or chew.
Use dry hands to peel back the foil packaging of the orally disintegrating tablet. Do not try to push it through the foil. Immediately take out the tablet. Place the entire tablet on your tongue. Do not try to split the tablet. The tablet will quickly dissolve and can be swallowed without liquid. If necessary, liquid can be used to take the orally disintegrating tablet.
Place the film on the top of the tongue. It should dissolve in saliva and can be swallowed. Do not chew the film. Use only one film at a time. Do not cut or split the film.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of aripiprazole and gradually increase or decrease your dose depending on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience.
Aripiprazole may help control your symptoms but will not cure your condition. It may take 2 weeks or longer before you feel the full benefit of aripiprazole. Continue to take aripiprazole even if you feel well. Do not stop taking aripiprazole without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking aripiprazole,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking aripiprazole. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription drugs or herbal products may interact with aripiprazole: allergy medications (diphenhydramine, loratadine, fexofenadine, chlorpheniramine or cetirizine), and St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these products before you start taking aripiprazole. Do not start any of these medications while taking aripiprazole without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have severe diarrhea or vomiting or you think you may be dehydrated. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease, heart failure, a heart attack, an irregular heartbeat, high or low blood pressure, a stroke, a ministroke, seizures, a low number of white blood cells, dyslipidemia (high cholesterol levels), trouble keeping your balance, or any condition that makes it difficult for you to swallow. Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family use or have ever used street drugs or have overused prescription medication or alcohol or has or has ever had diabetes, obsessive compulsive disorder, impulse-control disorder, bipolar disorder, or an impulsive personality. Also tell your doctor if you have ever had to stop taking a medication for mental illness because of severe side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking aripiprazole, call your doctor. Aripiprazole may cause problems in newborns following delivery if it is taken during the last months of pregnancy.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking aripiprazole.
you should know that aripiprazole may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication. Do not drink alcohol while taking aripiprazole.
you should know that you may experience hyperglycemia (increases in your blood sugar) while you are taking this medication, even if you do not already have diabetes. If you have schizophrenia, you are more likely to develop diabetes than people who do not have schizophrenia, and taking aripiprazole or similar medications may increase this risk. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking aripiprazole: extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, or weakness. It is very important to call your doctor as soon as you have any of these symptoms, because high blood sugar that is not treated can cause a serious condition called ketoacidosis. Ketoacidosis may become life-threatening if it is not treated at an early stage. Symptoms of ketoacidosis include dry mouth, nausea and vomiting, shortness of breath, breath that smells fruity, and decreased consciousness.
you should know that aripiprazole may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking aripiprazole. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that aripiprazole may make it harder for your body to cool down when it gets very hot. Tell your doctor if you plan to do vigorous exercise or be exposed to extreme heat.
if you have phenylketonuria (PKU, an inherited condition in which a special diet must be followed to prevent damage to your brain that can cause severe intellectual disability), you should know that the orally disintegrating tablets contain phenylalanine.
If you have diabetes, you should know that aripiprazole solution contains sugar.
you should know that some people who have taken medications such as aripiprazole have developed gambling problems or other intense urges or behaviors that were compulsive or unusual for them, such as increased sexual urges or behaviors, excessive shopping, and binge eating. Call your doctor if you have intense urges to shop, eat, have sex, or gamble, or you are unable to control your behavior. Tell your family members about this risk so that they can call the doctor even if you do not realize that these behaviors such as have become a problem.
you should know that when aripiprazole is used to treat children, it should be used as part of a treatment program that may include counseling and special education. Be sure that your child follows all of his or her doctor's or therapist's instructions.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking grapefruit juice and eating grapefruit while taking this medicine.
Be sure to drink plenty of water every day while you are taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Aripiprazole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
nervousness
restlessness
dizziness, feeling unsteady, or having trouble keeping your balance
heartburn
constipation
diarrhea
stomach pain
weight gain
changes in appetite
increased salivation
pain, especially in the arms, legs, or joints
tiredness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section or the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately:
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, lips, tongue, throat, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
difficulty breathing or swallowing
seizures
changes in vision
uncontrollable shaking of the face, tongue, or other body parts
fever; stiff muscles; sweating; confusion; sweating; or fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
problems with coordination or increased falls
tightening of the neck muscles
throat tightness
Aripiprazole may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the tablets, the solution, and the orally disintegrating tablets at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Store the orally disintegrating tablets in their sealed package, and use them immediately after opening the package. Store the tablets with a sensor at room temperature; do not store in places with high humidity. Dispose of any unused aripiprazole solution 6 months after you open the bottle or when the expiration date marked on the bottle has passed, whichever is sooner.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website (
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
) for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
drowsiness
weakness
widened pupils (black circles in the middle of the eyes)
nausea
vomiting
changes in heartbeat
movements that you cannot control
confusion
seizures
loss of consciousness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order laboratory tests before and during your treatment with aripiprazole.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Abilify
®
Abilify Mycite
®
¶
Opipza
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page