Nicotine Lozenges: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nicotine Lozenges
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a606019.html
Nicotine Lozenges
pronounced as (nik' oh teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nicotine lozenges are used to help people stop smoking. Nicotine lozenges are in a class of medications called smoking cessation aids. They work by providing nicotine to your body to decrease the withdrawal symptoms experienced when smoking is stopped and to reduce the urge to smoke.
How should this medicine be used?
Nicotine comes as a lozenge to slowly dissolve in the mouth. It is usually used according to the directions on the package, at least 15 minutes after eating or drinking. Follow the directions on your medicine package carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use nicotine lozenges exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of them or use them more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you smoke your first cigarette within 30 minutes of waking up in the morning, you should use 4-mg nicotine lozenges. If you smoke your first cigarette more than 30 minutes after waking up in the morning, you should use 2 mg-nicotine lozenges.
For weeks 1 to 6 of treatment, you should use one lozenge every 1 to 2 hours. Using at least nine lozenges per day will increase your chance of quitting. For weeks 7 to 9, you should use one lozenge every 2 to 4 hours. For weeks 10 to 12, you should use one lozenge every 4 to 8 hours.
Do not use more than five lozenges in 6 hours or more than 20 lozenges per day. Do not use more than one lozenge at a time or use one lozenge right after another. Using too many lozenges at a time or one after another can cause side effects such as hiccups, heartburn, and nausea.
To use the lozenge, place it in your mouth and allow it to slowly dissolve. Do not chew, crush, or swallow lozenges. Once in a while, use your tongue to move the lozenge from one side of your mouth to the other. It should take 20 to 30 minutes to dissolve. Do not eat while the lozenge is in your mouth.
Stop using nicotine lozenges after 12 weeks. If you still feel the need to use nicotine lozenges, talk to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be used for other conditions; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using nicotine lozenges,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nicotine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in the nicotine lozenges. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
do not use nicotine lozenges if you are using any other nicotine smoking cessation aid, such as the nicotine patch, gum, inhaler, or nasal spray.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using nicotine lozenges. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have recently had a heart attack and if you have or have ever had heart disease, irregular heartbeat, high blood pressure, a stomach ulcer, diabetes, or phenylketonuria (PKU, an inherited condition in which a special diet must be followed to prevent damage to your brain that can cause severe intellectual disability).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using nicotine lozenges, call your doctor.
stop smoking completely. If you continue smoking while using nicotine lozenges, you may have side effects.
ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice and for written information to help you stop smoking. You are more likely to stop smoking during your treatment with nicotine lozenges if you get information and support from your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nicotine lozenges may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if either of these symptoms is severe or does not go away:
heartburn
sore throat
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience either of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
mouth problems
irregular or fast heartbeat
Nicotine lozenges may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children and pets. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). If you need to remove a lozenge, wrap it in paper and dispose of it in a trash can safely, out of the reach of children and pets.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
dizziness
diarrhea
weakness
fast heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about nicotine lozenges.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Commit
®
lozenges
Nicorette
®
lozenges
Last Revised -
01/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page