Oxymetazoline Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Oxymetazoline Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617018.html
Oxymetazoline Topical
pronounced as (ox" i me taz' oh leen )
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Oxymetazoline is used to treat ongoing facial redness caused by rosacea (a skin disease that causes redness and pimples on the face). Oxymetazoline is in a class of medications called alpha
1A
adrenoceptor agonists. It works by narrowing the blood vessels in the skin.
How should this medicine be used?
Oxymetazoline comes as a cream to apply to the skin on your face. It is usually used once a day. Use oxymetazoline at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use oxymetazoline exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Oxymetazoline cream is only for use on the skin of your face (forehead, nose, each cheek, and chin). Do not use it in your eyes, mouth, or vagina. Do not apply it to irritated skin or open wounds.
Oxymetazoline cream comes in a tube or pump bottle with instructions for use. Read these instructions and follow them carefully. Apply a pea-sized amount of the cream in a thin layer to the affected skin. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how to use oxymetazoline cream.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using oxymetazoline,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to oxymetazoline, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in oxymetazoline cream. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using oxymetazoline. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high or low blood pressure, Raynaud's disease (problems with blood flow to the fingers, toes, ears, and nose), glaucoma (increased pressure in the eye that may lead to vision loss), problems with blood circulation, a stroke or ministroke, Sjogren's syndrome (a condition that affects the immune system and causes dryness of certain parts of the body such as the eyes and mouth), scleroderma (a condition in which extra tissue grows on the skin and some organs), thromboangiitis obliterans (inflammation of the blood vessels in the arms and legs), or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using oxymetazoline, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra cream to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Oxymetazoline may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
inflammation of the skin
itching
worsening redness
pain
worsening of pimples
Oxymetazoline may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows oxymetazoline, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Rhofade
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page