Temsirolimus: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Temsirolimus
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607071.html
Temsirolimus
pronounced as (tem'' sir oh' li mus)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Temsirolimus is used to treat advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC, a type of cancer that begins in the kidney). Temsirolimus is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that tells the cancer cells to multiply. This may help slow the growth of tumors.
How should this medicine be used?
Temsirolimus comes as a solution (liquid) to be given by infusion (slow injection into a vein) over 30 to 60 minutes. It is usually given by a doctor or nurse in a doctor's office or infusion center. Temsirolimus is usually given once every week.
You may experience symptoms such as hives, rash, itching, difficulty breathing or swallowing, swelling of the face, flushing, or chest pain. Tell your doctor or other healthcare provider if you experience these symptoms while you are receiving temsirolimus. Your doctor may prescribe other medications to help prevent or relieve these symptoms. Your doctor will probably give you these medications before you receive each dose of temsirolimus.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking temsirolimus,
tell your doctor if you are allergic to temsirolimus, sirolimus, antihistamines, any other medications, polysorbate 80, or any of the ingredients in the temsirolimus solution. Ask your doctor for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking temsirolimus. Your doctor may need to change the doses of these medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with temsirolimus: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking temsirolimus. Do not start this medication while taking temsirolimus without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, high cholesterol or triglycerides, a tumor in the central nervous system (brain or spinal cord), cancer, or kidney, liver, or lung disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are receiving temsirolimus and for 3 months after treatment with temsirolimus has ended. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking temsirolimus, call your doctor immediately. Temsirolimus may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breastfeed while receiving temsirolimus.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving temsirolimus.
you should know that you may be more at risk of getting an infection while you are receiving temsirolimus. Be sure to wash your hands frequently and avoid contact with people who are sick.
do not have any vaccinations (e.g., measles, chicken pox, or flu shots) without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of temsirolimus, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Temsirolimus may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
weakness
swelling of the eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
headache
itchy, watery, or red eye(s)
change in the way things taste
swelling, redness, pain, or sores inside the mouth or throat
loss of appetite
weight loss
nausea
vomiting
constipation
frequent need to urinate
pain or burning during urination
blood in the urine
back pain
muscle or joint pain
bloody nose
changes in fingernails or toenails
dry skin
pale skin
excessive tiredness
fast heart beat
acne
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
depression
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
flushing
chest pain
shortness of breath
fast breathing or panting
leg pain, swelling, tenderness, redness, or warmth
extreme thirst
extreme hunger
fever, sore throat, chills, cough, and other signs of infection
fainting
new or worsening abdominal pain
diarrhea
red blood in stools
decrease in amount of urine
blurred vision
slow or difficult speech
confusion
dizziness or faintness
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
Temsirolimus may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
This medication will be stored at your doctor's office or clinic.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
seizure
hallucinating (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
difficulty thinking clearly, understanding reality, or using good judgment
cough
shortness of breath
fever
new or worsening abdominal pain
panting or fast breathing
red blood in stools
diarrhea
leg pain, swelling, tenderness, redness, or warmth
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to temsirolimus.
Ask your doctor if you have any questions about your treatment with temsirolimus.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Torisel
®
Last Reviewed -
09/01/2010
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page