Darolutamide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Darolutamide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619045.html
Darolutamide
pronounced as (dar" oh loo' ta mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Darolutamide is used to treat certain types of prostate cancer (cancer that begins in the prostate [a male reproductive gland]) that has not spread to other parts of the body in men who have not been helped by other medical treatments. Darolutamide is also used to treat certain types of prostate cancer (cancer that begins in the prostate [a male reproductive gland]) that have spread to other parts of the body in men in combination with docetaxel. Darolutamide is in a class of medications called androgen receptor inhibitors. It works by blocking the effects of androgen (a male reproductive hormone) to stop the growth and spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Darolutamide comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food twice a day. Take darolutamide at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take darolutamide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor may tell you to stop taking darolutamide for a short time or decrease your dose if you experience serious side effects during your treatment. Be sure to talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment with darolutamide.
If your doctor has prescribed another medication such as goserelin (Zoladex), histrelin (Supprelin LA, Vantas), leuprolide (Eligard, Lupron), or triptorelin (Trelstar) to treat your prostate cancer, you will need to continue receiving this medication during your treatment with darolutamide.
Continue to take darolutamide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking darolutamide without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking darolutamide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to darolutamide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in darolutamide tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor what herbal products you are taking, especially St. John's Wort.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease, liver disease, heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes, high blood cholesterol or history of seizures.
you should know that darolutamide is only for use in men. Women should not take this medication, especially if they are or may become pregnant or are breastfeeding. If taken by pregnant women, darolutamide may harm the fetus. If a pregnant woman takes darolutamide, she should call her doctor immediately. If your female partner is not pregnant but could become pregnant, you and your partner must use birth control during your treatment and for 1 week after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. However, you should not assume that your female partner cannot become pregnant during your treatment.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Darolutamide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
extreme tiredness
arm, leg, hand, or foot pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
arm, leg, hand, or foot pain
rash
blood in urine
fever, rapid and/or shallow breathing, or cough
chest pain or feeling of pressure in the chest
seizures
Darolutamide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to darolutamide.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nubeqa
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page