Adagrasib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Adagrasib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623003.html
Adagrasib
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Adagrasib is used to treat certain types of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that has spread to nearby tissues or to other parts of the body or cannot be removed by surgery in adults who have received at least one other treatment. Adagrasib is also used in combination with cetuximab (Erbitux) to treat a certain type of colon cancer that has spread to other parts of the body after other treatment(s). Adagrasib is in a class of medications called KRAS inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop or slow the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Adagrasib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food twice a day for as long as your doctor recommends treatment. Take adagrasib at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take adagrasib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you vomit after taking adagrasib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may decrease your dose of adagrasib, treat you with other medications, or interrupt or permanently stop your treatment depending on your response to treatment and any side effects that you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with adagrasib. Continue to take adagrasib even if you feel well. Do not stop taking adagrasib without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking adagrasib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to adagrasib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in adagrasib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal product may interact with adagrasib: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking adagrasib. Do not start this medication while taking adagrasib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had long QT syndrome (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death) or another type of irregular heartbeat, or if you have or ever had heart failure or other heart problems, low levels of potassium or magnesium in your blood, liver or kidney problems, or lung or breathing problems other than lung cancer.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking adagrasib, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Your doctor may tell you not to breastfeed during your treatment, and for 1 week after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking adagrasib.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking adagrasib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if more than 4 hours passed since the missed dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Adagrasib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
loss of appetite
rash
dry skin
muscle or bone pain
tiredness
numbness or tingling in your hands or feet
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
bloody vomit or vomiting blood or brown material that resembles coffee grounds
bloody, black, or tarry stools
abdominal pain or stomach cramps
yellowing of skin or eyes, dark-colored urine, light-colored stools, bleeding or bruising more easily than normal, loss of appetite, decreased energy, or pain on right side of stomach area
shortness of breath, cough, or fever
dizziness, lightheadedness, or fainting
slow or irregular heartbeat
decreased urination; swelling of the face, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs; or unusual tiredness or weakness
Adagrasib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to adagrasib. Your doctor will order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with adagrasib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Krazati
®
Last Revised -
09/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page