Omeprazole, Amoxicillin, and Rifabutin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Omeprazole, Amoxicillin, and Rifabutin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625062.html
Omeprazole, Amoxicillin, and Rifabutin
pronounced as ( oh mep′ ra zole) (a mox″ i sil′ in)( rif″ a bue′ tin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Omeprazole, amoxicillin and rifabutin are used to treat and prevent the return of ulcers (sores in the lining of the stomach or intestine) caused by a certain type of bacteria. Omeprazole is in a class of medications called proton pump inhibitors. Amoxicillin and rifabutin are in a class of medications called antibiotics. Omeprazole works by decreasing the amount of acid made in the stomach. Amoxicillin and rifabutin work by stopping the growth of the bacteria that may cause ulcers.
How should this medicine be used?
Omeprazole, amoxicillin and rifabutin comes as a capsule to take by mouth. Take with food 3 times a day (at least 4 hours apart) for 14 days. Take omeprazole, amoxicillin and rifabutin at around the same times every day.
Take omeprazole, amoxicillin and rifabutin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole with a full glass of water (at least 8 ounces); do not split, chew, or crush them.
Take omeprazole, amoxicillin and rifabutin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking omeprazole, amoxicillin and rifabutin too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
If your condition does not improve or gets worse, call your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
you should know that omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have mononucleosis (a virus; also called 'mono') and if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin, call your doctor.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin.
tell your doctor if you wear soft contact lenses. Omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin may cause permanent brown-orange stains on your contact lenses.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is within 4 hours of the next dose, take the missed dose and delay the next dose for at least 4 more hours to make sure there are at least 4 hours between doses.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin may cause side effects. Skin, tears, saliva, sweat, urine, and stools may turn brown-orange; this side effect is normal and will stop when you finish taking this medication. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
stomach pain or cramps
nausea
vomiting
heartburn
headache
mouth or throat pain
vaginal itching and/or discharge
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash; hives; itching; swelling of the lips, face, or tongue; shortness of breath; difficulty breathing or swallowing
blistering or peeling skin
watery or bloody diarrhea with or without stomach pain or fever that occurs during your treatment or for up to 2 months afterward
new or worsening joint pain; rash on cheeks or arms that is sensitive to sunlight
increased or decreased urination, blood in urine, fatigue, nausea, loss of appetite, fever, or rash
prolonged vomiting, diarrhea, extreme tiredness, or pale skin within 24 hours after taking omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin
eye redness, eye pain, blurred vision or other vision changes
Omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
confusion
drowsiness
blurred vision
fast or pounding heartbeat
headache
sweating
flushing (feeling of warmth)
dry mouth
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking omeprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Talicia
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page