Cyproheptadine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cyproheptadine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682541.html
Cyproheptadine
pronounced as (si proe hep' ta deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cyproheptadine relieves red, irritated, itchy, watery eyes; sneezing; and runny nose caused by allergies, irritants in the air, and hay fever. It may also be used to relieve the itching of allergic skin conditions, and to treat hives, including hives caused by exposure to cold temperatures and by rubbing the skin. Cyproheptadine is also sometimes used to treat allergic reactions in people who have received blood products as part of medical treatment and to treat life-threatening allergic reactions after the symptoms have been brought under control with other medications. Cyproheptadine will help relieve symptoms but will not treat the cause of symptoms or speed recovery. Cyproheptadine is in a class of medications called antihistamines. It works by blocking the action of histamine, a substance in the body that causes allergic symptoms.
How should this medicine be used?
Cyproheptadine comes as a tablet and a solution (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken two or three times a day. Take cyproheptadine at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take cyproheptadine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you are using the solution, do not use a household spoon to measure your dose. Use the measuring cup or spoon that came with the medication or use a spoon that is made especially for measuring medication.
Other uses for this medicine
Cyproheptadine also is used for the treatment of Cushing's Syndrome (an abnormal condition that is caused by excess hormones [corticosteroids]) and to treat certain types of headache such as migraine.Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cyproheptadine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cyproheptadine, other antihistamines, or any other medications.
some medications should not be taken with cyproheptadine. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with cyproheptadine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting cyproheptadine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking cyproheptadine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist. .
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, glaucoma (a condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision), ulcers, difficulty urinating (due to an enlarged prostate gland), heart disease, high blood pressure, seizures, or an overactive thyroid gland.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking cyproheptadine, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking cyproheptadine if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take cyproheptadine because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking cyproheptadine.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
talk to your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are taking this medication. Alcohol can make the side effects of cyproheptadine worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cyproheptadine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth, nose, and throat
drowsiness
dizziness
nausea
chest congestion
headache
excitement (especially in children)
muscle weakness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
difficulty urinating
vision problems
nervousness
Cyproheptadine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Periactin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page