Misoprostol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Misoprostol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a689009.html
Misoprostol
pronounced as (mye soe prost' ole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Do not take misoprostol to prevent ulcers if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. Misoprostol may cause miscarriages, premature labor, or birth defects.
If you are a woman of childbearing age, you may take misoprostol to prevent ulcers only if you have had a negative pregnancy test in the past 2 weeks and if you use a reliable method of birth control while taking misoprostol. You must begin taking misoprostol on the second or third day of your menstrual period. If you become pregnant while taking misoprostol, stop taking it and call your doctor immediately.
Before taking misoprostol, ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient and read it carefully. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking misoprostol.
Do not let anyone else take your medication, especially a woman who is or may become pregnant.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Misoprostol is used to prevent ulcers in people who take certain arthritis or pain medicines, including aspirin, that can cause ulcers. It protects the stomach lining and decreases stomach acid secretion.
How should this medicine be used?
Misoprostol comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken 4 times a day, after meals and at bedtime with food. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take misoprostol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Misoprostol must be taken regularly to be effective. Women should not take their first dose until the second or third day of their menstrual period (to be sure that they are not pregnant). Do not stop taking misoprostol without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Misoprostol is also used sometimes to treat ulcers and to induce labor. Misoprostol is used alone or in combination with mifepristone to end an early pregnancy. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this drug for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking misoprostol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to misoprostol or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking, especially antacids, aspirin, arthritis medications, and vitamins.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Misoprostol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
headache
stomach pain
upset stomach
gas
vomiting
constipation
indigestion
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
vomiting blood
bloody or black, tarry stools
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cytotec
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page