Factor VII deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Factor VII deficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/factor-vii-deficiency/
Factor VII deficiency
Description
Factor VII deficiency is a rare bleeding disorder that varies in severity among affected individuals. The signs and symptoms of this condition can begin at any age, although the most severe cases are apparent in infancy. However, up to one-third of people with factor VII deficiency never have any bleeding problems. Factor VII deficiency commonly causes nosebleeds (epistaxis), bleeding of the gums, easy bruising, and prolonged or excessive bleeding following surgery or physical injury. Bleeding into joint spaces (hemarthrosis) and blood in the urine (hematuria) occasionally occur. Many women with factor VII deficiency have heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding (menorrhagia). Severely affected individuals have an increased risk of bleeding inside the skull (intracranial hemorrhage) or in the
gastrointestinal tract
, which can be life-threatening. Although factor VII deficiency is primarily associated with increased bleeding, some people with the condition have excessive blood clotting (thrombosis).
Frequency
Factor VII deficiency is estimated to affect 1 in 300,000 to 1 in 500,000 people. It is the most frequently occurring of a group of disorders classified as rare bleeding disorders.
Causes
The inherited form of factor VII deficiency, known as congenital factor VII deficiency, is caused by mutations in the
F7
gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called coagulation factor VII. This protein plays a critical role in the coagulation system, which is a series of chemical reactions that forms
blood clots
in response to injury. These mutations reduce the amount of coagulation factor VII in the bloodstream. Such a reduction prevents blood from clotting normally, causing episodes of excessive bleeding. It is not known why some people with this condition have problems with thrombosis. Researchers are also do not know what determines the severity of the condition; it does not appear to be related to the amount of coagulation factor VII in the bloodstream.
The noninherited form of the disorder, called acquired factor VII deficiency, is less common than the congenital form. It can be caused by
liver
disease or by blood cell disorders such as myeloma or
aplastic anemia
. Acquired factor VII deficiency can also be caused by certain drugs such as medicines that prevent clotting, or by a deficiency of vitamin K.
Learn more about the gene associated with Factor VII deficiency
F7
Inheritance
Congenital factor VII deficiency is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the
F7
gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Acquired factor VII deficiency is not inherited.
Other Names for This Condition
F7 deficiency
Hypoproconvertinemia
Proconvertin deficiency
Prothrombin conversion accelerator deficiency
Serum prothrombin conversion accelerator deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Factor VII deficiency
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Congenital factor VII deficiency
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
FACTOR VII DEFICIENCY
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Girolami A, Santarossa C, Cosi E, Ferrari S, Lombardi AM. Acquired Isolated
FVII Deficiency: An Underestimated and Potentially Important Laboratory Finding.
Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2016 Nov;22(8):705-711. doi: 10.1177/1076029615599440.
Epub 2015 Aug 31.
Citation on PubMed
Herrmann FH, Wulff K, Auerswald G, Schulman S, Astermark J, Batorova A, Kreuz
W, Pollmann H, Ruiz-Saez A, De Bosch N, Salazar-Sanchez L; Greifswald Factor FVII
Deficiency Study Group. Factor VII deficiency: clinical manifestation of 717
subjects from Europe and Latin America with mutations in the factor 7 gene.
Haemophilia. 2009 Jan;15(1):267-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2008.01910.x. Epub
2008 Oct 30.
Citation on PubMed
Mariani G, Bernardi F. Factor VII Deficiency. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2009
Jun;35(4):400-6. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1225762. Epub 2009 Jul 13.
Citation on PubMed
Mariani G, Herrmann FH, Bernardi F, Schved JF, Auerswald G, Ingerslev J.
Clinical manifestations, management, and molecular genetics in congenital factor
VII deficiency: the International Registry on Congenital Factor VII Deficiency
(IRF7). Blood. 2000 Jul 1;96(1):374. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Mariani G, Herrmann FH, Dolce A, Batorova A, Etro D, Peyvandi F, Wulff K,
Schved JF, Auerswald G, Ingerslev J, Bernardi F; International Factor VII
Deficiency Study Group. Clinical phenotypes and factor VII genotype in congenital
factor VII deficiency. Thromb Haemost. 2005 Mar;93(3):481-7. doi:
10.1160/TH04-10-0650.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Bleeding Disorders
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Bleeding into the skin
Blood Clot Formation (Image)
Factor VII deficiency
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Genetics
Related Medical Tests
Coagulation Factor Tests
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page