Eluxadoline: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Eluxadoline
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615054.html
Eluxadoline
pronounced as (el" ux ad' oh leen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Eluxadoline is used to treat irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea (IBS-D; a condition that causes stomach pain, cramping, or loose or watery stools) in adults. Eluxadoline is in a class of medications called mu-opioid receptor agonists. It works by decreasing bowel activity.
How should this medicine be used?
Eluxadoline comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food twice daily. Take eluxadoline at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take eluxadoline exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Eluxadoline may be habit-forming. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or take it for a longer period of time than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking eluxadoline,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to eluxadoline, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in eluxadoline tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking eluxadoline. ze, Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
you should know that you may take loperamide (Imodium AD) occasionally to treat severe diarrhea while taking eluxadoline. Stop taking loperamide immediately if you become constipated.
tell your doctor if you have constipation now or if you often have constipation, if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol (more than 3 alcoholic beverages a day), or if you do not have a gallbladder. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had bile duct obstruction (blockage in the tubes that carry bile from the liver to the gallbladder and small intestine), sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (blockage of bile or digestive juices flowing into the intestine that causes pain or jaundice), blockage in your intestines, pancreatitis (swelling of the pancreas that does not go away), or liver disease. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take eluxadoline.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking eluxadoline, call your doctor.
you should know that eluxadoline may make you drowsy, especially if you have liver disease. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
tell your doctor if you regularly drink alcohol or sometimes drink large amounts of alcohol in a short time. Ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking eluxadoline. Drinking alcohol may increase the risk that you will develop pancreatitis.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it with food. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Eluxadoline may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking eluxadoline and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
pain that begins in the upper stomach area but may spread to the back or shoulder with or without nausea and vomiting
severe constipation
rash; hives; swollen face or throat; shortness of breath; throat tightness; chest pain or tightness; or difficulty swallowing or breathing
Eluxadoline may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Eluxadoline is a controlled substance. Prescriptions may be refilled only a limited number of times; ask your pharmacist if you have any questions.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Viberzi
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page