Cefditoren: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cefditoren
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a605003.html
Cefditoren
pronounced as (sef dit' or in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cefditoren is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria such as bronchitis (infection of the airway tubes leading to the lungs); pneumonia; and infections of the skin, throat, and tonsils.Cefditoren is in a class of medications called cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as cefditoren will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Cefditoren comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken every 12 hours with the morning and evening meals for 10 to 14 days, depending on the condition being treated. Take cefditoren at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take cefditoren exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should begin to feel better during your first few days of treatment with cefditoren. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Take cefditoren until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking cefditoren too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely cured and bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cefditoren,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cefditoren; other cephalosporin antibiotic such as cefaclor, cefadroxil cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefdinir, cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefotetan, cefoxitin (Mefoxin), cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftaroline (Teflaro), ceftazidime (Fortaz, Tazicef, in Avycaz), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Zinacef) and cephalexin (Keflex); penicillin antibiotics; or any other medications. Also tell your doctor if you are allergic to milk protein, or any of the other ingredients in cefditoren tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking cefditoren. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with cefditoren: antacids (Maalox, Mylanta, Tums, others); medications that block stomach acid such as cimetidine (Tagamet), famotidine (Pepcid), nizatidine (Axid) and ranitidine (Zantac); medications that decrease stomach acid such as esomeprazole (Nexium),lansoprazole (Prevacid), omeprazole (Prilosec), and rabeprazole (Aciphex). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking cefditoren. Do not start any of these medications while taking cefditoren without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have carnitine deficiency (a rare condition in which the body does not have enough of a certain substance that is needed for energy production). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take cefditoren.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking cefditoren, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cefditoren may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
heartburn
headache
swelling, redness, irritation, burning, or itching of the vagina
white vaginal discharge
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps, or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
closing of the throat
a return of fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
Cefditoren may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light and excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
diarrhea
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking cefditoren.
If you are diabetic and test your urine for sugar, use Clinistix or TesTape (not Clinitest) to test your urine while taking this medication.If you test your blood for sugar, check with your doctor or pharmacist to recommend the best product to use while taking this medication.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Spectracef
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page