Erythromycin and Sulfisoxazole: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Erythromycin and Sulfisoxazole
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601049.html
Erythromycin and Sulfisoxazole
pronounced as (er ith roe mye' sin) (sul fi sox' a zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of erythromycin and sulfisoxazole (a sulfa drug) is used to treat certain ear infections caused by bacteria. It usually is used in children.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Erythromycin and sulfisoxazole comes as a liquid to take by mouth. It usually is taken every 6 hours (four times a day) for 10 days. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take erythromycin and sulfisoxazole exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the liquid well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
Drink a full glass of water after each dose.
Continue to take erythromycin and sulfisoxazole even if you feel well. Do not stop taking erythromycin and sulfisoxazole without talking to your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking erythromycin and sulfisoxazole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to erythromycin and sulfisoxazole, azithromycin (Zithromax
®
), clarithromycin (Biaxin
®
), dirithromycin (Dynabac
®
), medication for diabetes, diuretics ('water pills'), or any other drugs.
some medications should not be taken with erythromycin and sulfisoxazole. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with erythromycin and sulfisoxazole. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting erythromycin and sulfisoxazole with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking erythromycin and sulfisoxazole, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist..
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease, allergies, anemia, asthma, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6-PD) deficiency, yellowing of the skin or eyes, colitis, or stomach problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking erythromycin and sulfisoxazole, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking erythromycin and sulfisoxazole.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not take this medication with, or just after, fruit juices, carbonated drinks, or tea. It can be taken with or between meals.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Erythromycin and sulfisoxazole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
diarrhea
vomiting
stomach cramps
mild skin rash
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
severe skin rash
itching
hives
difficulty breathing or swallowing
wheezing
stomach pain
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark urine
pale stools
unusual tiredness
sore throat
fever
joint pain
blood in urine
unusual bleeding or bruising
dark, tarry stools
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Keep it in the refrigerator, and dispose of any unused medication after 14 days. Do not freeze.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1 222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to erythromycin and sulfisoxazole.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the erythromycin and sulfisoxazole, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Eryzole
®
¶
Ilosone
®
¶
Pediazole
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page