Lidocaine Transdermal Patch: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lidocaine Transdermal Patch
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603026.html
Lidocaine Transdermal Patch
pronounced as (lye' doe kane)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Prescription lidocaine transdermal (Dermalid, Lidoderm, Ztildo) is used to relieve the pain of post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN; burning, stabbing pains, or aches that may last for months or years after a shingles infection). Nonprescription (over-the-counter) lidocaine (Absorbine Jr, Aspercreme, Lidocare, Salonpas, others) is also available to relieve minor pain in shoulders, arms, neck and legs in adults and children 12 years of age and older. Lidocaine is in a class of medications called local anesthetics. It works by stopping nerves from sending pain signals.
How should this medicine be used?
Prescription lidocaine transdermal comes as a 5% patch (Dermalid, Lidoderm) and as a 1.8% topical system (Ztlido) to apply to the skin. Prescription lidocaine transdermal is applied only once a day as needed for pain. Never apply more than 3 of the lidocaine 5% patch or lidocaine 1.8% topical systems at one time, and never wear them for more than 12 hours per day (12 hours on and 12 hours off). Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use lidocaine transdermal exactly as directed. Do not apply it more or less often than prescribed by your doctor.
Nonprescription lidocaine transdermal comes as a 4% patch (Absorbine Jr, Aspercreme, Lidocare, Salonpas, others) to apply to the skin. It is applied up to 3 times daily and for no more than 8 hours per application. Use nonprescription lidocaine patches exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often or for a longer period of time than directed by the package instructions.
Your doctor will tell you how many lidocaine patches or topical systems you may use at one time and the length of time you may wear the patches. Applying too many patches or topical systems or leaving them on for too long may cause serious side effects.
Apply the lidocaine patch or topical system to clean, dry, intact skin as directed. Choose an area where the patch will not be rubbed by tight clothing. Do not apply the patch or topical system to an open wound or cut, to skin that is irritated or red, or to skin that is affected by a rash, burn, or other skin problem. If irritation or a burning sensation occurs during lidocaine application, remove the lidocaine patch or system and do not reapply it until the irritation is gone. Prescription patches and topical systems may be cut into smaller sizes with scissors prior to removal of the release liner. Be sure to remove the current patch before you apply a new one.
Do not let lidocaine transdermal come in contact with your eyes. If lidocaine transdermal does touch your eye, immediately wash the eye with water or saline and protect the eye until sensation returns.
While you are wearing a lidocaine transdermal patch or system, protect the treated area from direct heat such as heating pads or electric blankets. You can apply the lidocaine 1.8% topical system after moderate heat exposure, such as 15 minutes of heating pad exposure on a medium setting. Do not bandage the affected area tightly.
Do not shower, bathe, or go swimming while you are wearing the prescription lidocaine 5% transdermal patch. If you are using the prescription lidocaine 1.8% topical system, you may shower for up to 10 minutes or wear it while immersed in water for up to 15 minutes. If the lidocaine 1.8% topical system becomes wet, gently pat the skin, but do not rub the skin or lidocaine 1.8% topical system.
If the lidocaine 1.8% topical system comes off completely or lifts at the edges, reattach it by pressing firmly on the edges of the topical system or lifted areas. If the lidocaine 1.8% topical system comes off completely more than once and does not stick to the skin, remove it and apply a new lidocaine topical system not to exceed 12 hours of total use.
Wash your hands after handling lidocaine patches or topical system.
Stop using nonprescription lidocaine 4% patch and call your doctor if your pain lasts for longer than 7 days or if your pain improves and then worsens.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using lidocaine transdermal,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lidocaine; other medications such as benzocaine. bupivacaine (Marcaine), etidocaine (Duranest), mepivacaine (Carbocaine, Prolocaine), prilocaine (Citanest), procaine, tetracaine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in lidocaine transdermal. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using lidocaine transdermal. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
the following nonprescription product may interact with lidocaine transdermal: acetaminophen (Tylenol). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using lidocaine transdermal. Do not start any of these medications while using lidocaine transderaml without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6PD) deficiency (an inherited blood disorder), methemoglobinemia (a condition with defective red blood cells that are unable to carry oxygen to the tissues in the body), or heart, lung, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using lidocaine patches or topical systems, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using lidocaine patches or topical systems.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually used as needed. If your doctor has told you to use lidocaine patches or topical systems regularly, apply the missed patch or topical system as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed patch and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lidocaine patches or topical systems may cause side effects. If any of these symptoms occur, remove your patch or topical system and do not put it back on until the symptoms go away. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning or discomfort in the place you applied the patch
redness or swelling of the skin under the patch
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
hives
rash
itching
blisters
bruising
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
fast pulse or breathing
unusual thirst
nausea
vomiting
confusion
weakness
dizziness
fainting
pale, gray, or blue colored skin; headache; shortness of breath; lightheadedness; or fatigue
Lidocaine transdermal may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not store patches and topical systems outside the sealed envelope. Fold used patches or topical systems so that the adhesive side sticks to itself and then safely discard into trash and where children and pets cannot get to them.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If you wear too many lidocaine transdermal patches or topical systems or wear them for too long, too much lidocaine may be absorbed into your blood. In that case, you may experience symptoms of an overdose.
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
lightheadedness
nervousness
inappropriate happiness
confusion
dizziness
drowsiness
ringing in the ears
blurred or double vision
vomiting
feeling hot, cold, or numb
twitching or shaking that you cannot control
seizures
loss of consciousness
slow heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Absorbine Jr
®
Plus
Aspercreme Patch
®
Dermalid
®
Lidocare
®
Lidoderm
®
Salonpas
®
Ztlido
®
Synera
®
(containing lidocaine and tetracaine)
Last Revised -
06/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page