Voclosporin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Voclosporin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622021.html
Voclosporin
pronounced as (voe' kloe spor in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Voclosporin decreases the activity of your immune system. This may increase the risk that you will get a serious infection. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: cough; sore throat; fever; chills; flu-like symptoms; warm, red, or painful skin; pain or burning on urination; frequent urination; lower back pain; or other signs of infection.
Taking voclosporin may increase the risk that you will develop cancer, especially lymphoma (cancer of a part of the immune system) or skin cancer. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any type of cancer. To reduce your risk of skin cancer, plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen during your treatment. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: new sores or discoloration on the skin; lumps or masses anywhere in your body; night sweats; swollen glands in the neck, armpits, or groin; trouble breathing; chest pain; weakness or tiredness that does not go away; or pain, swelling, or fullness in the stomach.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with voclosporin and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to voclosporin.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Voclosporin is used in combination with other mycophenolate mofetil (Cellcept) and corticosteroids like methylprednisolone or prednisone for treatment of lupus nephritis (an autoimmune disease in which the immune system attacks the kidneys) in adults. Voclosporin is in a class of medications called immunosupressants. It works by decreasing the activity of the immune system to prevent it from attacking the transplanted organ.
How should this medicine be used?
Voclosporin comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day for up to 1 year. Voclosporin capsules should be taken on an empty stomach 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal, as close to every 12 hours as possible. There should be at least 8 hours between doses. Take voclosporin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take voclosporin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, crush, or dissolve them.
Voclosporin controls lupus nephritis but does not cure it. Continue to take voclosporin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking voclosporin without talking to your doctor.
It is not known if taking voclosporin for longer than one year is safe. Talk to your doctor about benefits and risks of continuing to take voclosporin after 1 year.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking voclosporin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to voclosporin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in voclosporin capsules. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with voclosporin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with voclosporin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting voclosporin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking voclosporin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist. .
the following herbal product may interact with voclosporin: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking St. John's wort. Do not start this medication while taking St. John's wort without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any of the conditions mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section or any of the following: long QT syndrome (an inherited condition in which a person is more likely to have QT prolongation); an irregular heartbeat; heart disease; low levels of potassium, calcium, or magnesium in your blood: high blood pressure; or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. Voclosporin capsules contain a small amount of alcohol and it is not known what effect it an have on an unborn baby if taken during pregnancy. If you become pregnant while taking voclosporin, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Your doctor may tell you not to breastfeed during your treatment and for 7 days after your final dose.
you should know that voclosporin may cause high blood pressure. Your doctor will monitor your blood pressure carefully, and may prescribe medication to treat high blood pressure if it develops.
do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is more than 4 hours after the time you were supposed to take the dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Voclosporin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
headache
cough
stomach pain
upset stomach
hair loss
sores in or around the mouth
shakiness
loss of appetite
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
confusion, changes in alertness, muscle tremors, numbness and tingling, headache, vision changes, or seizures
pale skin, shortness of breath, or dizziness
decreased urination; swelling in your legs, ankles or feet; or unusual tiredness or weakness
fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat; lightheadedness; or fainting
Voclosporin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep voclosporin capsules in their original package until you are ready to take them. Do not put them in another container.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
tremor
headache
nausea
vomiting
fast heart rate or heartbeat
hives
itching
sleepiness
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lupkynis
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page