Mobocertinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mobocertinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621048.html
Mobocertinib
pronounced as (moe boe" ser' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Mobocertinib is no longer commercially available in the U.S. See the FDA website (
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/
) for information on drugs that have been discontinued.
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Mobocertinib may cause QT prolongation (an irregular heart rhythm that can lead to fainting, loss of consciousness, seizures, or sudden death). Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had long QT syndrome (an inherited condition in which a person is more likely to have QT prolongation) or you have or have ever had low levels of potassium or magnesium in your blood, an irregular heartbeat, or heart failure. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking any of the following medications: amiodarone (Nexterone, Pacerone); azithromycin (Zithromax); ciprofloxacin (Cipro); clarithromycin; disopyramide (Norpace); dofetilide (Tikosyn); dronedarone (Multaq); erythromycin (E.E.S., Eryc, Ery-tab, Erythrocin); fluconazole (Diflucan); certain medications for HIV such as atazanavir (Reyataz), indinavir (Crixivan), nelfinavir (Viracept), ritonavir (Norvir, in Kaletra), and saquinavir (Invirase); haloperidol (Haldol); ibutilide (Corvert); itraconazole (Sporanox, Tolsura); ketoconazole; levofloxacin; moxifloxacin; ondansetron (Zofran); procainamide; quinidine (in Nuedexta); sotalol (Betapace, Sorine, Sotylize); or voriconazole (Vfend). If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat; dizziness; lightheadedness; or fainting.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests, such as blood tests and electrocardiograms (EKGs, tests that record the electrical activity of the heart) before and during your treatment to be sure that it is safe for you to take mobocertinib.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking mobocertinib.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Mobocertinib is used to treat a certain type of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that cannot be removed by surgery and has spread to other parts of the body either during or after treatment with platinum chemotherapy medications. Mobocertinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop or slow the spread of cancer cells and may help shrink tumors.
How should this medicine be used?
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Mobocertinib comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken once daily with or without food. The length of your treatment depends on how well this medication works for you, and the side effects that you experience. Take mobocertinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take mobocertinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not open, chew, crush, or dissolve them.
If you vomit after taking mobocertinib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may decrease your dose, or interrupt or discontinue your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Continue to take mobocertinib even if you feel well. Do not stop taking mobocertinib without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Before taking mobocertinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to mobocertinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in mobocertinib capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention the medications listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section and any of the following: angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors such as benazepril (Lotensin, in Lotrel), captopril , enalapril (Epaned, Vasotec, in Vaseretic), fosinopril, lisinopril (Prinivil, Qbrelis, Zestril, in Zestoretic), moexipril, perindopril, (in Prestalia), quinapril (Accupril, in Accuretic, in Quinaretic), ramipril (Altace), and trandolapril; angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) such as azilsartan (Edarbi, in Edarbyclor), candesartan (Atacand, in Atacand HCT), eprosartan (Teveten), irbesartan (Avapro, in Avalide), losartan (Cozaar, in Hyzaar), and valsartan (Diovan, in Diovan HCT, in Exforge, others); diuretics ('water pills'); efavirenz (Sustiva, in Atripla, in Symfi); hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, or injections); midazolam; rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane); and sulfasalazine (Azulfidine). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects. Many other medications may also interact with mobocertinib, so be sure to tell your doctor about all the medications you are taking, even those that do not appear on this list.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, emphysema, or other breathing problems (other than lung cancer); or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan on fathering a child. If you are female, you will need to take a pregnancy test before you start treatment and use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 1 month after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about which methods you should use; hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, implants, rings, or injections) may not work well in women who are taking mobocertinib. If you are a male, you and your partner should use birth control during your treatment with mobocertinib and for 7 days after your final dose. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking mobocertinib, call your doctor immediately. Mobocertinib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking mobocertinib and for 7 days after the final dose.
you should know that mobocertinib often causes diarrhea, which can be severe. Call your doctor if you have diarrhea while taking mobocertinib. Your doctor may tell you to drink plenty of liquids, make changes in your diet, and take medication to control the diarrhea and prevent dehydration (loss of too much water from your body). Call your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms of dehydration: extreme thirst, dry mouth and/or skin, decreased urination, sunken eyes, or fast heartbeat.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
If you miss a dose by less than 6 hours, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it and then take the next dose at the scheduled time. However, if you miss a dose by more than 6 hours, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Mobocertinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
mouth sores
decreased appetite
weight loss
stomach pain
heartburn
rash
dry skin or itching
red, itchy, or irritated eyes
blurry vision
hair loss
nail infection
tiredness
muscle or bone pain
fatigue
runny nose
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
diarrhea
cough
fever
shortness of breath
chest pain
swelling of your ankles and feet
Mobocertinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Your doctor will order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with mobocertinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Exkivity
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page