Chloral Hydrate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Chloral Hydrate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682201.html
Chloral Hydrate
pronounced as (klor al hi' drate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Chloral hydrate is no longer available in the United States.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Chloral hydrate, a sedative, is used in the short-term treatment of insomnia (to help you fall asleep and stay asleep for a proper rest) and to relieve anxiety and induce sleep before surgery. It is also used after surgery for pain and to treat alcohol withdrawal.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Chloral hydrate comes as a capsule and liquid to take by mouth and as a suppository to insert rectally. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take chloral hydrate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The liquid should be added to a half glass of water, fruit juice, or ginger ale and you should drink it immediately.
Swallow the capsule whole with a full glass of water or fruit juice; do not chew the capsule.
To use the suppository, follow these steps:
Remove the wrapper.
Dip the tip of the suppository in water.
Lie down on your left side and raise your right knee to your chest. (A left-handed person should lie on the right side and raise the left knee.)
Using your finger, insert the suppository into the rectum, about 1/2 to 1 inch (1.25 to 2.5 centimeters) in infants and children and 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) in adults. Hold it in place for a few moments.
Stand up after about 15 minutes. Wash your hands thoroughly and resume your normal activities.
Chloral hydrate can be habit-forming; do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or for a longer period than your doctor tells you to. Continue to take chloral hydrate even if you feel well. Do not stop taking chloral hydrate without talking to your doctor, especially if you have taken large doses for a long time. Your doctor probably will decrease your dose gradually.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking chloral hydrate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to chloral hydrate, aspirin, tartrazine (a yellow dye in some processed foods and drugs), or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking chloral hydrate. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease, heart or stomach problems, a history of alcohol or drug abuse, or asthma.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking chloral hydrate, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking chloral hydrate.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Chloral hydrate may cause an upset stomach. Take chloral hydrate with food or milk.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Do not take a missed dose when you remember it. Skip it completely; then take the next dose at the regularly scheduled time.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Chloral hydrate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
upset stomach
vomiting
diarrhea
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
skin rash
itching
confusion
difficulty breathing
slow heartbeat
extreme tiredness
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature, away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Protect the liquid from light; do not freeze.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
If you have diabetes, use TesTape or Clinistix to test your urine for sugar. Do not use Clinitest because chloral hydrate can cause false results.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Chloral hydrate is a controlled substance. Prescriptions may be refilled only a limited number of times; ask your pharmacist if you have any questions.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aquachloral
®
¶
Chloralum
®
§
Somnote
®
§
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
§
These products are not currently approved by the FDA for safety, effectiveness, and quality. Federal law generally requires that prescription drugs in the U.S. be shown to be both safe and effective prior to marketing. Please see the FDA website for more information on unapproved drugs (
https://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/Transparency/Basics/ucm213030.htm
) and the approval process (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/ucm054420.htm
).
Last Revised -
04/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page