Methotrexate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Methotrexate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682019.html
Methotrexate
pronounced as (meth'' oh trex' ate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Methotrexate may cause life-threatening birth defects or death of the unborn baby. Tell your doctor if you or your partner is pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are taking methotrexate. If you can become pregnant, you will need to take a pregnancy test before you begin taking methotrexate and use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 6 months after your final dose. If your partner can become pregnant, you should use birth control during your treatment and for 3 months after you stop taking methotrexate. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you.If you or your partner become pregnant, call your doctor immediately.
Methotrexate may cause serious allergic reactions. Tell your doctor if you every had a allergic reaction to methotrexate. Your doctor may tell you that you should not take methotrexate. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately: rask; itching; ,hives; stomach pain; difficulty breathing; shortness of breath; wheezing; fast heartbeat; swelling of your face, tongue, or throat; or feeling faint.
Methotrexate may cause a decrease in the number of blood cells made by your bone marrow. This may cause certain symptoms and may increase the risk that you will develop bleeding or a serious infection, including fungal, bacterial, or viral infections that spread through the body. Tell your doctor if you often get any type of infection or if you think you may have any type of infection now. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had hepatitis B (a viral infection that affects the liver), cytomegalovirus (a common virus that usually only causes serious symptoms in people who have weakened immune systems or who are infected at birth), herpes zoster (shingles; a rash that can occur in people who have had chickenpox in the past), tuberculosis, or any other condition that affects your immune system. Call your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms: sore throat, chills, fever, or other signs of infection; unusual bruising or bleeding; excessive tiredness; pale skin; or shortness of breath.
Methotrexate may cause severe or life-threatening liver damage, especially when it is taken for a long period of time. Tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol or if you have or have ever had liver disease. Ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking methotrexate. Call your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms: nausea; extreme tiredness; lack of energy; loss of appetite; weight loss; swelling of your legs, feet or ankles; unusual bleeding or bruising; itching; difficulty thinking clearly; pain in the upper right part of the stomach; yellowing of the skin or eyes; or flu-like symptoms.
Methotrexate may cause severe or life-threatening lung damage. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had lung disease. Call your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms: dry cough, fever, difficulty breathing, or shortness of breath.
Methotrexate may cause damage to the lining of your mouth, stomach, or intestines. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had stomach ulcers or ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum). If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor right away: mouth sores; new or worsening diarrhea; vomiting; fever; chills; persistent, severe stomach pain; black, tarry, or bloody stools; or vomit that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds.
Methotrexate may cause serious or life-threatening skin reactions. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: fever, rash, blisters, or peeling skin.
Methotrexate may cause serious kidney problems, including kidney failure. Your doctor will order laboratory tests before and during your treatment to see if your kidneys are affected by this medication. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease or if you are being treated with dialysis (treatment to clean the blood outside the body when the kidneys are not working well). If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: decreased or increased urination; swelling of the face, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs; weight gain; shortness of breath; or unusual tiredness or weakness.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before, during, and after your treatment to check your body's response to methotrexate and to treat side effects before they become severe.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Methotrexate is used to treat severe psoriasis (a skin disease in which red, scaly patches form on some areas of the body). Methotrexate is also used to treat rheumatoid arthritis (RA; a condition in which the body attacks its own joints, causing pain, swelling, and loss of function). Methotrexate is also used in children to treat polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis (PJIA; a type of childhood arthritis that affects five or more joints during the first six months of the condition, causing pain, swelling, and loss of function). Methotrexate is also used in combination with other chemotherapy medications to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL; also called acute lymphoblastic leukemia and acute lymphatic leukemia; a type of cancer that begins in the white blood cells) and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL; a type of cancer that begins in a type of white blood cells that normally fights infection) that has returned or did not respond to other medications. and Methotrexate is also used alone or combination with other chemotherapy medications to treat mycosis fungoides,a type of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma ([CTCL], a group of cancers of the immune system that first appear as skin rashes). Methotrexate is in a class of medications called antimetabolites. Methotrexate treats cancer by slowing the growth of cancer cells. Methotrexate treats psoriasis by slowing the growth of skin cells to stop scales from forming. Methotrexate may treat rheumatoid arthritis and polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis by decreasing the activity of the immune system.
How should this medicine be used?
Methotrexate comes as a tablet and solution (liquid) to take by mouth. Your doctor will tell you how often you should take methotrexate. The schedule depends on the condition you have and on how your body responds to the medication. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take methotrexate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you are taking methotrexate to treat psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, or mycosis fungoids, your doctor may tell you to take the medication once a week. Pay close attention to your doctor's directions. Some people who mistakenly took methotrexate once daily instead of once weekly experienced very severe side effects or died.
If you are taking methotrexate to treat psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, or polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, your doctor may start you on a low dose of the medication and gradually increase your dose. Follow these directions carefully. Your doctor will probably tell you to take another medication, folic acid (a vitamin), to decrease some of the side effects of this medication. Take this medication exactly as directed.
If you are taking methotrexate to treat rheumatoid arthritis or polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, it may take 3 to 6 weeks for your symptoms to begin to improve, and 12 weeks or longer for you to feel the full benefit of methotrexate. Continue to take methotrexate even if you feel well. Do not stop taking methotrexate without talking to your doctor.
Your doctor may decrease your dose of methotrexate or permanently or temporarily stop your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with methotrexate.
If you are taking methotrexate liquid, use the bottle adapter and oral syringe (measuring device) provided by the manufacturer to accurately measure and take your dose of methotrexate solution. Do not use a household teaspoon to measure the solution. You should wear disposable gloves to prevent contact with the medication. Follow the manufacturer's instructions about how to use and clean the oral syringe. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you if you have any questions.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
Methotrexate is also sometimes used to treat Crohn's disease (condition in which the immune system attacks the lining of the digestive tract, causing pain, diarrhea, weight loss and fever), multiple sclerosis (MS; condition in which the immune system attacks the nerves, causing weakness, numbness, loss of muscle coordination, and problems with vision, speech, and bladder control), and other autoimmune diseases (conditions that develop when the immune system attacks healthy cells in the body by mistake). Methotrexate is also used sometimes to treat gestational trophoblastic tumors (a type of tumor that forms inside a woman's uterus while she is pregnant). Ask your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking methotrexate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to methotrexate, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in methotrexate tablets. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with methotrexate: Proton pump inhibitors such as esomeprazole (Nexium
®
), lansoprazole (Prevacid
®
), omeprazole (Prilosec
®
OTC, in Zegerid
®
OTC). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking methotrexate. Do not start any of these medications while taking methotrexate without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any of the conditions mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, a low level of folate in your blood, radiation therapy to the head or brain, pleural effusions (a condition when fluid collects in the lungs), or ascites (swelling of the stomach caused by liver disease).
tell your doctor if you plan to breastfeed or are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking methotrexate and for 1 week after you final dose.
you should know that methotrexate may cause permanent infertility in men and women, stop sperm production in men, and interfere with the normal menstrual cycle (period) in women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking methotrexate.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight or ultraviolet light (tanning beds and sunlamps) and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Methotrexate may make your skin sensitive to sunlight or ultraviolet light. If you have psoriasis, your sores may get worse if you expose your skin to sunlight while you are taking methotrexate.
do not have any vaccinations during your treatment with methotrexate without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose of methotrexate, call your doctor right away. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Methotrexate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
drowsiness
headache
swollen, tender gums
reddened eyes
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
blurred vision or sudden loss of vision
seizures
confusion
weakness or difficulty moving one or both sides of the body
loss of consciousness
Methotrexate may increase the risk that you will develop other cancers, such as lymphoma (cancer that begins in the cells of the immune system) and skin cancer. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving this medication.
Methotrexate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light and excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of any unused oral oral solution 90 days after opening the bottle for the first time.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Jylamvo
®
Trexall
®
Xatmep
®
Other names
Amethopterin
MTX
Last Revised -
02/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page