Carpal tunnel syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Carpal tunnel syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/carpal-tunnel-syndrome/
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Description
Carpal tunnel syndrome is a disorder caused by disturbances in nerve function (neuropathy), leading to pain and numbness or tingling (paresthesia) primarily in the wrist and hand. While carpal tunnel syndrome can occur at any age, it most often affects people between the ages of 40 and 60. In more than half of cases, both hands are affected; however, the severity may vary between hands. When only one hand is affected, it is most often the hand used for writing (the dominant hand).
In carpal tunnel syndrome, the pain or paresthesia is usually felt in the wrist, the palm, and the first four fingers of the hand. These signs and symptoms often develop during sleep and are noticeable upon waking. Affected individuals typically shake their hand to get rid of the pain and numbness, a characteristic move known as the flick sign. As the condition advances, the signs and symptoms begin to occur during the day as well. Affected individuals may have difficulty performing manual tasks such as turning doorknobs, fastening buttons, or opening jars. The symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome may be triggered by certain activities that flex or extend the wrist, such as driving, typing, or holding a telephone.
Over time, people with carpal tunnel syndrome can have muscle and nerve wasting (atrophy) in the affected hand and a reduced ability to detect sensations, which can be mistaken for an improvement of symptoms.
Frequency
Carpal tunnel syndrome is estimated to affect 1 to 5 percent of the adult population.
Causes
Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs when a nerve in the hand and forearm, known as the median nerve, gets pinched (compressed) within a passage called the carpal tunnel. The carpal tunnel is a narrow canal at the wrist through which the median nerve extends from the forearm to the hand and the first four fingers. It is surrounded by the wrist bones and
connective tissues
, which are tissues that support the body's joints and organs.
Carpal tunnel syndrome is often described as idiopathic because its cause is frequently unknown but can be influenced by lifestyle factors. Little is known about the genetic contributions to this condition. Most of the genes that have been studied provide instructions for making proteins that are components of connective tissues. Other genes associated with the condition play roles in nerve cell function, the immune system, or metabolism. Additionally, the width of the carpal tunnel varies among individuals; people with narrower passages are more likely to have nerve compression than are people with wider passages.
In carpal tunnel syndrome, nerve compression can be caused by many factors including inflammation of connective tissues surrounding the carpal tunnel, accumulation of fluids (edema) in the lower arm, hormonal changes, stress and trauma to the wrist, or obstructions within the carpal tunnel, such as a cyst or tumor. Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs in 20 to 45 percent of pregnant women, likely due to edema or hormonal changes, and often goes away at the end of the pregnancy.
Particular activities, often related to certain occupations, may increase a person's risk of developing carpal tunnel syndrome. Repeated use of tools that vibrate or require forceful movements can put stress on the wrist, causing swelling or inflammation around the carpal tunnel. Whether repeated tensing of the hand and wrist, caused by frequent computer use, increases the risk of carpal tunnel syndrome is unclear; the evidence is conflicting. It is likely that the impact of computer use on the development of carpal tunnel syndrome is minor.
While carpal tunnel syndrome can be a feature of many disorders, including obesity,
alcohol use disorder
,
rheumatoid arthritis
,
type 1 diabetes
,
type 2 diabetes
, hypothyroidism, kidney (renal) failure,
transthyretin amyloidosis
, and
hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies
, it usually occurs in people with no related health conditions.
Learn more about the genes associated with Carpal tunnel syndrome
COL11A1
COL1A1
COL5A1
TTR
Additional Information from NCBI Gene:
BGN
GSTM1
IL6R
SH3TC2
Inheritance
Carpal tunnel syndrome is a complex condition and is usually not inherited. However, having a close relative with carpal tunnel syndrome likely increases a person's risk of developing the condition.
When carpal tunnel syndrome occurs as part of a genetic syndrome, this feature follows the inheritance pattern of the syndrome.
Other Names for This Condition
Amyotrophy, thenar, of carpal origin
Carpal canal
Carpal tunnel
Compression neuropathy, carpal tunnel
CTS
Distal median nerve compression
Distal median nerve entrapment
Entrapment neuropathy, carpal tunnel
Median neuropathy, carpal tunnel
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Carpal tunnel syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME 1; CTS1
MONONEUROPATHY OF THE MEDIAN NERVE, MILD; MNMN
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Burger MC, de Wet H, Collins M. Interleukin and growth factor gene variants
and risk of carpal tunnel syndrome. Gene. 2015 Jun 10;564(1):67-72. doi:
10.1016/j.gene.2015.03.047. Epub 2015 Mar 24.
Citation on PubMed
Dada S, Burger MC, Massij F, de Wet H, Collins M. Carpal tunnel syndrome: The
role of collagen gene variants. Gene. 2016 Aug 1;587(1):53-8. doi:
10.1016/j.gene.2016.04.030. Epub 2016 Apr 14.
Citation on PubMed
Graham B, Peljovich AE, Afra R, Cho MS, Gray R, Stephenson J, Gurman A,
MacDermid J, Mlady G, Patel AT, Rempel D, Rozental TD, Salajegheh MK, Keith MW,
Jevsevar DS, Shea KG, Bozic KJ, Adams J, Evans JM, Lubahn J, Ray WZ, Spinner R,
Thomson G, Shaffer WO, Cummins DS, Murray JN, Mohiuddin M, Mullen K, Shores P,
Woznica A, Linskey E, Martinez Y, Sevarino K. The American Academy of Orthopaedic
Surgeons Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guideline on: Management of Carpal
Tunnel Syndrome. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2016 Oct 19;98(20):1750-1754. doi:
10.2106/JBJS.16.00719. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Padua L, Coraci D, Erra C, Pazzaglia C, Paolasso I, Loreti C, Caliandro P,
Hobson-Webb LD. Carpal tunnel syndrome: clinical features, diagnosis, and
management. Lancet Neurol. 2016 Nov;15(12):1273-1284. doi:
10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30231-9. Epub 2016 Oct 11.
Citation on PubMed
Wipperman J, Goerl K. Carpal Tunnel Syndrome: Diagnosis and Management. Am Fam
Physician. 2016 Dec 15;94(12):993-999.
Citation on PubMed
Yunoki M, Kanda T, Suzuki K, Uneda A, Hirashita K, Yoshino K. Importance of
Recognizing Carpal Tunnel Syndrome for Neurosurgeons: A Review. Neurol Med Chir
(Tokyo). 2017 Apr 15;57(4):172-183. doi: 10.2176/nmc.ra.2016-0225. Epub 2017 Feb
2.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Related Health Topics
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Carpal tunnel release
Carpal tunnel repair - series
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page