Octreotide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Octreotide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620051.html
Octreotide
pronounced as (ok tree' oh tide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Octreotide is used to treat acromegaly (condition in which the body produces too much growth hormone, causing enlargement of the hands, feet, and facial features; joint pain; and other symptoms) in people who have been treated successfully with octreotide injection or lanreotide injection. Octreotide is in a class of medications called octapeptides. It works by decreasing the amounts of certain natural substances produced by the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Octreotide comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice daily on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal, with a glass of water. Take octreotide at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take octreotide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Gently push the capsules from the packaging to remove them. Do not use two thumbs to push a capsule or press the middle of the capsule through the packaging as it could damage the capsule. If the capsules are cracked or broken, discard them.
Octreotide may control your symptoms, but it will not cure your condition. Do not stop taking octreotide without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking octreotide, your symptoms may return.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking octreotide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to octreotide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in octreotide delayed-release capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking octreotide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with octreotide: H2 blockers such as cimetidine, famotidine, nizatidine, and ranitidine; proton-pump inhibitors such as esomprazole, lansoprazole and omeprazole; and antacids. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking octreotide. Do not start any of these medications while taking octreotide without discussing with your healthcare provider.
you should know that octreotide may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking octreotide. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had low levels of vitamin B-12 in your body; high or low blood sugar; diabetes; or gall bladder, pancreas, thyroid, heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. You may be able to become pregnant during your treatment with octreotide even if you were not able to become pregnant before your treatment because you have acromegaly. Talk to your doctor about methods of birth control that will work for you. If you become pregnant while taking octreotide, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
This medication may cause changes in your blood sugar. You should know the symptoms of high and low blood sugar and what to do if you have these symptoms.
Octreotide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
headache
stomach discomfort
heartburn
gas
joint or back pain
sweating
swelling in hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
weakness
tiredness
dizziness
cough, stuffy or runny nose, sneezing, or sore throat
difficult, painful, or frequent urination
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
pain in the upper right part of the stomach, center of the stomach, back, or shoulder; yellowing of skin or whites of eyes; fever with chills; or nausea
sluggishness, sensitivity to cold pale, dry skin, and brittle fingernails and hair
loose, fatty, or light-colored stools; stomach bloating; or weight loss
swelling of your tongue, throat, lips, eyes or face
difficulty swallowing or breathing
rash
itching
feeling faint
chest pain
fast or irregular heartbeat
Octreotide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the unopened packages in the refrigerator; do not freeze. After first opening, store capsules in the container they came in at room temperature for up to 1 month.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
slowed or irregular heartbeat
dizziness
fainting
flushing
diarrhea
weakness
weight loss
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to octreotide.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mycapssa
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page