Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/ataxia-pancytopenia-syndrome/
Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome
Description
Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome is a rare condition that affects the part of the brain that coordinates movement (the cerebellum) and
blood-forming cells
in the
bone marrow
. The age when signs and symptoms begin, the severity of the condition, and the rate at which it worsens all vary among affected individuals.
People with ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome have neurological problems associated with a loss of tissue (atrophy) and other changes in the cerebellum. These problems include poor coordination and balance (ataxia), difficulty with movements that involve judging distance or scale (dysmetria), uncontrollable muscle contractions (clonus), and involuntary back-and-forth eye movements (nystagmus). These neurological issues worsen over time, making walking and other movements challenging. Some affected individuals eventually require wheelchair assistance.
Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome also causes a shortage of one or more types of normal blood cells: red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. A shortage of all three of these cell types is known as pancytopenia. Pancytopenia can result in extreme tiredness (fatigue) due to low numbers of red blood cells (
anemia
), frequent infections due to low numbers of white blood cells (neutropenia), and abnormal bleeding due to low numbers of platelets (thrombocytopenia). Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome is also associated with an increased risk of certain cancerous conditions of the blood, particularly myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid
leukemia
.
Frequency
Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome appears to be very rare. At least 25 affected individuals from four families have been described in the medical literature.
Causes
Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the
SAMD9L
gene. The protein produced from this gene is involved in regulating the growth and division (proliferation) and maturation (differentiation) of cells, particularly cells in the bone marrow that give rise to
blood cells
. Studies suggest that the SAMD9L protein acts as a tumor suppressor, keeping cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. The SAMD9L protein also appears to play an important role in the brain, particularly the cerebellum, although less is known about the protein's function there.
The mutations that cause ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome are described as "gain-of-function." They increase the SAMD9L protein's ability to block cell growth and division. In the bone marrow, the resulting reduction in cell proliferation leads to a shortage of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. It is unclear how the effects of these mutations are related to ataxia and the other neurological problems associated with ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome.
It seems paradoxical that gain-of-function mutations in the
SAMD9L
gene, which enhance the protein's tumor suppressor function, could increase the risk of developing cancerous conditions such as myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia. It appears that certain cells in the bone marrow with an inherited gain-of-function
SAMD9L
gene mutation can develop additional genetic changes that are associated with milder pancytopenia but an increased cancer risk. These changes include mutations that disable the
SAMD9L
gene ("loss-of-function" mutations) or a
deletion
of part of the long (q) arm of chromosome 7 that contains the
SAMD9L
gene. These additional changes compensate for the effects of the gain-of-function mutation in bone marrow cells. They prevent an overactive SAMD9L protein from excessively restricting cell proliferation, which reduces the severity of pancytopenia in affected individuals. However, a loss of the
SAMD9L
gene and other genes on the long arm of chromosome 7 may allow cells to grow and divide uncontrollably, leading to cancer. A deletion of the long arm of chromosome 7 is a well-known risk factor for myelodysplastic syndrome and leukemia.
Learn more about the gene associated with Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome
SAMD9L
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In all reported cases, an affected person has had one parent with the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
ATXPC
Myelocerebellar disorder
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
ATAXIA-PANCYTOPENIA SYNDROME; ATXPC
MONOSOMY 7 MYELODYSPLASIA AND LEUKEMIA SYNDROME 1; M7MLS1
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Chen DH, Below JE, Shimamura A, Keel SB, Matsushita M, Wolff J, Sul Y,
Bonkowski E, Castella M, Taniguchi T, Nickerson D, Papayannopoulou T, Bird TD,
Raskind WH. Ataxia-Pancytopenia Syndrome Is Caused by Missense Mutations in
SAMD9L. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Jun 2;98(6):1146-1158. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.04.009.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Li FP, Hecht F, Kaiser-McCaw B, Baranko PV, Potter NU. Ataxia-pancytopenia:
syndrome of cerebellar ataxia, hypoplastic anemia, monosomy 7, and acute
myelogenous leukemia. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1981 Nov;4(3):189-96. doi:
10.1016/0165-4608(81)90013-3.
Citation on PubMed
Li FP, Potter NU, Buchanan GR, Vawter G, Whang-Peng J, Rosen RB. A family with
acute leukemia, hypoplastic anemia and cerebellar ataxia: association with bone
marrow C-monosomy. Am J Med. 1978 Dec;65(6):933-40. doi:
10.1016/0002-9343(78)90744-1.
Citation on PubMed
Tesi B, Davidsson J, Voss M, Rahikkala E, Holmes TD, Chiang SCC,
Komulainen-Ebrahim J, Gorcenco S, Rundberg Nilsson A, Ripperger T, Kokkonen H,
Bryder D, Fioretos T, Henter JI, Mottonen M, Niinimaki R, Nilsson L, Pronk CJ,
Puschmann A, Qian H, Uusimaa J, Moilanen J, Tedgard U, Cammenga J, Bryceson YT.
Gain-of-function SAMD9L mutations cause a syndrome of cytopenia,
immunodeficiency, MDS, and neurological symptoms. Blood. 2017 Apr
20;129(16):2266-2279. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-10-743302. Epub 2017 Feb 15.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Anemia
Bone Marrow Diseases
Cerebellar Disorders
Genetic Disorders
Leukemia
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Neutropenia - infants
Thrombocytopenia
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page