Tezepelumab Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tezepelumab Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622010.html
Tezepelumab Injection
pronounced as (tez" e pel' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tezepelumab injection is used along with other medications to prevent wheezing, difficulty breathing, chest tightness, and coughing caused by asthma in adults and children 12 years and older whose asthma is not controlled with their current asthma medication. Tezepelumab injection is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by reducing a certain type of white blood cell to help decrease swelling and irritation of the airways to allow for easier breathing.
How should this medicine be used?
Tezepelumab injection comes as a solution (liquid) in single-dose, prefilled syringes, prefilled dosing pens, and vials to inject subcutaneously (just under the skin) into your upper arm, thigh, or abdomen. It is usually given once every 4 weeks. Your doctor will determine the length of your treatment based on your condition and how well you respond to the medication.
Tezepelumab may be given to you by a nurse or other healthcare provider, or you may be told to inject the medication by yourself at home using a prefilled dosing pen. If you will be injecting tezepelumab yourself, a healthcare provider will show you how to inject the medication. Carefully read the manufacturer's instructions for use that comes with the medication. These instructions describe how to inject a dose of tezepelumab injection using a dosing pen. Be sure to ask your pharmacist or doctor if you have any questions about how to inject this medication. Dispose of used dosing pens in a puncture-resistant container. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
Do not decrease your dose of any other asthma medication or stop taking any other medication that has been prescribed by your doctor unless your doctor tells you to do so. Your doctor may want to decrease the doses of your other medications gradually.
Tezepelumab injection is not used to treat a sudden attack of asthma symptoms. Your doctor will prescribe a short-acting inhaler to use during attacks. Talk to your doctor about how to treat symptoms of a sudden asthma attack. If your asthma symptoms get worse or if you have asthma attacks more often, be sure to talk to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving tezepelumab injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tezepelumab, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in tezepelumab injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have a parasitic infection.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving tezepelumab, call your doctor.
do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you forget to inject your dose, inject the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not inject a double dose to make up for a missed one.
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of tezepelumab injection, call your doctor to reschedule the appointment.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tezepelumab injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain, redness, or swelling at the injection site
sore throat
joint pain
back pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
hives
breathing problems
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat
fainting, dizziness, feeling lightheaded
red, itchy, swollen or inflamed eyes
Tezepelumab may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, away from light, closed, and out of reach of children. Store tezepelumab injection in the refrigerator. Do not freeze or shake tezepelumab, and do not expose the medication to high temperatures. If a refrigerator is not available, you can store tezepelumab injection at room temperature, away from heat and light, for up to 30 days. Tezepelumab injection should not be put back into the refrigerator after it has been stored at room temperature.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about tezepelumab injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tezspire
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page