Fluorouracil Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fluorouracil Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682708.html
Fluorouracil Injection
pronounced as (floor'' oh ure' a sil)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Fluorouracil injection should be given in a hospital or medical facility under the supervision of a doctor who is experienced in giving chemotherapy medications for cancer. Treatment with fluorouracil injection may cause serious side effects.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fluorouracil is generally used in combination with other medications to treat colon cancer or rectal cancer (cancer that begins in the large intestine) that has gotten worse or spread to other parts of the body. Fluorouracil is used in combination with other medications to treat certain types of breast cancer after surgery to remove the tumor or radiation therapy. Fluorouracil is also used to treat cancer of the pancreas and stomach cancer. Fluorouracil is in a class of medications called antimetabolites. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells in your body.
How should this medicine be used?
Fluorouracil injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be given intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. Your doctor will tell you how often you will receive fluorouracil injection. The schedule depends on the condition you have and on how your body responds to the medication. Your doctor may need to delay your treatment or change your dose if you experience certain side effects. It is important for you to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with fluorouracil injection.
Your doctor may perform a genetic test prior to starting fluorouracil injection to see how well you will tolerate the medication.
Other uses for this medicine
Fluorouracil is also sometimes used to treat cancer of the cervix (opening of the uterus) and esophagus, head and neck cancer (including cancer of the mouth, lip, cheek, tongue, palate, throat, tonsils, and sinuses), ovarian cancer (cancer that begins in the female reproductive organs where eggs are formed), and renal cell cancer (RCC, a type of cancer that begins in the kidney). Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving fluorouracil,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to fluorouracil or any of the ingredients in fluorouracil injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving fluorouracil. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have an infection. Your doctor may not want you to receive fluorouracil injection.
tell your doctor if you have previously received radiation (x-ray) therapy or treatment with other chemotherapy medications or if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant or breast-feed while you are receiving fluorouracil injection. If you become pregnant while receiving fluorouracil injection, call your doctor. Fluorouracil may harm the fetus.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Fluorouracil may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fluorouracil may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
loss of appetite
nausea
unusual tiredness or weakness
dizziness
headache
hair loss
dry and cracked skin
vision changes
eye that are teary or sensitive to light
redness, pain, swelling, or burning at the site where the injection was given
confusion
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
sores in the mouth and throat
diarrhea
vomiting
swelling, pain, redness, or peeling of skin on the palms and soles of the feet
fever, chills, sore throat, or other signs of an infection
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
nosebleeds
coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds
unusual bleeding or bruising
pink, red, or dark brown urine
red or tarry black bowel movements
chest pain
Fluorouracil may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea
diarrhea
vomiting
fever, chills, sore throat, or other signs of an infection
unusual bleeding or bruising
bloody or black, tarry stools
coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will/may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to fluorouracil.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Adrucil
®
Injection
¶
Other names
5-Fluorouracil
5-FU
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
12/10/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page