Clopidogrel: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clopidogrel
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601040.html
Clopidogrel
pronounced as (kloh pid' oh grel)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Clopidogrel must be changed to an active form in your body so that it can treat your condition. Some people do not change clopidogrel to its active form in the body as well as other people. Because the medication does not work as well in these people, they may be at a higher risk of having a heart attack or stroke. There are tests available to identify people who have trouble changing clopidogrel to an active form. Talk to your doctor about whether you should be tested. If you are found to have difficulty converting clopidogrel to its active form, your doctor may change your dose of clopidogrel or tell you not to take clopidogrel.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with clopidogrel and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking clopidogrel.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Clopidogrel is used alone or with aspirin to prevent serious or life-threatening problems with the heart and blood vessels in people who have had a stroke, heart attack, or severe chest pain. This includes people who have percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI; angioplasty; a type of heart surgery) that may involve inserting coronary stents (metal tubes surgically placed in clogged blood vessels to improve blood flow) or who have coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG; a type of heart surgery). Clopidogrel is also used to prevent serious or life-threatening problems with the heart and blood vessels in people who have peripheral arterial disease (poor circulation in the blood vessels that supply blood to the legs). Clopidogrel is in a class of medications called antiplatelet medications. It works by preventing platelets (a type of blood cell) from collecting and forming clots that may cause a heart attack or stroke.
How should this medicine be used?
Clopidogrel comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food. Take clopidogrel at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take clopidogrel exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Clopidogrel will help prevent serious problems with your heart and blood vessels only as long as you take the medication. Continue to take clopidogrel even if you feel well. Do not stop taking clopidogrel without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking clopidogrel, there is a higher risk that you may have a heart attack or stroke. If you have a stent, there is also a higher risk that you could develop a blood clot in the stent if you stop taking clopidogrel too soon.
Other uses for this medicine
Clopidogrel is also sometimes used to prevent blood clots in people with atrial fibrillation (a condition in which the heart beats irregularly). Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking clopidogrel,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to clopidogrel, prasugrel (Effient), ticlopidine, any other medications, or any ingredient in clopidogrel tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking clopidogrel. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects. .
The following nonprescription products may interact with clopidogrel: omeprazole (Prilosec, Prilosec OTC, Zegerid); esomeprazole (Nexium); aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking clopidogrel. Do not start any of these medications while taking clopidogrel without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have bleeding ulcers (sores in the lining of the stomach or small intestine that are bleeding), bleeding in the brain, or any other condition that causes severe bleeding. Your doctor may tell you that you should not take clopidogrel.
tell your doctor if you have recently been injured and if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease or any condition that may cause bleeding, including stomach problems such as ulcers.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking clopidogrel, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking clopidogrel. Your doctor may tell you to stop taking clopidogrel at least 5 days prior to your surgery to avoid excessive bleeding during surgery. Your doctor will tell you when to start taking clopidogrel again after your surgery.
you should know that you may bleed more easily or for a longer time than usual while you are taking clopidogrel. Be careful not to cut or hurt yourself while you are taking clopidogrel.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Clopidogrel may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
excessive tiredness
headache
dizziness
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
diarrhea
nosebleed
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
black and tarry stools
red blood in stools
bloody vomit
vomit that looks like coffee grounds
unusual bleeding or bruising
pink or brown urine
slow or difficult speech
weakness or numbness of an arm or a leg
changes in vision
fever
shortness of breath
fast heartbeat
pale skin
purple patches or bleeding under the skin
confusion
yellowing of the skin or eyes
seizures
Clopidogrel may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
unusual bruising or bleeding
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Plavix
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page