Fulvestrant Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fulvestrant Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607031.html
Fulvestrant Injection
pronounced as (ful ves' trant)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fulvestrant injection is used alone or in combination with another chemotherapy medication to treat a certain type of hormone receptor positive, advanced breast cancer (breast cancer that depends on hormones such as estrogen to grow) or breast cancer has spread to other parts of the body in women who have experienced menopause (change of life; end of monthly menstrual periods) and have not previously been treated with an anti-estrogen medication such as tamoxifen (Nolvadex). Fulvestrant injection is also used alone or in combination with certain other chemotherapy medications to treat a certain type of hormone receptor positive, advanced breast cancer or breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body in adults whose cancer got worse during or after certain other treatments. Fulvestrant is in a class of medications called estrogen receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of estrogen on cancer cells. This can slow or stop the growth of some breast tumors that need estrogen to grow.
How should this medicine be used?
Fulvestrant comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected slowly over 1 to 2 minutes into a muscle in the buttocks. Fulvestrant is administered by a doctor or nurse in a medical office. It is usually given once every 2 weeks for the first 3 doses (days 1, 15, and 29) and then once a month thereafter. Your doctor will tell you how often you will receive fulvestrant. The schedule depends on the condition you have and on how your body responds to the medication. You will receive your dose of medication as two separate injections (one in each buttock).
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving fulvestrant,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to fulvestrant, any other medications , or any of the ingredients in fulvestrant injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention anticoagulants (blood thinners) such as warfarin (Jantoven). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any bleeding problems or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant.You should not become pregnant while you are receiving fulvestrant and for at least 1 year after receiving the final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. Your doctor may also check to see if you are pregnant within 7 days before you begin treatment. Tell your doctor if you become pregnant during your treatment with fulvestrant. Fulvestrant may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with fulvestrant and for 1 year after receiving the final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving fulvestrant.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of fulvestrant, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fulvestrant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
constipation
diarrhea
stomach pain
loss of appetite
sore throat
mouth sores
cough
weakness
hot flashes or flushing
headache
pain in bones, muscles, joints, or back
pain, redness, or swelling in the place where your medication was injected
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
dizziness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
depression
anxiety
tiredness
feelings of numbness, tingling, pricking, or burning on the skin
sweating
abnormal vaginal bleeding
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
shortness of breath
chest pain
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes
pain in your lower back or legs
numbness, tingling, or weakness in your legs
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain or burning while urinating
Fulvestrant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving fulvestrant.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Faslodex
®
Last Revised -
10/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page