Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625080.html
Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv Injection
pronounced as ( tel eye″ soe tooz′ ue mab)(ve doe′ tin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection is used a certain type of lung cancer (non-small cell lung cancer; NSCLC). Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv is in a class of medications called antibody-drug conjugates. It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected over 30 minutes intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or hospital. It is injected once every 2 weeks. The length of your treatment depends on how well your body responds to the medication and the side effects that you experience.
Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection may cause serious reactions, which can occur during or after you receive a dose. You may receive certain medications before your infusion to prevent a reaction if you had a reaction with previous treatment. Your doctor will watch you carefully while you are receiving telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately: rash, hives, itching, flushing, fever, chills, headache, feeling faint, nausea, vomiting, back pain, shortness of breath, difficulty breathing, or chest pain.
Your doctor may lower your dose, delay or stop your treatment, or treat you with additional medications if you experience certain side effects. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection and each time you receive a dose. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking receiving telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had neuropathy or other nerve problems, any type of lung disease or breathing problems, eye problems, diabetes, or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are receiving telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection. You may need to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment and use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 2 months after your last dose. If your partner can become pregnant, you should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 4 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. If you or your partner become pregnant while receiving telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection, call your doctor immediately. Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while receiving telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection, and for 1 month after your final dose.
this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection.
you should know that telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection has caused serious eye or vision problems. Your doctor will monitor you for signs of serious eye problems. Call your doctor right away if you have any of the following symptoms: blurred vision, vision changes. dry eyes, eye pain or swelling, or sensitivity to light. Your doctor may refer you to an ophthalmologist (eye doctor).
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while receiving this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
decreased appetite
nausea
vomiting
constipation
unusual tiredness or weakness
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the HOW section and the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately:
numbness or tingling in the hands or feet, muscle weakness, pain, burning, or difficulty walking
new or worsening cough, shortness of breath, trouble breathing, wheezing, or fever
Telisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to elisotuzumab vedotin-tllv injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Emrelis
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page