Tofersen Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tofersen Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623024.html
Tofersen Injection
pronounced as (toe fer' sen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tofersen injection is used to treat a certain type of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, Lou Gehrig's disease; a condition in which the nerves that control muscle movement slowly die, causing the muscles to shrink and weaken) in adults with a certain genetic make-up. Tofersen injection is in a class of medications called antisense oligonucleotides. It works by decreasing the production of a harmful protein that builds up in the brain and spinal cord in ALS patients.
How should this medicine be used?
Tofersen injection comes as a solution (liquid) to inject intrathecally (into the fluid-filled space of the spinal canal). Tofersen injection is given by a doctor in a medical office or clinic. It is usually given as 3 initial doses (once every 2 weeks) and then is given once every 28 days thereafter.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving tofersen injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tofersen, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in tofersen injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving tofersen injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive tofersen injection, call your doctor right away to reschedule your appointment. Your doctor will probably tell you to resume your previous schedule to receive tofersen injection, with at least 14 days between the 3 initial doses and 28 days between the later doses.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tofersen injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
fatigue
muscle or joint pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
weakness, numbness, burning, or tingling in the hands, arms, feet, or legs
back or neck pain
loss of control of your bowels or bladder
headaches, including those that are unusual or will not go away
blurred vision, double vision, loss of vision, or other visions changes
buzzing or ringing in the ears
fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, confusion, stiff neck
Tofersen injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Qalsody
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page