Olopatadine Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Olopatadine Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602025.html
Olopatadine Ophthalmic
pronounced as (oh loe pa ta' deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Prescription ophthalmic olopatadine (Pazeo) and nonprescription ophthalmic olopatadine (Pataday) are used to relieve itchy eyes caused by allergic reactions to pollen, ragweed, grass, animal hair, or pet dander. Olopatadine is in a class of medications called mast cell stabilizers. It works by preventing the release of substances that cause eye itching.
How should this medicine be used?
Prescription ophthalmic olopatadine (Pazeo) and nonprescription ophthalmic olopatadine (Pataday) come as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eye. Prescription ophthalmic olopatadine (Pazeo) is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) once daily. Nonprescription ophthalmic olopatadine (Pataday) 0.1% is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) twice daily, and nonprescription ophthalmic olopatadine (Pataday) 0.2% is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) once daily. To help you remember to use olopatadine, use it around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use olopatadine exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
If using another eye product, wait at least 5 minutes after using olopatadine eye drops before using the other eye medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using olopatadine eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to olopatadine, benzalkonium chloride, or any other medications. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using olopatadine, call your doctor.
you should know that you should not wear contact lenses if your eye(s) is/are red. If your eye is not red and you wear contact lenses, you should know that olopatadine solution contains benzalkonium chloride, which can be absorbed by soft contact lenses. Remove your contact lenses before applying olopatadine and put them back in 5 minutes later if using prescription ophthalmic olopatadine (Pazeo) eye drops or 10 minutes later if using nonprescription ophthalmic olopatadine (Pataday) eye drops.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Olopatadine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
blurred vision
eye burning, redness, or stinging
dry eyes
taste changes
abnormal sensation in eye
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using olopatadine and call your doctor immediately:
eye pain
vision changes
eye itching that worsens or continues for more than 3 days after you begin treatment
Olopatadine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Pataday
®
Patanol
®
¶
Pazeo
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
05/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page