Balsalazide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Balsalazide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a699052.html
Balsalazide
pronounced as (bal sal' a zide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Balsalazide is used to treat ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum) in adults and children 5 years of age and older. Balsalazide is an anti-inflammatory drug. It is converted in the body to mesalamine and works by reducing bowel inflammation, diarrhea, rectal bleeding, and stomach pain.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Balsalazide comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food three times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take balsalazide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Balsalazide is usually taken for 8 weeks, but it may be taken for up to 12 weeks. Continue to take balsalazide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking balsalazide without talking to your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them. If you cannot swallow the capsules or if you are giving this medication to a child, you may open the capsules and sprinkle the contents over 2 teaspoonfuls (approximately 10 mL) of applesauce. Eat the mixture right away and swallow; if necessary you can chew the mixture. If you are taking balsalazide capsules mixed with applesauce, you should know that your teeth and tongue may be stained.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking balsalazide capsules.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking balsalazide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to balsalazide, salicylate pain relievers such as aspirin, choline magnesium trisalicylate, choline salicylate, diflunisal, magnesium salicylate (Doan's, others), mesalamine (Apriso, Pentasa), salsalate, sulfasalazine (Azulfidine); any other medications; or any of the ingredients in balsalazide capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with balsalazide: aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking balsalazide. Do not start any of these medications while taking balsalazide without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a skin condition such as eczema (atopic dermatitis; a skin disease that causes the skin to be dry and itchy and to sometimes develop red, scaly rashes), kidney stones, liver or kidney disease, or pyloric stenosis (a condition in which the stomach empties slowly).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking balsalazide, call your doctor.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to the sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Balsalazide may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that balsalazide should not be taken by people who have received the varicella virus (chicken pox) vaccine in the past six weeks because of the risk of Reye's syndrome (a serious condition in which fat builds up on the brain, liver, and other body organs).
you should know that balsalazide may cause a serious reaction. Many of the symptoms of this reaction are similar to the symptoms of ulcerative colitis, so it may be difficult to tell if you are experiencing a reaction to the medication or a flare (episode of symptoms) of your disease. Call your doctor if you experience some or all of the following symptoms: stomach pain or cramping, bloody diarrhea, fever, headache, or rash.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Side effects from balsalazide can occur. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
abdominal pain
upset stomach
diarrhea
vomiting
joint or muscle pain
difficulty falling or staying asleep
tiredness
gas
runny nose, cough, fever, sore throat, or flu-like symptoms
loss of appetite
constipation
dry mouth
mouth sores
painful menstrual periods
If you experience any of the following symptoms, or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, hives, itching or peeling or blistering skin
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, mouth, or throat
difficulty breathing or swallowing
new or worsening cough
shortness of breath
chest pain
extreme tiredness
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the right upper part of the stomach
pale stools
difficult or painful urination or cloudy, discolored or bloody urine
side or back pain
bloating or swelling of the stomach
increased diarrhea
increased rectal bleeding
Balsalazide may cause your urine to become discolored, reddish-brown when it comes in contact with any surface or water (e.g., in the toilet). Call your doctor if your urine is discolored.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain
fast or shallow breathing
ringing in ears
headache
dizziness
confusion
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to balsalazide. Before you have any laboratory tests, tell the laboratory personnel that you take balsalazide, as this medication may interfere with some laboratory tests.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Colazal
®
Giazo
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page