Rimegepant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rimegepant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620031.html
Rimegepant
pronounced as (ri me' je pant)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rimegepant is used to prevent and treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes are accompanied by nausea and sensitivity to sound or light). Rimegepant is in a class of medications called calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of a certain natural substance in the body that causes migraine headaches.
How should this medicine be used?
Rimegepant comes as an orally disintegrating tablet (tablet that dissolves quickly in the mouth) to take by mouth. If used to prevent a migraine, it is usually taken every other day. If used to treat a migraine, it is usually taken as a single dose at the first sign of a migraine headache. Do not take more than one dose in a 24-hour or 48-hour period. Your doctor will tell you the maximum number of migraine headaches you should treat with rimegepant tablets in a 30-day period. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take rimegepant exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Do not try to push the orally disintegrating tablet through the foil packaging. Instead, use dry hands to peel back the foil. Immediately take out the tablet and place it on or under your tongue. The tablet will quickly dissolve and can be swallowed with saliva. No water is needed to swallow disintegrating tablets.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more frequently after taking rimegepant.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking rimegepant,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rimegepant, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in rimegepant orally disintegrating tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with rimegepant. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with rimegepant. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting rimegepant with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking rimegepant, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking rimegepant, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rimegepant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
shortness of breath
difficulty breathing
swelling of the face, eyes, mouth, throat, tongue, or lips
rash
hives
itching
Rimegepant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you take rimegepant.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nurtec
®
ODT
Last Revised -
05/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page