Oteseconazole: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Oteseconazole
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624030.html
Oteseconazole
pronounced as (oh tes″ e kon′ a zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Oteseconazole is used to reduce the number of recurrent vaginal yeast infections in women who are not able to become pregnant. This includes women who are postmenopausal (women who have experienced a change of life; end of menstrual periods) and women who have had surgery to remove their uterus and/or both ovaries or have had a tubal ligation ('tubes tied,' surgery to prevent pregnancy). Oteseconazole is in a class of medications called azole antifungals. It works by slowing the growth of fungi that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Oteseconazole comes as a capsule to take by mouth with food. It is usually taken as 4 capsules at one time on day 1, then as 3 capsules at one time on day 2, and then as 1 capsule once a week starting on day 14 for 11 weeks. Oteseconazole may also be taken as 1 capsule once daily for 7 days in a row, followed by 1 capsule once a week starting on day 15 for 11 weeks. Take oteseconazole at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take oteseconazole exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, dissolve, or crush them.
Take oteseconazole until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. Do not stop taking oteseconazole without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking oteseconazole too soon or skip doses, your infection may come back after a short time.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking oteseconazole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to oteseconazole, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in oteseconazole capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. Oteseconazole should not be taken by patients who are pregnant or who may become pregnant or who are breast-feeding. Oteseconazole may harm the baby if it is used by women who are pregnant or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking oteseconazole, call your doctor immediately.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Oteseconazole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
nausea
indigestion
hot flushes
Oteseconazole may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vivjoa
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page