Frovatriptan: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Frovatriptan
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604013.html
Frovatriptan
pronounced as (froe va trip' tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Frovatriptan is used to treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe throbbing headaches that sometimes come with nausea and a strong reaction to sound and light). Frovatriptan is in a class of medications called selective serotonin receptor agonists. It works by narrowing blood vessels around the brain, blocking pain signals from being sent to the brain, and stopping the release of certain natural substances that cause pain, nausea, and other symptoms of migraine. Frovatriptan does not stop migraine attacks from coming or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Frovatriptan comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take at the first sign of a migraine headache. If your symptoms improve after you take frovatriptan but return after 2 hours or longer, you may take a second tablet. However, if your symptoms do not improve after you take frovatriptan, do not take a second tablet before calling your doctor. Do not take more than three frovatriptan tablets in any 24-hour period. Take frovatriptan exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more frequently after taking frovatriptan.
If you take frovatriptan more often or for longer than the recommended period of time, your headaches may get worse or may occur more often. You should not take frovatriptan or any other headache medications for more than 10 days per month. Call your doctor if you need to take frovatriptan to treat more than four headaches in a 1-month period.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking frovatriptan,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
do not take frovatriptan if you have taken any of the following medications in the past 24 hours: other selective serotonin receptor agonists such as almotriptan, eletriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan , or zolmitriptan; or ergot-type medications such as bromocriptine, cabergoline, dihydroergotamine, ergoloid mesylates, ergonovine, ergotamine, methylergonovine, methysergide, and pergolide.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past 2 weeks: isocarboxazid, phenelzine, selegiline, and tranylcypromine.
some medications should not be taken with frovatriptan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting frovatriptan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking frovatriptan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease; a heart attack; angina (chest pain); irregular heartbeats; stroke or 'mini-stroke'; or circulation problems such as varicose veins, blood clots in the legs, Raynaud's disease (problems with blood flow to the fingers, toes, ears, and nose), or ischemic bowel disease (bloody diarrhea and stomach pain caused by decreased blood flow to the intestines). Your doctor may tell you not to take frovatriptan.
tell your doctor if you smoke or are overweight; if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, or liver disease; if you have gone through menopause; or if any family members have or have ever had heart disease or stroke.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you plan to be sexually active while you are taking this medication, talk to your doctor about effective methods of birth control. If you become pregnant while taking frovatriptan, call your doctor.
you should know that frovatriptan may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
talk to your doctor about your headache symptoms to make sure they are caused by migraine. Frovatriptan should not be used to treat certain types of headaches.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Frovatriptan may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness, drowsiness
headache
dry mouth
indigestion
excessive tiredness
flushing
hot or cold feeling
pain in joints or bones
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
tightness, pain, pressure, or heaviness in the chest, throat, neck, or jaw
shortness of breath
breaking out in a cold sweat
lightheadedness, faintness
slow or difficult speech
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
sudden or severe stomach pain
bloody diarrhea
constipation
sudden weight loss
vomiting
rapid, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
difficulty breathing or swallowing
paleness or blue color of the fingers and toes
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
hives, rash, itching
Frovatriptan may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you take fovatriptan.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Frova
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page