Mitochondrial complex I deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Mitochondrial complex I deficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/mitochondrial-complex-i-deficiency/
Mitochondrial complex I deficiency
Description
Mitochondrial complex I deficiency is a shortage (deficiency) of a protein complex called complex I or a loss of its function. Complex I is found in cell structures called
mitochondria
, which convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use. Complex I is the first of five mitochondrial complexes that carry out a multi-step process called
oxidative phosphorylation
, through which cells derive much of their energy.
Mitochondrial complex I deficiency can cause a wide variety of signs and symptoms affecting many organs and systems of the body, particularly the nervous system, the heart, and the muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles). These signs and symptoms can appear at any time from birth to adulthood.
People with mitochondrial complex I deficiency typically have neurological problems, such as abnormal brain function (encephalopathy), recurrent seizures (epilepsy), intellectual disability, difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia), or involuntary movements (dystonia). Affected individuals may have low muscle tone (hypotonia), muscle pain (myalgia), and extreme fatigue in response to physical activity (exercise intolerance). They tend to develop elevated levels of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis), which can cause nausea, vomiting, weakness, and rapid breathing. In severe cases, lactic acidosis can be life-threatening.
People with mitochondrial complex I deficiency sometimes have heart, liver, or kidney problems. Vision problems due to abnormal eye movement or breakdown (degeneration) of the nerves that carry signals from the eyes to the brain (
optic nerves
) can also occur.
Some people with mitochondrial complex I deficiency have groups of signs and symptoms that are classified as a specific syndrome. For example, a condition called
Leigh syndrome
is most commonly caused by mitochondrial complex I deficiency. Leigh syndrome is characterized by progressive loss of mental and movement abilities (developmental or psychomotor regression) and typically results in death within 2 to 3 years from the onset of symptoms. Another condition that can be caused by mitochondrial complex I deficiency,
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy
, is associated mainly with vision problems due to optic nerve degeneration. These syndromes can also have other causes.
Frequency
Mitochondrial diseases are thought to occur in about 1 in 8,500 people. Mitochondrial complex I deficiency is the most common cause of mitochondrial disease in children, accounting for approximately 30 percent of cases.
Causes
Mutations in many genes can cause mitochondrial complex I deficiency. Most of these genes provide instructions for making components of complex I or proteins that help assemble the complex. In some cases, the genes are involved in other functions that influence these processes.
Mutations that cause mitochondrial complex I deficiency impair the formation or function of complex I. As a result, complex I activity is reduced and oxidative phosphorylation is impaired. Researchers believe that problems with oxidative phosphorylation can lead to cell death by reducing the amount of energy available in the cell. It is thought that tissues and organs that require a lot of energy, such as the nervous system, heart, liver, kidneys, and skeletal muscles, are most affected by a reduction in oxidative phosphorylation.
Most genes known to be involved in mitochondrial complex I deficiency are found in nuclear DNA, which is packaged in chromosomes within the cell
nucleus
. Other genes involved in the condition are found in
mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which is located in the mitochondria themselves. Most of the body's cells contain many mitochondria, and the mitochondria each contain many sets of mtDNA. When a mutation occurs in mtDNA, either all the mtDNA will have the same change (homoplasmy), or just some of the mtDNA will contain the change (heteroplasmy). A higher percentage of mutated mtDNA typically causes more severe disease.
Learn more about the genes associated with Mitochondrial complex I deficiency
ACAD9
MT-ND1
MT-ND4
MT-ND4L
MT-ND5
MT-ND6
MT-TL1
Additional Information from NCBI Gene:
ELAC2
FOXRED1
MT-ND2
MT-ND3
MTFMT
NDUFA1
NDUFA10
NDUFA11
NDUFA12
NDUFA13
NDUFA2
NDUFA9
NDUFAF1
NDUFAF2
NDUFAF3
NDUFAF4
NDUFAF5
NDUFAF6
NDUFB10
NDUFB11
NDUFB3
NDUFB9
NDUFS1
NDUFS2
NDUFS3
NDUFS4
NDUFS6
NDUFS7
NDUFS8
NDUFV1
NDUFV2
NUBPL
PPA2
TIMMDC1
TMEM126B
Inheritance
Mitochondrial complex I deficiency has several inheritance patterns, depending on the gene involved. When the disorder is caused by a mutation in a gene found in nuclear DNA, it has autosomal recessive or X-linked inheritance.
Autosomal recessive
means that both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition because the other copy of the gene is normal.
X-linked inheritance occurs when the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two
sex chromosomes
in each cell. In males, who have only one X chromosome, a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females, who have two copies of the X chromosome, one altered copy of the gene in each cell can lead to less severe features of the condition or may cause no signs or symptoms at all. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
When mitochondrial complex I deficiency is caused by a mutation in a gene found in mtDNA, it is inherited in a
mitochondrial pattern
, which is also known as maternal inheritance. Because egg cells, but not sperm cells, contribute mitochondria to the developing embryo, children can inherit disorders resulting from mtDNA mutations only from their mother. These disorders can appear in every generation of a family and can affect both males and females, but fathers do not pass traits associated with changes in mtDNA to their children.
Other Names for This Condition
NADH-coenzyme Q reductase deficiency
NADH:Q(1) oxidoreductase deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Isolated complex I deficiency
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1; MC1DN1
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Alston CL, Rocha MC, Lax NZ, Turnbull DM, Taylor RW. The genetics and
pathology of mitochondrial disease. J Pathol. 2017 Jan;241(2):236-250. doi:
10.1002/path.4809. Epub 2016 Nov 2.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Blanchet L, Buydens MC, Smeitink JA, Willems PH, Koopman WJ. Isolated
mitochondrial complex I deficiency: explorative data analysis of patient cell
parameters. Curr Pharm Des. 2011 Dec 1;17(36):4023-33. doi:
10.2174/138161211798764870.
Citation on PubMed
Distelmaier F, Koopman WJ, van den Heuvel LP, Rodenburg RJ, Mayatepek E,
Willems PH, Smeitink JA. Mitochondrial complex I deficiency: from organelle
dysfunction to clinical disease. Brain. 2009 Apr;132(Pt 4):833-42. doi:
10.1093/brain/awp058. Epub 2009 Mar 31.
Citation on PubMed
Fernandez-Vizarra E, Tiranti V, Zeviani M. Assembly of the oxidative
phosphorylation system in humans: what we have learned by studying its defects.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jan;1793(1):200-11. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.05.028.
Epub 2008 Jun 21.
Citation on PubMed
Leman G, Gueguen N, Desquiret-Dumas V, Kane MS, Wettervald C, Chupin S,
Chevrollier A, Lebre AS, Bonnefont JP, Barth M, Amati-Bonneau P, Verny C, Henrion
D, Bonneau D, Reynier P, Procaccio V. Assembly defects induce oxidative stress in
inherited mitochondrial complex I deficiency. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015
Aug;65:91-103. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.05.017. Epub 2015 May 27.
Citation on PubMed
Pagniez-Mammeri H, Loublier S, Legrand A, Benit P, Rustin P, Slama A.
Mitochondrial complex I deficiency of nuclear origin I. Structural genes. Mol
Genet Metab. 2012 Feb;105(2):163-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.11.188. Epub 2011
Nov 18.
Citation on PubMed
Pagniez-Mammeri H, Rak M, Legrand A, Benit P, Rustin P, Slama A. Mitochondrial
complex I deficiency of nuclear origin II. Non-structural genes. Mol Genet Metab.
2012 Feb;105(2):173-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.10.001. Epub 2011 Oct 20.
Citation on PubMed
Vartak RS, Semwal MK, Bai Y. An update on complex I assembly: the assembly of
players. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2014 Aug;46(4):323-8. doi:
10.1007/s10863-014-9564-x. Epub 2014 Jul 17.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Mitochondrial Diseases
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page