Ferric Derisomaltose Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ferric Derisomaltose Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625042.html
Ferric Derisomaltose Injection
pronounced as (fer′ ik der eye″ soe mawl′ tose)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ferric derisomaltose is used to treat iron-deficiency anemia (a lower than normal number of red blood cells due to not enough iron in the body). Ferric derisomaltose is in a class of medications called iron replacement products. It works by providing iron so that the body can make more red blood cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Ferric derisomaltose comes as a solution (liquid) to be given intravenously (into a vein) by a healthcare provider. It is usually given as a single dose. Ferric derisomaltose may be given again, if needed for your condition.
Ferric derisomaltose injection may cause severe or life-threatening reactions during and shortly after you receive the medication. Your doctor will watch you carefully while you receive each dose and for at least 30 minutes afterwards. Tell your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms during or after your injection: shortness of breath; wheezing; difficulty swallowing or breathing; hoarseness; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes; hives; rash; itching; fainting; lightheadedness; dizziness; flushing of the face; nausea; cold, clammy skin; rapid, weak pulse; chest pain; or loss of consciousness. If you experience a severe reaction, your doctor will stop your infusion immediately and provide emergency medical treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving ferric derisomaltose,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ferric derisomaltose may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
rash
Ferric derisomaltose may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to ferric derisomaltose.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Monoferric
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page