Sumatriptan Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sumatriptan Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a696023.html
Sumatriptan Injection
pronounced as (soo ma trip' tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sumatriptan injection is used to treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes come with nausea and a strong reaction to sound and light). Sumatriptan injection is also used to treat the symptoms of cluster headaches (severe headaches usually on one side of the head or around one eye). Sumatriptan is in a class of medications called selective serotonin receptor agonists. It works by narrowing blood vessels in the brain, stopping pain signals from being sent to the brain, and stops the release of certain natural substances that cause pain, nausea, and other symptoms of migraine or cluster headaches. Sumatriptan does not stop migraine attacks from coming or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Sumatriptan injection comes as a solution (liquid) to inject subcutaneously (just under your skin). Use at the first sign of a migraine headache. If your symptoms improve after you use sumatriptan but return after 1 hour or longer, you may use a second dose. However, if your symptoms do not improve after you use sumatriptan, do not use a second injection without talking to your doctor. Use sumatriptan exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Sumatriptan injection comes in a pre-filled auto-injection device and in vials to be used with disposable syringes. If you are using vials of sumatriptan injection, your doctor or pharmacist will tell you what type of syringe you should use. Do not use any other type of syringe because you may not get the right amount of medication.
Inject your sumatriptan in the outer side of your thigh or upper arm. Do not inject sumatriptan through clothing. Never inject sumatriptan into a vein or muscle.
You may use your first dose of sumatriptan injection in a doctor's office or other medical facility where you can be monitored for serious reactions. Carefully read the instructions that come with your device, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to show you how to use it.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more often after using sumatriptan injection.
If you use sumatriptan more often or for longer than the recommended period of time, your headaches may get worse or may occur more often. You should not use sumatriptan injection or take any other headache medication for more than 10 days per month. Call your doctor if you need to use sumatriptan injection to treat more than 4 headaches in 1-month period.
Do not use prefilled injection devices or vials of sumatriptan injection more than once. Dispose of used syringes in a puncture-resistant container. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using sumatriptan,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
do not use sumatriptan injection if you have taken any of the following medications in the past 24 hours: other selective serotonin receptor agonists such as almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, or zolmitriptan; or ergot-type such as bromocriptine, cabergoline, dihydroergotamine, ergoloid mesylates, ergonovine, ergotamine, methylergonovine, methysergide, and pergolide.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past 2 weeks: monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) inhibitor such as isocarboxazid, phenelzine, selegiline, or tranylcypromine.
some medications should not be taken with sumatriptan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting sumatriptan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking sumatriptan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease; a heart attack; angina (chest pain); irregular heartbeats; stroke or 'mini-stroke'; or circulation problems such as varicose veins, blood clots in the legs, Raynaud's disease (problems with blood flow to the fingers, toes, ears, and nose), or ischemic bowel disease (bloody diarrhea and stomach pain caused by decreased blood flow to the intestines). Your doctor may tell you not to use sumatriptan injection.
tell your doctor if you smoke or are overweight; if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, seizures, or liver or kidney disease; if you have gone through menopause; or if any family members have or have ever had heart disease or stroke.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you plan to be sexually active while you are using this medication, talk to your doctor about effective methods of birth control. If you become pregnant while using sumatriptan, call your doctor.
you should know that sumatriptan injection may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sumatriptan may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain or redness at the site of injection
flushing
tingling feeling
feeling of warmth
drowsiness
upset stomach, vomiting
muscle cramps
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
pain, tightness, pressure, or heaviness in chest, throat, neck, or jaw
slow or difficult speech
faintness
breaking out in a cold sweat
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
bloody diarrhea
vomiting
sudden or severe stomach pain
sudden weight loss
paleness or blue color of the fingers and toes
shortness of breath
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat
rash, hives
hoarseness
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
seizures
changes in vision
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature, away from light, excess heat, and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you use sumatriptan injection.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Alsuma
®
Injection
Imitrex
®
Injection
Sumavel
®
Injection
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page