Posaconazole Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Posaconazole Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616017.html
Posaconazole Injection
pronounced as (poe'' sa kon' a zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Posaconazole injection is used to prevent serious fungal infections that can spread throughout the body in adults and children 2 years of age and older with a weakened ability to fight infection. Posaconazole injection is also used to treat invasive aspergillosis (a serious fungal infection that begins in the lungs and spreads through the bloodstream to other organs) in adults and teenagers 13 years of age and older. Posaconazole injection is in a class of medications called azole antifungals. It works by slowing the growth of fungi that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Posaconazole injection comes as a liquid to be injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually infused (injected slowly) over 30 to 90 minutes twice daily on the first day and then once a day. Your doctor will determine how long you need to use this medication. You may receive posaconazole injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving posaconazole injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving posaconazole injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to posaconazole; other antifungal medications such as fluconazole (Diflucan), isavuconazonium (Cresemba), itraconazole (Onmel, Sporanox, Tolsura), ketoconazole, or voriconazole (Vfend); any other medications; or any of the ingredients in posaconazole injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Some medications should not be taken with posaconazole injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting posaconazole injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping or changing any medications while taking posaconazole injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking posaconazole injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a slow or irregular heartbeat; a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death); problems with blood circulation; low levels of calcium, magnesium, or potassium in your blood; or kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving posaconazole injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Posaconazole injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
fever
headache
chills or shaking
stomach pain
constipation
diarrhea
nosebleeds
coughing
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
extreme tiredness, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, yellowing of the skin or eyes, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, dark urine, pale stools, or flu-like symptoms
rash
itching
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
sudden loss of consciousness
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
shortness of breath
Posaconazole injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to posaconazole injection.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish posaconazole injection, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Noxafil
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page