Temozolomide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Temozolomide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601250.html
Temozolomide
pronounced as (te moe zoe' loe mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Temozolomide is used to treat certain types of brain tumors. Temozolomide is in a class of medications called alkylating agents. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells in your body.
How should this medicine be used?
Temozolomide comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day in the evening at bedtime. Take temozolomide capsules on an empty stomach with a glass of water. Take temozolomide at around the same time every day. For some types of brain tumors, temozolomide is taken daily for 42–49 days. Then, after a 28-day break, it may be taken once a day for 5 days in a row, followed by a 23-day break before repeating the next dosage cycle. For treatment of other types of brain tumors, temozolomide is taken once a day for 5 days in a row, followed by a 23-day break before repeating the next dosage cycle. Your doctor will decide how many times you should repeat the treatment cycles. The length of treatment depends on the how well your body responds to it and the type of cancer that you have. Take temozolomide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your full dose may contain more than one type and color of capsules and may be contained in more than one prescription bottle. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand.
Temozolomide capsules come in several different strengths. Your doctor may want you to take a combination of capsules to make up your full dose. Be sure that you know what each type of capsule looks like and how many you are to take of each. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions.
If any of the capsules are broken or leaking, do not touch them with your bare hands and be careful not to breathe in the powder from the capsules. You should wear rubber or latex gloves when you handle broken or opened capsules so that your skin does not come into contact with the powder. If the capsule contents do touch your skin, wash the area well with water right away.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not empty, chew, or crush them.
You may vomit after you take the medication. If this happens, let your doctor know right away. Do not take another dose of temozolomide on the same day.
Your doctor may need to delay your treatment or adjust your dose of temozolomide depending on your response to treatment and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Do not stop taking temozolomide without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking temozolomide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to temozolomide, dacarbazine (DTIC-Dome) any other medications, or any of the ingredients in temozolomide capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with temozolomide. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting temozolomide with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking temozolomide, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist..
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease.
you should know that temozolomide may interfere with sperm production in men. However, you should not assume that you cannot get someone else pregnant. Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are taking temozolomide. Use a reliable method of birth control to prevent pregnancy. If you become pregnant while taking temozolomide, call your doctor. Temozolomide may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking temozolomide.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Talk to your doctor about what to do if you miss a dose of temozolomide. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Temozolomide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
loss of appetite
sores in the mouth and throat
headache
pale skin
lack of energy
loss of balance or coordination
fainting
dizziness
hair loss
insomnia
memory problems
changes in vision
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking temozolomide and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
unusual bleeding or bruising
red or black, tarry stools
pink, red, or dark brown urine
coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds
fever, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, or other signs of infection
unusual tiredness or weakness
rash
unable to move one side of the body
shortness of breath
seizures
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
decreased urination
Temozolomide may increase the risk that you will develop other cancers. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking temozolomide.
Temozolomide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
unusual bleeding or bruising
red or black, tarry stools
pink, red, or dark brown urine
coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds
fever, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, or other signs of infection
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order laboratory tests before, during, and after your treatment to check your body's response to temozolomide and to see if your blood cells are affected by this drug.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Temodar
®
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page