Buspirone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Buspirone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a688005.html
Buspirone
pronounced as (byoo spye' rone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Buspirone is used to treat anxiety disorders or in the short-term treatment of symptoms of anxiety. Buspirone is in a class of medications called anxiolytics. It works by changing the amounts of certain natural substances in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Buspirone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken twice daily and must be taken consistently, either always with food or always without food each time. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take buspirone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of buspirone and gradually increase your dose, not more often than once every 2 to 3 days. It may take several weeks before you reach a dose that works for you.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking buspirone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to buspirone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in buspirone tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor such as isocarboxazid (Marplan), linezolid (Zyvox), methylene blue, phenelzine (Nardil), selegiline (Eldepryl, Emsam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate.
some medications should not be taken with buspirone. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with buspirone. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting buspirone with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking buspirone, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription product may interact with buspirone: cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking buspirone. Do not start this medication while taking buspirone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease or a history of alcohol or drug abuse.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking buspirone, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking buspirone.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug. Do not drink alcohol while taking buspirone.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Avoid drinking large amounts of grapefruit juice while taking buspirone.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Buspirone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
nausea
diarrhea
headache
excitement
confusion
fatigue
nervousness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
feelings of anger or hostility
lightheadedness
headache
weakness
numbness
increased sweating
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the face, eyes, mouth, throat, tongue, or lips
fast or irregular heartbeat
blurred vision
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
agitation, fever, sweating, dizziness, flushing, confusion, fast or irregular heartbeat, shivering, severe muscle stiffness or twitching, seizures, hallucinations, loss of coordination, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature, away from light, excess heat, and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
dizziness
drowsiness
blurred vision
upset stomach
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to buspirone.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking buspirone.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
BuSpar
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
04/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page