Desmopressin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Desmopressin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608010.html
Desmopressin
pronounced as (des moe press' in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Desmopressin is used to control the symptoms of a certain type of diabetes insipidus ('water diabetes'; condition in which the body produces an abnormally large amount of urine). Desmopressin is also used to control excessive thirst and the passage of an abnormally large amount of urine that may occur after a head injury or after certain types of surgery. Desmopressin is also used to control bed-wetting. Desmopressin is in a class of medications called hormones. It works by replacing vasopressin, a hormone that is normally produced in the body to help balance the amount of water and salt.
How should this medicine be used?
Desmopressin comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken two to three times a day. When desmopressin is used to treat bed-wetting, it is usually taken once a day at bedtime. Try to take desmopressin at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take desmopressin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of desmopressin and gradually increase your dose. Follow these directions carefully.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking desmopressin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to desmopressin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in desmopressin tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking desmopressin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of these medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with desmopressin: aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking desmopressin. Do not start any of these medications while taking desmopressin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease or a low level of sodium in your blood. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take desmopressin.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, any condition that causes you to be extremely thirsty, cystic fibrosis, or heart disease.
if you are taking desmopressin to treat bed-wetting, tell your doctor if you develop an infection, fever, vomiting, or diarrhea; if the weather is unusually hot; or if you plan to exercise more than usual. You may need to drink more fluid than usual in these situations. Drinking too much fluid while you are taking desmopressin can be dangerous, so your doctor will probably tell you to stop taking desmopressin temporarily.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking desmopressin, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking desmopressin if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take desmopressin because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking desmopressin.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Your doctor may tell you to limit the amount of fluid you drink during your treatment with desmopressin. If you are taking desmopressin to treat bed-wetting, your doctor will probably tell you to avoid drinking for at least one hour before you take desmopressin and at least 8 hours after you take desmopressin. Follow your doctor's directions carefully to prevent serious side effects.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Desmopressin may cause side effects. Call your doctor if either of the following symptoms is severe or does not go away:
diarrhea
abnormal thinking
Some side effects may be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
weight gain
headache
irritability
restlessness
extreme tiredness
confusion
slowed reflexes
muscle weakness, spasms, or cramps
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
seizures
loss of consciousness for a period of time
Desmopressin may cause other side effects. Tell your doctor if you experience any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature, away from heat, light, and moisture.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
confusion
drowsiness
headache
difficulty urinating
sudden weight gain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to desmopressin.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
DDAVP
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page