Progesterone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Progesterone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604017.html
Progesterone
pronounced as (proe jes' ter one)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Progestin, when used with estrogen, may increase the risk of heart attack, stroke, blood clots in the lungs and legs, and breast cancer. Tell your doctor if you smoke and if you have or have ever had a breast lump; breast cancer; a heart attack; a stroke; blood clots or blood clotting problems; high blood pressure; high blood levels of cholesterol or fats; lupus (an autoimmune disease in which the immune system attacks healthy parts of the body such as joints, skin, blood vessels, and organs); or diabetes. If you are having surgery or will be on bedrest, talk to your doctor about stopping estrogen and progestin at least 4 to 6 weeks before the surgery or bedrest.
If you experience any of the following side effects, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment: sudden, severe headache; sudden, severe vomiting; sudden partial or complete loss of vision; speech problems; dizziness or faintness; weakness or numbness of an arm or a leg; a lump in your breast; crushing chest pain or chest heaviness; coughing up blood; sudden shortness of breath; or calf pain.
Progestin, when used with estrogen, have also been found to increase the risk of dementia (decrease in thinking, remembering, and reasoning).
Progestin, when used with estrogen, have also been found to increase the risk of breast cancer.
Talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking estrogen and progestin.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Progesterone is used to prevent changes to the uterus lining that can happen with estrogen when used for hormone replacement in women during menopause. Combination of estrogen and progesterone used during menopause is called menopausal hormone therapy (MHT). Progesterone is also used to produce a period in women who have amenorrhea (absence of a period). Progesterone is in a class of medications called progestins (female hormones). It works as part of hormone replacement therapy by decreasing the amount of estrogen in the uterus. It works to bring on menstruation by replacing the natural progesterone that some women are missing.
How should this medicine be used?
Progesterone comes as a capsule to take by mouth. Take once a day in the evening or at bedtime. You will probably take progesterone on a rotating schedule that alternates 10 to 12 days when you take progesterone with 16 to 18 days when you do not take the medication. Your doctor will tell you exactly when to take progesterone. To help you remember to take progesterone, take it around the same time in the evening.
Take progesterone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Continue to take progesterone as directed even if you feel well. Do not stop taking progesterone without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking progesterone,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking while taking progesterone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with progesterone: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking progesterone. Do not start any of these medications while taking progesterone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had unexplained vaginal bleeding between periods; a miscarriage in which some tissue was left in the uterus; cancer of the breasts or female organs; seizures; migraine headaches; asthma; diabetes; depression; blood clots in the legs, lungs, eyes, brain, or anywhere in the body; stroke or ministroke; vision problems; or liver, kidney, heart, or gallbladder disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking progesterone, call your doctor immediately.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking progesterone.
you should know that progesterone may make you dizzy or drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you. If progesterone does make you dizzy or drowsy, take your daily dose at bedtime.
you should know that progesterone may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking progesterone. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Progesterone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
breast tenderness or pain
upset stomach
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
tiredness
muscle, joint, or bone pain
mood swings, irritability or excessive worrying
runny nose, sneezing, or cough
vaginal discharge
problems urinating
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them or any in the important warning section, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency care:
breast lumps
migraine headache
bulging eyes or double vision
unexpected vaginal bleeding
shaking hands that you cannot control
seizures
stomach pain or swelling
depression
hives, skin rash itching or difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Progesterone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test or biopsy (removal of tissue for testing), tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking progesterone.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Prometrium
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page