Tinidazole: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tinidazole
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604036.html
Tinidazole
pronounced as (tye ni' da zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Another medication that is similar to tinidazole has caused cancer in laboratory animals. It is not known whether tinidazole increases the risk of developing cancer in laboratory animals or in humans.Talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of using this medication.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tinidazole is used to treat trichomoniasis (a sexually transmitted disease that can affect men and women), giardiasis (an infection of the intestine that can cause diarrhea, gas, and stomach cramps), and amebiasis (an infection of the intestine that can cause diarrhea, gas, and stomach cramps and can spread to other organs such as the liver). Tinidazole is also used to treat bacterial vaginosis (an infection caused by an overgrowth of harmful bacteria in the vagina) in women. Tinidazole is in a class of medications called nitroimidazole antimicrobials. It works by killing the organisms that can cause infection.
Antibiotics will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Tinidazole comes as a suspension (liquid) prepared by the pharmacist and a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food as a single dose or once a day for 2 to 5 days. To help you remember to take tinidazole (if you are to take it for more than one day), take it around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take tinidazole exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the liquid well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
Take tinidazole until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking tinidazole too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely cured and bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tinidazole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tinidazole, metronidazole (Flagyl), secnidazole (Solosec), or any other medications.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or if you have stopped taking them within the past 2 weeks: disulfiram (Antabuse). .
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking tinidazole. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking cholestyramine (Questran), you should not take it at the same time that you take tinidazole. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to space doses of these medications.
tell your doctor if you have a yeast infection now; if you are being treated with dialysis (mechanical removal of waste in patients with kidney failure); or if you have or have ever had seizures or nervous system, blood, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking tinidazole, call your doctor. Do not breastfeed while you are taking tinidazole and for 3 days after you finish your treatment.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking tinidazole.
know that you should not drink alcoholic beverages or take products with alcohol or propylene glycol while you are taking this medication and for 3 days afterwards. Alcohol and propylene glycol may cause an upset stomach, vomiting, stomach cramps, headaches, sweating, and flushing (redness of the face).
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tinidazole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
sharp, unpleasant metallic taste
upset stomach
vomiting
nausea
loss of appetite
constipation
stomach pain or cramps
headache
tiredness or weakness
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
seizures
numbness or tingling of hands or feet
rash
hives
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty swallowing or breathing
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Protect the medication from light. Discard any remaining liquid after 7 days.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to tinidazole. Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking tinidazole.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the tinidazole, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tindamax
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page