Ranibizumab Implant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ranibizumab Implant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625086.html
Ranibizumab Implant
pronounced as (ra″ ni biz′ ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Ranibizumab implant may cause endophthalmitis (infection of tissues or fluids inside the eyeball that can cause severe eye damage, including blindness). Tell your doctor if you have an infection in or around your eyes, inflammation in your eye, or any other eye condition. Your doctor may not give you ranibizumab until the infection or inflammation is gone. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: increasing eye pain, vision loss, sensitivity to light, or redness in the white of the eye.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with ranibizumab implant. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving ranibizumab implant.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ranibizumab implant is used to treat wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD; an eye disease that causes central vision loss [ability to see straight ahead]), diabetic macular edema (an eye disease caused by diabetes that can lead to vision loss) and diabetic retinopathy (damage to the eyes caused by diabetes). Ranibizumab is in a class of medications called vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) antagonists. It works by stopping abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage in the eye(s) that may cause vision loss.
How should this medicine be used?
Ranibizumab comes as an implant to be inserted into the white part of your eye with a needle by a doctor in a medical office or clinic. The implant may need to be refilled by injecting with more solution into it in a medical office or clinic. Your doctor will refill your implant on a schedule based on your condition.
Before you receive ranibizumab implant, your doctor will clean your eye to prevent infection and numb your eye to reduce discomfort during the implant. You may feel pressure in your eye when the medication is implanted. After your injection, your doctor will need to examine your eyes before you leave the office.
After having the implant inserted, you may be asked to keep your head above shoulder level for the rest of the day, which includes sleeping with 3 or more pillows under your head when you sleep. You will also be provided with an eye shield which should not be removed until told to do so by your doctor and should be worn for at least 7 nights after the implant was inserted.
Do not push, rub or touch that part of the eye for 30 days after the implant insertion (underneath the eyelid in the upper and outer part of the eye) or 7 days after the implant is refilled. Avoid rubbing or touching that part of the eye during your treatment with ranibizumab implant. If you have to rub or touch your eye, wash your hands before.
Ranibizumab controls certain eye conditions, but does not cure them. Your doctor will watch you carefully to see how well ranibizumab works for you. Talk to your doctor about how long you should continue treatment with ranibizumab implant.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving ranibizumab implant,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you can become pregnant, use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 12 months after your last dose. If you become pregnant while receiving ranibizumab implant, call your doctor.
your doctor may prescribe antibiotic eye drops for you to use for a few days after you receive the implant. Talk to your doctor about how to use these eye drops.
ask your doctor if there are any activities you should avoid during your treatment with ranibizumab implant.
you should plan to have someone drive you home after your treatment. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until the eye shield is removed and you can see.
tell your doctor if you will be having a magnetic resonance imaging exam (MRI; a medical test that uses powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body) during your treatment with ranibizumab implant.
tell your doctor if you notice that the implant has moved out of place in your eye.
talk to your doctor about testing your vision at home during your treatment. Check your vision in both eyes as directed by your doctor, and call your doctor if there are any changes in your vision.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive ranibizumab implant or refill, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ranibizumab implant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
redness or blood in the white of your eyes
eye pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
sudden feeling that something is in your eye, seeing a bulge over the white part of your eye, or eye discharge or watering of the eye
seeing flashing lights, seeing "floaters" or small specks, seeing a curtain or shadow covering your vision, vision loss, or other vision changes
seeing moving spots or what looks like spider webs in your vision
Ranibizumab implant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Susvimo
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page