X-linked acrogigantism: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
X-linked acrogigantism
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/x-linked-acrogigantism/
X-linked acrogigantism
Description
X-linked acrogigantism (X-LAG) is a condition that causes abnormally fast growth beginning early in life. Babies with this condition are a normal size at birth but begin to grow rapidly in infancy or early childhood, and affected children are taller than their peers.
This rapid growth is caused by an abnormality of the
pituitary gland
. The pituitary gland, which is found at the base of the brain, produces hormones that control many important body functions, including growth. Individuals with X-LAG may have the condition as a result of enlargement (hyperplasia) of the gland or development of a noncancerous tumor in the gland (called a pituitary neuroendocrine tumor or PitNET). Rarely, an affected individual has both pituitary hyperplasia and a pituitary neuroendocrine tumor. The abnormal gland releases excess amounts of growth hormone, a hormone that normally helps direct growth of the body's bones and tissues. The abnormal gland can also release excess amounts of another hormone called prolactin, which helps control the function of the internal reproductive organs (gonads).
Some people with X-LAG have additional signs and symptoms such as facial features that are described as coarse; disproportionately large hands or feet (acral enlargement); an increased appetite; and a skin condition called acanthosis nigricans, in which the skin in body folds and creases becomes thick, dark, and velvety.
Frequency
X-LAG is thought to be a very rare condition, although the prevalence is not known. It occurs more frequently in females than in males. X-LAG accounts for one in ten cases of abnormally fast growth in children that is caused by pituitary gland abnormalities (pituitary gigantism).
Causes
X-LAG is caused by a genetic change in which a small amount of genetic material on the
X chromosome
is abnormally copied (
duplicated
). The duplication, often referred to as an Xq26.3 microduplication, occurs on the long (q) arm of the chromosome at a location designated q26.3. It can include several genes, but only duplication of the
GPR101
gene is necessary to cause X-LAG.
The
GPR101
gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is unknown. Studies suggest that the GPR101 protein is involved in the growth of cells in the
pituitary gland
or in the release of growth hormone from the gland.
Duplication of the
GPR101
gene leads to an excess of GPR101 protein. It is unclear how extra GPR101 protein results in the development of a pituitary adenoma or hyperplasia or in the release of excess growth hormone or GHRH.
Learn more about the gene and chromosome associated with X-linked acrogigantism
GPR101
x chromosome
Inheritance
X-LAG follows an
X-linked dominant inheritance pattern
. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two
sex chromosomes
. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a duplication of one of the two copies of the
GPR101
gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In males (who have only one X chromosome), a duplication of the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
In females, the condition results from new (
de novo
) duplications involving the
GPR101
gene that occur during the formation of a parent's reproductive cells (eggs or sperm). The duplication is found in all of the cells in the affected person's body.
In males, the condition often results from
somatic mosaicism
, in which some of an affected person's cells have the duplication and others do not. The genetic changes, which are called somatic variants, arise randomly in one cell during embryonic development. As cells continue to divide, only cells arising from the first abnormal cell will have the variant. Other affected males inherit the duplication from their affected mother, and it is found in all the body's cells.
Other Names for This Condition
Chromosome Xq26 microduplication syndrome
Chromosome Xq26.3 duplication syndrome
X-LAG
X-linked acrogigantism syndrome
XLAG
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: X-linked acrogigantism due to Xq26 microduplication
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Pituitary gigantism
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CHROMOSOME Xq26.3 DUPLICATION SYNDROME
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Beckers A, Lodish MB, Trivellin G, Rostomyan L, Lee M, Faucz FR, Yuan B,
Choong CS, Caberg JH, Verrua E, Naves LA, Cheetham TD, Young J, Lysy PA,
Petrossians P, Cotterill A, Shah NS, Metzger D, Castermans E, Ambrosio MR, Villa
C, Strebkova N, Mazerkina N, Gaillard S, Barra GB, Casulari LA, Neggers SJ,
Salvatori R, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Zacharin M, Santamaria BL, Zacharieva S, Lim EM,
Mantovani G, Zatelli MC, Collins MT, Bonneville JF, Quezado M, Chittiboina P,
Oldfield EH, Bours V, Liu P, W de Herder W, Pellegata N, Lupski JR, Daly AF,
Stratakis CA. X-linked acrogigantism syndrome: clinical profile and therapeutic
responses. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Jun;22(3):353-67. doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0038.
Epub 2015 Feb 24.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Daly AF, Lysy PA, Desfilles C, Rostomyan L, Mohamed A, Caberg JH, Raverot V,
Castermans E, Marbaix E, Maiter D, Brunelle C, Trivellin G, Stratakis CA, Bours
V, Raftopoulos C, Beauloye V, Barlier A, Beckers A. GHRH excess and blockade in
X-LAG syndrome. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2016 Mar;23(3):161-70. doi:
10.1530/ERC-15-0478. Epub 2015 Dec 15.
Citation on PubMed
Daly AF, Yuan B, Fina F, Caberg JH, Trivellin G, Rostomyan L, de Herder WW,
Naves LA, Metzger D, Cuny T, Rabl W, Shah N, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Zatelli MC, Faucz
FR, Castermans E, Nanni-Metellus I, Lodish M, Muhammad A, Palmeira L, Potorac I,
Mantovani G, Neggers SJ, Klein M, Barlier A, Liu P, Ouafik L, Bours V, Lupski JR,
Stratakis CA, Beckers A. Somatic mosaicism underlies X-linked acrogigantism
syndrome in sporadic male subjects. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2016 Apr;23(4):221-33.
doi: 10.1530/ERC-16-0082. Epub 2016 Mar 2.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Iacovazzo D, Caswell R, Bunce B, Jose S, Yuan B, Hernandez-Ramirez LC, Kapur
S, Caimari F, Evanson J, Ferrau F, Dang MN, Gabrovska P, Larkin SJ, Ansorge O,
Rodd C, Vance ML, Ramirez-Renteria C, Mercado M, Goldstone AP, Buchfelder M,
Burren CP, Gurlek A, Dutta P, Choong CS, Cheetham T, Trivellin G, Stratakis CA,
Lopes MB, Grossman AB, Trouillas J, Lupski JR, Ellard S, Sampson JR, Roncaroli F,
Korbonits M. Germline or somatic GPR101 duplication leads to X-linked
acrogigantism: a clinico-pathological and genetic study. Acta Neuropathol Commun.
2016 Jun 1;4(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s40478-016-0328-1.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Rodd C, Millette M, Iacovazzo D, Stiles CE, Barry S, Evanson J, Albrecht S,
Caswell R, Bunce B, Jose S, Trouillas J, Roncaroli F, Sampson J, Ellard S,
Korbonits M. Somatic GPR101 Duplication Causing X-Linked Acrogigantism
(XLAG)-Diagnosis and Management. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016
May;101(5):1927-30. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-4366. Epub 2016 Mar 16.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Rostomyan L, Daly AF, Petrossians P, Nachev E, Lila AR, Lecoq AL, Lecumberri
B, Trivellin G, Salvatori R, Moraitis AG, Holdaway I, Kranenburg-van Klaveren DJ,
Chiara Zatelli M, Palacios N, Nozieres C, Zacharin M, Ebeling T, Ojaniemi M,
Rozhinskaya L, Verrua E, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Filipponi S, Gusakova D, Pronin V,
Bertherat J, Belaya Z, Ilovayskaya I, Sahnoun-Fathallah M, Sievers C, Stalla GK,
Castermans E, Caberg JH, Sorkina E, Auriemma RS, Mittal S, Kareva M, Lysy PA, Emy
P, De Menis E, Choong CS, Mantovani G, Bours V, De Herder W, Brue T, Barlier A,
Neggers SJ, Zacharieva S, Chanson P, Shah NS, Stratakis CA, Naves LA, Beckers A.
Clinical and genetic characterization of pituitary gigantism: an international
collaborative study in 208 patients. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Oct;22(5):745-57.
doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0320. Epub 2015 Jul 17.
Citation on PubMed
Trivellin G, Bjelobaba I, Daly AF, Larco DO, Palmeira L, Faucz FR, Thiry A,
Leal LF, Rostomyan L, Quezado M, Schernthaner-Reiter MH, Janjic MM, Villa C, Wu
TJ, Stojilkovic SS, Beckers A, Feldman B, Stratakis CA. Characterization of
GPR101 transcript structure and expression patterns. J Mol Endocrinol. 2016
Aug;57(2):97-111. doi: 10.1530/JME-16-0045. Epub 2016 Jun 9.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Trivellin G, Daly AF, Faucz FR, Yuan B, Rostomyan L, Larco DO,
Schernthaner-Reiter MH, Szarek E, Leal LF, Caberg JH, Castermans E, Villa C,
Dimopoulos A, Chittiboina P, Xekouki P, Shah N, Metzger D, Lysy PA, Ferrante E,
Strebkova N, Mazerkina N, Zatelli MC, Lodish M, Horvath A, de Alexandre RB,
Manning AD, Levy I, Keil MF, Sierra Mde L, Palmeira L, Coppieters W, Georges M,
Naves LA, Jamar M, Bours V, Wu TJ, Choong CS, Bertherat J, Chanson P, Kamenicky
P, Farrell WE, Barlier A, Quezado M, Bjelobaba I, Stojilkovic SS, Wess J,
Costanzi S, Liu P, Lupski JR, Beckers A, Stratakis CA. Gigantism and acromegaly
due to Xq26 microduplications and GPR101 mutation. N Engl J Med. 2014 Dec
18;371(25):2363-74. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1408028. Epub 2014 Dec 3.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Growth Disorders
Pituitary Tumors
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Gigantism
Growth hormone test
Pituitary tumor
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page