Pyrantel: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pyrantel
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682820.html
Pyrantel
pronounced as (pi ran' tel)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pyrantel, an antiworm medication, is used to treat roundworm, hookworm, pinworm, and other worm infections.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Pyrantel comes as a capsule and a liquid to take by mouth. It usually is taken as a single dose for pinworm and roundworm infections. The dose usually is repeated after 2 weeks for pinworm infections. For hookworm infections, pyrantel usually is taken once a day for 3 days. Pyrantel may be taken with food, juice, or milk or on an empty stomach.
Shake the liquid well to mix the medication evenly. Pyrantel may be mixed with milk or fruit juice. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take pyrantel exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking pyrantel,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pyrantel or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking pyrantel. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had anemia or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking pyrantel, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pyrantel may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
vomiting
diarrhea
loss of appetite
stomach cramps
stomach pain
straining and pain during bowel movements
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to pyrantel.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the pyrantel, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ascarel
®
Parasitol
®
Pin-X
®
¶
Reese's
®
Pinworm Medicine
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page