Osimertinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Osimertinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616005.html
Osimertinib
pronounced as (oh'' sim er' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Osimertinib is used to help prevent a certain type of non small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) from returning after the tumor(s) has been removed by surgery in adults. Osimertinib is also used to treat a certain type of NSCLC that has spread to nearby tissues and cannot be removed surgery in people who have responded to chemotherapy and radiation treatments. It is also used alone and in combination with other chemotherapy medications as a first treatment for a certain type of NSCLC that has spread to nearby tissues or to other parts of the body in adults. Osimertinib is also used to treat certain types of NSCLC that has spread to other parts of the body in people who could not be treated successfully with other similar chemotherapy medications. Osimertinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop or slow the spread of cancer cells and may help shrink tumors.
How should this medicine be used?
Osimertinib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day. The length of your treatment depends on how well this medication works for you and the side effects that you experience. Take osimertinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take osimertinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you cannot swallow the tablets, place the tablet into 4 tablespoons (2 oz [60 mL]) of water and stir until the tablet is in small pieces. Drink the mixture right away. Pour in another half a cup (4 oz [120 mL]) to a cup of water (8 oz [240 mL]) to the container you used, rinse, and drink to make sure you get the full dose of osimertinib. Do not use carbonated water or any other liquid to dissolve the osimertinib tablet. Do not crush the tablet or heat the mixture. If you have a nasogastric (NG) tube, your doctor or pharmacist will explain how to give this mixture through an NG tube.
Your doctor may temporarily or permanently stop your treatment or decrease your dose of osimertinib depending on the side effects that you experience. Be sure to talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Do not stop taking osimertinib without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking osimertinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to osimertinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in osimertinib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor what nonprescription or herbal products you are taking, especially St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking osimertinib. Do not start any of these medications while taking osimertinib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had long QT syndrome (condition that increases the risk of developing an irregular heartbeat that may cause fainting or sudden death); an irregular heartbeat; heart failure (condition in which the heart is unable to pump enough blood to the other parts of the body); high blood pressure; higher or lower than normal levels of sodium, potassium, calcium, or magnesium in your blood; eye problems; lung problems other than lung cancer; or kidney disease.
you should know that osimertinib may decrease fertility in men and women. However, you should not assume that you or your partner cannot become pregnant. Tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you can become pregnant, you will need to take a pregnancy test before starting treatment and should not become pregnant while you are taking osimertinib. Use effective birth control during your treatment with osimertinib, and for 6 weeks after your final dose. If you your partner can become pregnant, you should use effective birth control during your treatment and for 4 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking osimertinib, call your doctor immediately. Osimertinib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Your doctor may tell you not to breastfeed during your treatment and for 2 weeks after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a dose late or take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Osimertinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
constipation
stomach pain
rash
itching
dry or cracking skin
eczema
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
swelling or sores in the mouth
bone, muscle, joint, or back pain
headache
nail changes including swelling, redness, pain, splitting, breaking, and separation or loss from nailbed
tiredness
darkening of the skin
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fast or pounding heartbeat; shortness of breath; swelling of ankles or feet; or feeling lightheaded, dizzy, or faint
fever; new or worsening shortness of breath, difficulty breathing, or cough
rash, skin blisters, or skin peeling
purple spots, redness, or hives on arms, lower legs, buttocks, or trunk (torso)
chest pain
swollen, red, teary or painful eyes; sensitivity to light; or vision changes
new or persistent fever, bruising or bleeding, pale skin, unusual tiredness or weakness, or any signs of an infection
Osimertinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests and heart function tests before and during your treatment to be sure it is safe for you to take osimertinib, and to check your body's response to the medication. Your doctor will also order a lab test before you begin your treatment to find out if your cancer can be treated with osimertinib.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tagrisso
®
Last Reviewed -
01/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page