Crizanlizumab-tmca Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Crizanlizumab-tmca Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620010.html
Crizanlizumab-tmca Injection
pronounced as (kriz" an liz' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Crizanlizumab-tmca injection is used to reduce the number of pain crises (sudden, severe pain that may last several hours to several days) in adults and children 16 years of age and older with sickle cell disease (an inherited blood disease). Crizanlizumab-tmca is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by blocking certain blood cells from interacting.
How should this medicine be used?
Crizanlizumab-tmca injection as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse over a period of 30 minutes. It is usually given once every 2 weeks for the first two doses and then once every 4 weeks.
Crizanlizumab-tmca injection can cause serious infusion reactions, which may occur within 24 hours of receiving a dose. A doctor or nurse will watch you closely while you are receiving the infusion and after the infusion to be sure you are not having a serious reaction to the medication. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor or nurse immediately: fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, tiredness, dizziness, sweating, rash, hives, itching, wheezing, or difficulty breathing.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using crizanlizumab-tmca injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to crizanlizumab-tmca, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in crizanlizumab-tmca injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using crizanlizumab-tmca injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a crizanlizumab-tmca infusion, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Crizanlizumab-tmca injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
back or joint pain
fever
redness, pain, swelling, or burning at the site where the injection was given
Crizanlizumab-tmca injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving crizanlizumab-tmca.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about crizanlizumab-tmca.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Adakveo
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page