Nystatin and Triamcinolone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nystatin and Triamcinolone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601087.html
Nystatin and Triamcinolone
pronounced as (nye stat' in) (trye am sin' oh lone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of nystatin and triamcinolone is used to treat fungal skin infections. It relieves itching, inflammation, and pain.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of nystatin and triamcinolone comes in ointment and cream to be applied to the skin. This medication usually is applied twice a day for no longer than 2 weeks. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use nystatin and triamcinolone exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Wash the affected area thoroughly. Apply a small amount of cream or ointment and gently and thoroughly massage it into your skin.
If you use this medication on your face, keep it out of your eyes.
If you are using this medication on a child's diaper area, do not place tightly fitting diapers or plastic pants on the child. They can increase the absorption of triamcinolone, which can affect the child's growth.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using nystatin and triamcinolone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nystatin, triamcinolone, or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using nystatin and triamcinolone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using nystatin and triamcinolone, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nystatin and triamcinolone may cause side effects. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
acne
skin sores
itching
irritation
burning
stinging
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. This medication is for external use only. Do not let nystatin and triamcinolone get into your eyes, nose, or mouth, and do not swallow it. Do not apply dressings, bandages, cosmetics, lotions, or other skin medications to the area being treated unless your doctor tells you.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the nystatin and triamcinolone, call your doctor. Tell your doctor if your skin condition gets worse or does not go away.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mycolog-II
®
¶
Myco-Triacet II
®
¶
Mykacet
®
¶
Mytrex F
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page