Neomycin Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Neomycin Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682274.html
Neomycin Topical
pronounced as (nee oh mye' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Neomycin, an antibiotic, is used to prevent or treat skin infections caused by bacteria. It is not effective against fungal or viral infections.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Neomycin comes in cream and ointment that is applied to the skin. Neomycin usually is used one to three times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use neomycin exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Thoroughly clean the infected area, allow it to dry, and then gently rub the medication in until most of it disappears. Use just enough medication to cover the affected area. You should wash your hands after applying the medication.
Do not apply neomycin to a child's diaper area, especially if the skin is raw, unless directed to do so by a doctor. If you are directed to apply neomycin to a child's diaper area, do not use tightly fitting diapers or plastic pants. They can increase the absorption of the drug, which can cause harmful effects.
Apply only small amounts of neomycin to scrapes, cuts, burns, sores, and wounds, and do not apply it more frequently than directed. Neomycin can be absorbed into the body through broken skin and cause kidney problems and hearing difficulty.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using neomycin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to neomycin or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using neomycin, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Neomycin may cause side effects. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
irritation
burning
redness
rash
itching
hearing difficulty
decreased urination
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Neomycin may become discolored, but this change does not affect its action.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Neomycin is for external use only. Do not let neomycin get into your eyes, nose, or mouth, and do not swallow it. Do not apply dressings, bandages, cosmetics, lotions, or other skin medications to the area being treated unless your doctor tells you.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the neomycin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Myciguent
®
Brand names of combination products
Neo-Cortef
®
(containing Hydrocortisone, Neomycin)
Neo-Decadron
®
(containing Dexamethasone, Neomycin)
Neo-Medrol
®
(containing Methylprednisolone, Neomycin)
Last Revised -
06/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page