Polio Vaccine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Polio Vaccine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601177.html
Polio Vaccine
Why get vaccinated?
Who should get polio vaccine and when?
Talk with your healthcare provider
What are the risks from IPV?
What if there is a severe problem?
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
How can I learn more?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Other names
Why get vaccinated?
Polio vaccine can prevent polio.
Polio (or poliomyelitis) is a disabling and life-threatening disease caused by poliovirus, which can infect a person's spinal cord, leading to paralysis.
Most people infected with polio have no symptoms, and many recover without complications. Some people will experience sore throat, fever, tiredness, nausea, headache, or stomach pain.
A smaller group of people will develop more serious symptoms that affect the brain and spinal cord:
Paresthesia (feeling of pins and needles in the legs),
Meningitis (infection of the covering of the spinal cord and/or brain), or
Paralysis (can't move parts of the body) or weakness in the arms, legs, or both.
Paralysis is the most severe symptom associated with polio because it can lead to permanent disability and death.
Improvements in limb paralysis can occur, but in some people new muscle pain and weakness may develop 15 to 40 years later. This is called "post-polio syndrome."
Polio has been eliminated from the United States, but it still occurs in other parts of the world. The best way to protect yourself and keep the United States polio-free is to maintain high immunity (protection) in the population against polio through vaccination.
Who should get polio vaccine and when?
Children should usually get 4 doses of polio vaccine at ages 2 months, 4 months, 6–18 months, and 4–6 years.
Most adults do not need polio vaccine because they were vaccinated as children. But some adults are at higher risk and should consider polio vaccination including:
People traveling to areas of the world,
Laboratory workers who might handle polio virus
Healthcare workers treating patients who could have polio.
Unvaccinated people whose children will be receiving oral poliovirus vaccine (for example, international adoptees or refugees)
Polio vaccine may be given as a stand-alone vaccine, or as part of a combination vaccine (a type of vaccine that combines more than one vaccine together into one shot).
Polio vaccine may be given at the same time as other vaccines.
Talk with your healthcare provider
Tell your vaccination provider if the person getting the vaccine:
Has had an allergic reaction after a previous dose of polio vaccine, or has any severe, life-threatening allergies
In some cases, your health care provider may decide to postpone polio vaccination until a future visit.
People with minor illnesses, such as a cold, may be vaccinated. People who are moderately or severely ill should usually wait until they recover before getting polio vaccine.
Not much is known about the risks of this vaccine for pregnant or breastfeeding women. However, polio vaccine can be given if a pregnant woman is at increased risk for infection and requires immediate protection.
Your health care provider can give you more information.
What are the risks from IPV?
A sore spot with redness, swelling, or pain where the shot is given can happen after polio vaccination.
People sometimes faint after medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your provider if you feel dizzy or have vision changes or ringing in the ears.
As with any medicine, there is a very remote chance of a vaccine causing a severe allergic reaction, other serious injury, or death.
What if there is a severe problem?
An allergic reaction could occur after the vaccinated person leaves the clinic. If you see signs of a severe allergic reaction (hives, swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, or weakness), call 9-1-1 and get the person to the nearest hospital.
For other signs that concern you, call your health care provider.
Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself. Visit the VAERS website at
https://www.vaers.hhs.gov
or call
1-800-822-7967
.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions, and VAERS staff does not give medical advice.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a federal program that was created to compensate people who may have been injured by certain vaccines. Claims regarding alleged injury or death due to vaccination have a time limit for filing, which may be as short as two years. Visit the VICP website at
https://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation
or call
1-800-338-2382
to learn about the program and about filing a claim.
How can I learn more?
Ask your healthcare provider.
Call your local or state health department.
Visit the website of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for vaccine package inserts and additional information at
https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/vaccines
.
Contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): call
1-800-232-4636
(
1-800-CDC-INFO
) or visit CDC's website at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines
Brand names
IPOL
®
Brand names of combination products
Kinrix
®
(containing Diphtheria, Tetanus Toxoids, Acellular Pertussis, Polio Vaccine)
Pediarix
®
(containing Diphtheria, Tetanus Toxoids, Acellular Pertussis, Hepatitis B, Polio Vaccine)
Pentacel
®
(containing Diphtheria, Tetanus Toxoids, Acellular Pertussis, Haemophilus influenzae type b, Polio Vaccine)
Quadracel
®
(containing Diphtheria, Tetanus Toxoids, Acellular Pertussis, Polio Vaccine)
Other names
DTaP-HepB-IPV
DTaP-IPV
DTaP-IPV/Hib
IPV
OPV
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page