Atogepant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Atogepant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621052.html
Atogepant
pronounced as (a toe' je pant)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Atogepant is used to prevent migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes are accompanied by nausea and sensitivity to sound or light). Atogepant is in a class of medications called calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of a certain natural substance in the body that causes migraine headaches.
How should this medicine be used?
Atogepant comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take once a day with or without food. Take atogepant at around the same time every day.
Take atogepant exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Atogepant helps to prevent migraines but does not cure them. Continue to take atogepant even if you feel well. Do not stop taking atogepant without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking atogepant,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking atogepant. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with atogepant: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking atogepant. Do not start any of these medications while taking atogepant without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney problems, hypertension (high blood pressure), or Raynaud's Phenomenon (condition that causes reduced blood flow to the fingers and toes, often in response to cold or stress).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking atogepant, call your doctor.
you should know that atogepant may cause new onset or cause to worsen existing hypertension (high blood pressure) or Raynaud's Phenomenon (condition of reduced blood flow to the fingers or toes). Call your doctor right away if you have any of the following symptoms: severe headache, chest pain, vision changes, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, shortness of breath; coldness, numbness or tingling of fingers or toes; white or blue or red discoloration of fingers or toes.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Atogepant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
constipation
decreased appetite
fatigue
sleepiness
Atogepant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches. Be sure to share this information with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Qulipta
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page