Paclitaxel (with albumin) Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Paclitaxel (with albumin) Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619008.html
Paclitaxel (with albumin) Injection
pronounced as (pak'' li tax' el)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Paclitaxel (with albumin) injection may cause a large decrease in the number of white blood cells (a type of blood cell that is needed to fight infection) in your blood. This increases the risk that you will develop a serious infection. You should not receive paclitaxel (with albumin) if you already have a low number of white blood cells. Your doctor will order laboratory tests before and during your treatment to check the number of white blood cells in your blood. Your doctor will delay or interrupt your treatment if the number of white blood cells is too low. Call your doctor immediately if you develop a temperature greater than 100.4 °F (38 °C); a sore throat; cough; chills; difficult, frequent, or painful urination; or other signs of infection during your treatment with paclitaxel injection.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests to check your body's response to paclitaxel (with albumin) injection.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving paclitaxel (with albumin) injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Paclitaxel (with albumin) injection is used to treat breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body and has not improved or worsened after treatment with other medications. Paclitaxel (with albumin) injection is also used in combination with other chemotherapy medications to treat non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Paclitaxel (with albumin) injection is used in combination with gemcitabine (Gemzar) to treat cancer of the pancreas. Paclitaxel is in a class of medications called antimicrotubule agents. It works by stopping the growth and spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Paclitaxel (with albumin) injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid to be injected over 30 minutes intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. When paclitaxel (with albumin) injection is used to treat breast cancer, it is usually given once every 3 weeks. When paclitaxel (with albumin) injection is used to treat non-small cell lung cancer it is usually given on days 1, 8, and 15 as part of a 3 week cycle. When paclitaxel (with albumin) injection is used to treat cancer of the pancreas, it is usually given on day 1, 8, and 15 as part of a 4 week cycle. These cycles may be repeated for as long as your doctor recommends.
Your doctor may need to interrupt your treatment, reduce your dose, or stop your treatment depending on your response to the medication and any side effects that you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
Paclitaxel injection is also sometimes used to treat cancer of the head and neck, esophagus (tube that connects the mouth and stomach), bladder, endometrium (lining of the uterus), and cervix (opening of the uterus). Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving paclitaxel (with albumin) injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to paclitaxel, docetaxel, any other medications, or human albumin, Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you do not know if a medication that you are allergic to contains human albumin.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving paclitaxel (with albumin) injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver, kidney, or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are receiving paclitaxel (with albumin) injection. Your doctor may perform a pregnancy test to be sure that you are not pregnant when you begin receiving paclitaxel (with albumin) injection. If you are female, you should use birth control during your treatment with paclitaxel (with albumin) injection and for at least 6 months after your final dose. If you are male, you and your female partner should use birth control during your treatment with paclitaxel (with albumin) and continue for 3 months after you stop receiving paclitaxel (with albumin) injection. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner become pregnant while receiving paclitaxel (with albumin) injection, call your doctor. Paclitaxel may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breast-feed while you are receiving paclitaxel (with albumin) injection and for 2 weeks after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving paclitaxel (with albumin) injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Paclitaxel (with albumin) may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain, redness, swelling, or sores in the place where the medication was injected
unusual tiredness or weakness
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
sores in the mouth or throat
hair loss
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles or lower legs
blurred vision or vision changes
decreased urination
dry mouth
thirst
muscle pain or cramps
joint pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
numbness, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
sudden onset of dry cough that doesn't go away
shortness of breath
rash
hives
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, lips, tongue, or throat
pale skin
excessive tiredness
unusual bruising or bleeding
chest pain
slow or irregular heartbeat
fainting
Paclitaxel (with albumin) may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
pale skin
shortness of breath
excessive tiredness
sore throat, fever, chills, and other signs of infection
unusual bruising or bleeding
numbness, burning, or tingling of the hands and feet
sores in the mouth
What other information should I know?
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Abraxane
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page