Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623031.html
Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj Injection
pronounced as (peg ue' ni gal' si dase)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj has been associated with hypersensitivity (severe allergic) reactions, including anaphylaxis, and may cause infusion-related reactions during and within 24 hours after infusions. Your doctor or nurse will monitor you very closely during your infusion. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical care: headache; nausea; vomiting; diarrhea; stomach pain; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat; rash; hives; itching; fever; chills; dizziness; weakness; difficulty breathing; fast or irregular heartbeat; or chest pain. Your doctor may given you medicines prior to each infusion to reduce the chance of these events occurring.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection is used to treat Fabry disease (an inherited condition in which a type of fatty substance builds up in the body, resulting in nerve and organ damage). Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection is in a class of medications called enzymes. It works by replacing an enzyme that is normally produced by the body that helps prevents the build of the fatty substance in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) by a healthcare provider. Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection is usually infused (injected slowly) intravenously over a period of 90 minutes to 6 hours once every 2 weeks.
Initially, you will receive pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection in a medical facility for at least the 4 to 6 infusions. If previous infusions are tolerated, your doctor may decide that this medication may be given at home under the supervision of a healthcare provider.
Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection may cause serious reactions during or after you receive your infusion. A doctor or nurse will watch you carefully for these side effects while the medication is being infused. Your doctor may need to slow down or temporarily stop your infusion if you experience these reactions.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart or kidney problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nasal congestion or runny nose
sore throat
arm, leg, or back pain
fatigue
numbness or tingling in the your hands, feet, arms, or legs
redness or swelling at the injection site
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
decreased urination; foamy, pink, or brown colored urine; swelling in hands, face, feet or stomach
Pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to pegunigalsidase alfa-iwxj injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Elfabrio
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page