Hypomyelination with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and leg spasticity: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Hypomyelination with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and leg spasticity
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hypomyelination-with-brainstem-and-spinal-cord-involvement-and-leg-spasticity/
Hypomyelination with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and leg spasticity
Description
Hypomyelination with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and leg spasticity (HBSL) is a condition that affects the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system). In particular, the condition affects nerves in specific regions (called tracts) within the spinal cord and the brainstem, which is the part of the brain that connects to the spinal cord. HBSL is a form of leukodystrophy, which is a group of conditions that involve abnormalities of the nervous system's white matter. The white matter consists of nerve fibers covered by a fatty substance, called
myelin
, that insulates the fibers and promotes the rapid transmission of nerve impulses. In HBSL, the nervous system has a reduced ability to form myelin (hypomyelination).
In HBSL, early development of motor skills (such as rolling over and sitting) may be normal, but movement problems typically begin within the infant's first year. However, in some individuals, these problems do not appear until adolescence. The characteristic feature of HBSL is muscle stiffness (spasticity) in the legs that worsens over time. Most people with HBSL are unable to walk independently. Other neurological problems in affected individuals can include abnormal side-to-side movements of the eyes (nystagmus), weak muscle tone (hypotonia) in the torso, and mild intellectual disability.
Distinct changes in the brains of people with HBSL can be seen using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These characteristic abnormalities typically involve specific regions (called tracts) within the
brainstem
and spinal cord, especially the pyramidal tract, lateral corticospinal tract, and the dorsal column.
Frequency
HBSL is a rare condition. Its prevalence is unknown.
Causes
HBSL is caused by mutations in a gene called
DARS1
, which provides instructions for making an enzyme called aspartyl-tRNA synthetase. This enzyme is important in the production (synthesis) of proteins.
During
protein synthesis
, building blocks (amino acids) are connected together in a specific order, creating a
chain of amino acids
that forms the protein. Aspartyl-tRNA synthetase plays a role in adding the amino acid aspartate at the proper place in proteins.
Mutations in the
DARS1
gene result in decreased aspartyl-tRNA synthetase enzyme activity, which hinders the addition of aspartate to proteins. It is unclear how the
DARS1
gene mutations lead to the signs and symptoms of HBSL. Researchers do not understand why reduced activity of aspartyl-tRNA synthetase affects myelination or why specific parts of the
brainstem and spinal cord
are involved.
Learn more about the gene associated with Hypomyelination with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and leg spasticity
DARS1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Aspartyl-tRNA synthetase deficiency
HBSL
Hypomyelination with brain stem and spinal cord involvement and leg spasticity
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Hypomyelination with brain stem and spinal cord involvement and leg spasticity
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
HYPOMYELINATION WITH BRAINSTEM AND SPINAL CORD INVOLVEMENT AND LEG SPASTICITY; HBSL
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Frohlich D, Suchowerska AK, Spencer ZH, von Jonquieres G, Klugmann CB, Bongers
A, Delerue F, Stefen H, Ittner LM, Fath T, Housley GD, Klugmann M. In
vivocharacterization of the aspartyl-tRNA synthetase DARS: Homing in on the
leukodystrophy HBSL. Neurobiol Dis. 2017 Jan;97(Pt A):24-35. doi:
10.1016/j.nbd.2016.10.008. Epub 2016 Nov 2.
Citation on PubMed
Frohlich D, Suchowerska AK, Voss C, He R, Wolvetang E, von Jonquieres G,
Simons C, Fath T, Housley GD, Klugmann M. Expression Pattern of the Aspartyl-tRNA
Synthetase DARS in the Human Brain. Front Mol Neurosci. 2018 Mar 20;11:81. doi:
10.3389/fnmol.2018.00081. eCollection 2018.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Taft RJ, Vanderver A, Leventer RJ, Damiani SA, Simons C, Grimmond SM, Miller
D, Schmidt J, Lockhart PJ, Pope K, Ru K, Crawford J, Rosser T, de Coo IF, Juneja
M, Verma IC, Prabhakar P, Blaser S, Raiman J, Pouwels PJ, Bevova MR, Abbink TE,
van der Knaap MS, Wolf NI. Mutations in DARS cause hypomyelination with brain
stem and spinal cord involvement and leg spasticity. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 May
2;92(5):774-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.006.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Wolf NI, Toro C, Kister I, Latif KA, Leventer R, Pizzino A, Simons C, Abbink
TE, Taft RJ, van der Knaap MS, Vanderver A. DARS-associated leukoencephalopathy
can mimic a steroid-responsive neuroinflammatory disorder. Neurology. 2015 Jan
20;84(3):226-30. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001157. Epub 2014 Dec 19.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Leukodystrophies
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Myelin
Spasticity
White matter of the brain
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page