Praziquantel: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Praziquantel
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608048.html
Praziquantel
pronounced as (praz'' i kwon' tel)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Praziquantel is used to treat schistosoma (infection with a type of worm that lives in the bloodstream) and liver fluke (infection with a type of worm that lives in or near the liver). Praziquantel is in a class of medications called anthelmintics. It works by killing the worms.
How should this medicine be used?
Praziquantel comes as a tablet to take by mouth with water and a meal. It is usually taken for one day as three doses; each dose spaced 4 to 6 hours apart. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take praziquantel exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Praziquantel tablets are marked with 3 notches so that they can easily be split. If your doctor has told you to take only part of a tablet, use your thumbnail to press down on the correct notch and separate the number of parts needed for your dose.
Swallow the tablets or tablet parts whole as soon as you put them into your mouth. Do not chew them, crush them, or hold them in your mouth. The bitter taste of the tablets may cause you to gag or vomit if you keep the tablets in your mouth before swallowing.
Other uses for this medicine
Praziquantel is also sometimes used to treat certain other worm infestations, including tapeworm (a type of worm that may attach to the wall of the intestine or may move to different parts of the body). Talk to your doctor about the risks of using praziquantel to treat your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking praziquantel,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to praziquantel, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in praziquantel tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane, in Rifamate, in Rifater). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take praziquantel if you are taking this medication. Your doctor will probably tell you to stop taking rifampin four weeks before beginning treatment with praziquantel, and will tell you to start taking rifampin again one day after finishing treatment with praziquantel.
some medications should not be taken with praziquantel. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with praziquantel. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting praziquantel with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking praziquantel, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
The following nonprescription product may interact with praziquantel: cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking praziquantel. Do not start any of these medications while taking praziquantel without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have ocular cysticercosis (infestation with a type of tapeworm that forms cysts in the eyes). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take praziquantel.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had seizures; cysticercosis nodules (bumps) just under your skin; or kidney, liver,or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking praziquantel, call your doctor.
do not breastfeed on the day you take praziquantel and for 72 hours (3 days) after you take praziquantel.
you should know that praziquantel may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery on the day you take praziquantel and the day after you take praziquantel.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Ask your doctor what you should do if you miss a dose of praziquantel.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Praziquantel may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
not feeling well
headache
dizziness
stomach pain
nausea
fever
itching
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor right away:
hives
Praziquantel may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the praziquantel, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Biltricide
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page