Diclofenac and Misoprostol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Diclofenac and Misoprostol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a699002.html
Diclofenac and Misoprostol
pronounced as (dye kloe' fen ak) and (mye soe prost' ole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
IMPORTANT WARNING:
For female patients:
Do not take diclofenac and misoprostol if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant or think you may be pregnant while taking diclofenac and misoprostol, stop taking the medication and call your doctor immediately. Diclofenac and misoprostol may cause miscarriage (pregnancy loss), serious bleeding, or premature birth (baby is born too early) if taken during pregnancy.
Women who can become pregnant generally should not take diclofenac and misoprostol. However, you and your doctor may decide that diclofenac and misoprostol combination is needed to treat your condition. In that case you must:
agree to use a reliable method of birth control during your treatment;
have a negative blood test for pregnancy no longer than 2 weeks before you start taking diclofenac and misoprostol;
begin taking the medication only on the second or third day of the next normal menstrual period.
For all patients:
People who take nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (other than aspirin) such as diclofenac and misoprostol combination may have a higher risk of having a heart attack or a stroke than people who do not take these medications. These events may happen without warning and may cause death. This risk may be higher for people who take NSAIDs for a long time. Do not use an NSAID such as diclofenac and misoprostol combination if you have recently had a heart attack, unless directed to do so by your doctor. Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had heart disease, a heart attack, or a stroke, if you smoke, and if you have or have ever had high cholesterol, high blood pressure, or diabetes. Get emergency medical help right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: chest pain, shortness of breath, weakness in one part or side of the body, or slurred speech.
If you will be undergoing a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG; a type of heart surgery), you should not take diclofenac and misoprostol right before or right after the surgery.
NSAIDs such as diclofenac may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in the stomach or intestine. Misoprostol is taken in combination with diclofenac to protect the stomach and intestine, but may not prevent all damage to these parts of the body. Problems with the stomach and intestine may develop at any time during treatment, may happen without warning symptoms, and may cause death. The risk may be higher for people who take NSAIDs for a long time, are older in age, have poor health, smoke, or drink large amounts of alcohol while taking diclofenac and misoprostol. Tell your doctor if you take any of the following medications: anticoagulants ('blood thinners') such as warfarin (Jantoven); aspirin; other NSAIDs such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn); oral steroids such as dexamethasone, methylprednisolone (Medrol), and prednisone (Rayos); selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as citalopram (Celexa), fluoxetine (Prozac, in Symbyax), fluvoxamine (Luvox), paroxetine (Paxil, Pexeva), and sertraline (Zoloft); or serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) such as desvenlafaxine (Khedezla, Pristiq), duloxetine (Cymbalta), and venlafaxine (Effexor XR). Tell your doctor if you have any bleeding in your stomach or intestines or if you have any of these symptoms: vomiting a substance that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds, blood in the stool, or black and tarry stools. before you begin your treatment with diclofenac and misoprostol. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take diclofenac and misoprostol. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had ulcers or a bleeding disorder. If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking diclofenac and misoprostol and call your doctor: stomach pain, heartburn, vomiting a substance that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds, blood in the stool, or black and tarry stools.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will monitor your symptoms carefully and will probably order certain tests to check your body's response to diclofenac and misoprostol. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling so that your doctor can prescribe the right amount of medication to treat your condition with the lowest risk of serious side effects.
Do not give this medication to anyone else, especially a woman who is or could become pregnant.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet for diclofenac and misoprostol and the general Medication Guide for NSAIDs when you begin your treatment and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the patient information sheet and Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of diclofenac and misoprostol is used to relieve the pain, tenderness, swelling, and stiffness caused by osteoarthritis (arthritis caused by a breakdown of the lining of the joints) and rheumatoid arthritis (arthritis caused by swelling of the lining of the joints) in patients who have a high risk of developing stomach ulcers. Diclofenac is in a class of medications called nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). It works by stopping the body's production of a substance that causes pain and inflammation. Misoprostol is in a class of medications called prostaglandins. It prevents ulcers caused by diclofenac by protecting the stomach lining and decreasing stomach acid production.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of diclofenac and misoprostol comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food two to four times a day. To help you remember to take diclofenac and misoprostol, take it at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take diclofenac and misoprostol combination exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking diclofenac and misoprostol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to diclofenac (Cambia, Cataflam, Flector, Licart, Pennsaid, Zipsor), misoprostol (Cytotec), aspirin or other NSAIDs such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), any other medications, or any of the inactive ingredients in diclofenac and misoprostol tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the inactive ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any of the medications listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
talk to your doctor if you need to take an antacid during your treatment with diclofenac and misoprostol. You should not take antacids that contain magnesium (Mylanta, others).
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any of the conditions mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section or inflammatory bowel disease (swelling of the lining of the intestine that may cause painful or bloody diarrhea and cramping); asthma, especially if you also have frequent stuffed or runny nose or nasal polyps (swelling of the lining of the nose); heart failure; liver or kidney disease; or swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking diclofenac and misoprostol.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Diclofenac and misoprostol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
gas or bloating
constipation
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical help. Do not take any more diclofenac and misoprostol until you speak to your doctor.
diarrhea
unexplained weight gain
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
swelling in the abdomen, ankles, feet, or legs
unusual tiredness or weakness
lack of energy
upset stomach
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
flu-like symptoms
pale skin
fast heartbeat
rash or blistering or peeling skin with fever
hives
itching
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, throat, arms, or hands
difficulty swallowing
hoarseness
unusual vaginal bleeding
cloudy, discolored, or bloody urine
back pain
difficult or painful urination
Diclofenac and misoprostol may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
stomach pain
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
confusion
drowsiness
low muscle tone
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
seizures
shortness of breath
fever
fast, pounding, or slow heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking diclofenac and misoprostol.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Arthrotec
®
(containing Diclofenac, Misoprostol)
Last Revised -
10/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page