Dasiglucagon Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dasiglucagon Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621022.html
Dasiglucagon Injection
pronounced as (das" i gloo' ka gon)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dasiglucagon injection is used along with emergency medical treatment to treat severe hypoglycemia (very low blood sugar) in adults and children 6 years of age and older with diabetes. Dasiglucagon injection is in a class of medications called glucagon receptor agonists. It works by causing the liver to release stored sugar to the blood.
How should this medicine be used?
Dasiglucagon injection comes as a solution (liquid) in a prefilled syringe and an auto-injector device to inject subcutaneously (just under the skin). It is usually injected as needed at the first sign of severe hypoglycemia. After the injection, the patient should be turned onto their side to prevent choking if they vomit. Use dasiglucagon injection exactly as directed; do not inject it more often or inject more or less of it than prescribed by your doctor.
Ask your doctor or pharmacist to show you, family, or caregivers who could be injecting the medication how to use and prepare dasiglucagon injection. Before a friend or family member uses dasiglucagon injection for the first time, read the patient information that comes with it. This information includes directions for how to use the injection device. Be sure to ask your pharmacist or doctor if you or your caregivers have any questions about how to inject this medication.
Following a dasiglucagon injection, an unconscious person with hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) will usually wake within 15 minutes. Once the dasiglucagon has been given, immediately contact a doctor and get emergency medical treatment. If the person does not awaken within 15 minutes after an injection, give one more dose of dasiglucagon. Feed the individual a fast-acting source of sugar (e.g., regular soft drink or fruit juice) and then a long-acting source of sugar (e.g., crackers, cheese or a meat sandwich) as soon as they awaken and are able to swallow.
Always look at the dasiglucagon solution before it is injected. It should be clear, colorless, and free of particles. Do not use dasiglucagon injection if it is cloudy, contains particles, or if the expiration date has passed. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
Dasiglucagon can be injected with the prefilled syringe or autoinjector in the upper arm, thigh, stomach, or buttocks. Roll back any clothing to expose bare skin; do not inject through clothes. Never inject the dasiglucagon prefilled syringe or autoinjector into a vein or muscle.
It is important that all patients have a household member who knows the symptoms of low blood sugar and how to administer dasiglucagon. If you have low blood sugar often, keep dasiglucagon injection with you at all times. You should and a family member or friend should be able to recognize some of the signs and symptoms of low blood sugar (i.e., shakiness, dizziness or lightheadedness, sweating, confusion, nervousness or irritability, sudden changes in behavior or mood, headache, numbness or tingling around the mouth, weakness, pale skin, sudden hunger, clumsy or jerky movements). Try to eat or drink a food or beverage with sugar in it, such as hard candy or fruit juice, before it is necessary to administer dasiglucagon.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving dasiglucagon injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dasiglucagon, any other medications, latex, or any of the ingredients in dasiglucagon injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving dasiglucagon injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have pheochromocytoma (tumor on a small gland near the kidneys) or insulinoma (pancreatic tumors). Your doctor will probably tell you not to use dasiglucagon injection.
tell your doctor if you have ever had adrenal gland problems, malnutrition, or heart disease. Also, tell your doctor if you have chronic (ongoing) low blood sugar.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually taken as needed.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dasiglucagon injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
headache
diarrhea
injection site pain
fast heartbeat
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
difficulty breathing
Dasiglucagon injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the provided case it came in, tightly closed, away from light, and out of reach of children. Store it in the refrigerator away from the cooling element; do not freeze. It can also be kept at room temperature for up to 12 months, but do not return it to the refrigerator after storing it at room temperature. Write the date when the injection is removed the refrigerator on the case. Dispose of any medication that is damaged, expired, or stored at room temperature for longer than 12 months and be sure to have a replacement available.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
constipation
fast or racing heart beat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. If your dasiglucagon injection is used, be sure to get a replacement right away. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zegalogue
®
Last Revised -
04/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page