Diazepam Rectal: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Diazepam Rectal
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a605033.html
Diazepam Rectal
pronounced as (dye az' e pam)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Diazepam rectal may increase the risk of serious or life-threatening breathing problems, sedation, or coma if used along with certain medications. Tell your doctor if you are taking or plan to take certain opiate medications for cough such as codeine (in Triacin-C, in Tuzistra XR) or hydrocodone (in Anexsia, in Norco, in Zyfrel) or for pain such as codeine (in Fiorinal), fentanyl (Actiq, Duragesic, Subsys, others), hydromorphone (Dilaudid, Exalgo), meperidine (Demerol), methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), morphine (Astramorph, Duramorph PF, Kadian), oxycodone (in Oxycet, in Percocet, in Roxicet, others), and tramadol (Conzip, Ultram, in Ultracet). Your doctor may need to change the dosages of your medications and will monitor you carefully. If you use diazepam rectal with any of these medications and you develop any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical care immediately: unusual dizziness, lightheadedness, extreme sleepiness, slowed or difficult breathing, or unresponsiveness. Be sure that your caregiver or family members know which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor or emergency medical care if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
Diazepam rectal may be habit forming. Do not use a larger dose, use it more often, or for a longer time than your doctor tells you to. Tell your doctor if you have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, if you use or have ever used street drugs, or have overused prescription medications. Do not drink alcohol or use street drugs during your treatment. Drinking alcohol or using street drugs during your treatment with diazepam also increases the risk that you will experience these serious, life-threatening side effects. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression or another mental illness.
Diazepam rectal may cause a physical dependence (a condition in which unpleasant physical symptoms occur if a medication is suddenly stopped or used in smaller doses), especially if you use it for several days to several weeks. Do not stop using this medication or use fewer doses without talking to your doctor. Stopping diazepam rectal suddenly can worsen your condition and cause withdrawal symptoms that may last for several weeks to more than 12 months. Your doctor probably will decrease your diazepam rectal dose gradually. Call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment if you experience any of the following symptoms: unusual movements; ringing in your ears; anxiety; memory problems; difficulty concentrating; sleep problems; seizures; shaking; muscle twitching; changes in mental health; depression; burning or prickling feeling in hands, arms, legs or feet; seeing or hearing things that others do not see or hear; thoughts of harming or killing yourself or others; overexcitement; or losing touch with reality.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Diazepam rectal gel is used in emergency situations to stop cluster seizures (episodes of increased seizure activity) in people who are taking other medications to treat epilepsy (seizures). Diazepam is in a class of medications called benzodiazepines. It works by calming abnormal overactivity in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Diazepam comes as a gel to instill rectally using a prefilled syringe with a special plastic tip. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand.
Before diazepam rectal gel is prescribed, the doctor will talk to your caregiver about how to recognize signs of the type of seizure activity that should be treated with this medication. Your caregiver will also be taught how to administer the rectal gel.
Diazepam rectal gel is not meant to be used on a daily basis. Diazepam rectal gel should not be used more than 5 times a month or more often than every 5 days. If you or your caregiver think that you need diazepam rectal gel more often than this, talk to your doctor.
Put the person having seizures on his/her side in a place where he/she cannot fall.
Remove the protective cover from the syringe by pushing it up with your thumb and then pulling it off.
Put lubricating jelly on the rectal tip.
Turn the person on his/her side facing you, bend his/her upper leg forward, and separate his/her buttocks to expose the rectum.
Gently insert the syringe tip into the rectum until the rim is snug against the rectal opening.
Slowly count to 3 while pushing in the plunger until it stops.
Slowly count to 3 again, and then remove the syringe from the rectum.
Hold the buttocks together so the gel doesn't leak from the rectum, and slowly count to 3 before letting go.
Keep the person on his/her side. Take note of what time diazepam rectal gel was given, and continue to watch the person.
To dispose of the remaining diazepam gel, remove the plunger from the syringe body and point the tip over a sink or toilet. Insert the plunger into the syringe and gently push it to release the medication into the toilet or sink. Then flush the toilet or rinse the sink with water until the diazepam gel is no longer visible. Discard all used materials in the trash away from children and pets.
seizures continue for 15 minutes after diazepam rectal gel was given (or follow the doctor's instructions).
the seizures seem different or worse than usual.
you are worried about how often seizures are happening.
you are worried about the skin color or breathing of the person with seizures.
the person is having unusual or serious problems.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's administration instructions.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using diazepam rectal gel,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to diazepam (Valium), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in diazepam rectal. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using diazepam rectal gel. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with diazepam rectal gel: cimetidine (Tagamet); St. John's wort; omeprazole (Prilosec). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using diazepam rectal gel. Do not start any of these medications while using diazepam rectal gel without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glaucoma, lung problems such as asthma or pneumonia, or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using diazepam rectal gel, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of using diazepam rectal gel if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually use diazepam rectal gel because it is not as safe as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
you should know that diazepam rectal gel may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car, operate machinery, or ride a bicycle until the effects of diazepam rectal gel have passed.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while using this medicine.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Diazepam rectal gel may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
dizziness
headache
pain
stomach pain
nervousness
flushing
diarrhea
unsteadiness
abnormal 'high' mood
lack of coordination
runny nose
problems falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
trouble breathing
rage
Diazepam rectal gel may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Talk to your pharmacist about the proper disposal of your medication.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
drowsiness
confusion
coma
slow reflexes
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will need to examine you about every 6 months to check if your dose of diazepam rectal should be changed.
If you have symptoms that are different from your usual seizures, you or your caregiver should call your doctor immediately.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Diastat
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page