Isolated congenital asplenia: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Isolated congenital asplenia
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/isolated-congenital-asplenia/
Isolated congenital asplenia
Description
Isolated congenital asplenia is a condition in which affected individuals are missing their spleen (asplenia) but have no other developmental abnormalities. While most individuals with this condition have no spleen at all, some people have a very small, nonfunctional spleen (hyposplenism).
The spleen plays an important role in the immune system. This organ is part of the lymphatic system, which produces and transports fluids and immune cells throughout the body. The spleen produces certain immune system cells called phagocytes that help remove bacteria from the blood in order to prevent infections. The spleen also stores particular blood cells that fight foreign invaders until they are needed and filters old blood cells for removal. Because people with isolated congenital asplenia lack these immune functions, they are highly susceptible to bacterial infections.
People with isolated congenital asplenia are prone to developing severe, recurrent infections. Infections most commonly affect the whole body (sepsis),
the membrane covering the brain and spinal cord
(meningitis), or the ears (otitis media). Infections are most often caused by the
Streptococcus pneumoniae
bacteria.
Without preventative care and proper treatment, the frequent infections caused by isolated congenital asplenia can be life-threatening.
Frequency
The worldwide prevalence of isolated congenital asplenia is unknown. One population study done in France estimated that the condition occurs in 1 per 2 million newborns.
Causes
About 40 percent of cases of isolated congenital asplenia are caused by mutations in a gene called
RPSA
. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called ribosomal protein SA, which is a component of ribosomes.
Ribosomes
are cellular structures that process the cell's genetic instructions to create proteins.
Each ribosome has two parts (subunits) called the large and small subunits. Ribosomal protein SA is one of several proteins that make up the small subunit. Within the ribosome, the function of the ribosomal protein SA is unclear. Research suggests that it helps the ribosome control the production of certain proteins, many of which are likely important for development before birth.
RPSA
gene mutations are thought to reduce the amount of functional ribosomal protein SA. A shortage of the normal protein likely impairs the assembly of ribosomes, but the specific effects of the mutations are not known. It is unclear why
RPSA
gene mutations appear to solely affect development of the
spleen
.
When isolated congenital asplenia is not caused by mutations in the
RPSA
gene, the cause of the condition is unknown.
Learn more about the gene associated with Isolated congenital asplenia
RPSA
Inheritance
Isolated congenital asplenia caused by mutations in the
RPSA
gene is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from
one affected parent
. Other cases result from
new mutations in the gene
that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in an affected individual's parent or in early embryonic development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
For unknown reasons, some people with an
RPSA
gene mutation that has been associated with isolated congenital asplenia have a normal spleen. The condition is said to have incomplete penetrance because not everyone with an
RPSA
gene mutation develops the condition.
When the cause of isolated congenital asplenia is unknown, the inheritance of the condition is unclear.
Other Names for This Condition
Asplenia, familial
Asplenia, isolated congenital
Congenital hypoplasia of spleen
Hypoplasia of spleen
Hyposplenia, isolated congenital
ICAS
Spenlic hypoplasia
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Familial isolated congenital asplenia
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
ASPLENIA, ISOLATED CONGENITAL; ICAS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Ahmed SA, Zengeya S, Kini U, Pollard AJ. Familial isolated congenital
asplenia: case report and literature review. Eur J Pediatr. 2010
Mar;169(3):315-8. doi: 10.1007/s00431-009-1030-0. Epub 2009 Jul 19.
Citation on PubMed
Bolze A, Boisson B, Bosch B, Antipenko A, Bouaziz M, Sackstein P,
Chaker-Margot M, Barlogis V, Briggs T, Colino E, Elmore AC, Fischer A, Genel F,
Hewlett A, Jedidi M, Kelecic J, Kruger R, Ku CL, Kumararatne D, Lefevre-Utile A,
Loughlin S, Mahlaoui N, Markus S, Garcia JM, Nizon M, Oleastro M, Pac M, Picard
C, Pollard AJ, Rodriguez-Gallego C, Thomas C, Von Bernuth H, Worth A, Meyts I,
Risolino M, Selleri L, Puel A, Klinge S, Abel L, Casanova JL. Incomplete
penetrance for isolated congenital asplenia in humans with mutations in
translated and untranslated RPSA exons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018
Aug 21;115(34):E8007-E8016. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1805437115. Epub 2018 Aug 2.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Bolze A, Mahlaoui N, Byun M, Turner B, Trede N, Ellis SR, Abhyankar A, Itan Y,
Patin E, Brebner S, Sackstein P, Puel A, Picard C, Abel L, Quintana-Murci L,
Faust SN, Williams AP, Baretto R, Duddridge M, Kini U, Pollard AJ, Gaud C, Frange
P, Orbach D, Emile JF, Stephan JL, Sorensen R, Plebani A, Hammarstrom L, Conley
ME, Selleri L, Casanova JL. Ribosomal protein SA haploinsufficiency in humans
with isolated congenital asplenia. Science. 2013 May 24;340(6135):976-8. doi:
10.1126/science.1234864. Epub 2013 Apr 11.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Davies JM, Lewis MP, Wimperis J, Rafi I, Ladhani S, Bolton-Maggs PH; British
Committee for Standards in Haematology. Review of guidelines for the prevention
and treatment of infection in patients with an absent or dysfunctional spleen:
prepared on behalf of the British Committee for Standards in Haematology by a
working party of the Haemato-Oncology task force. Br J Haematol. 2011
Nov;155(3):308-17. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08843.x.
Citation on PubMed
Mahlaoui N, Minard-Colin V, Picard C, Bolze A, Ku CL, Tournilhac O,
Gilbert-Dussardier B, Pautard B, Durand P, Devictor D, Lachassinne E, Guillois B,
Morin M, Gouraud F, Valensi F, Fischer A, Puel A, Abel L, Bonnet D, Casanova JL.
Isolated congenital asplenia: a French nationwide retrospective survey of 20
cases. J Pediatr. 2011 Jan;158(1):142-8, 148.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.07.027. Epub 2010 Sep 16.
Citation on PubMed
Salvadori MI, Price VE; Canadian Paediatric Society, Infectious Diseases and
Immunization Committee. Preventing and treating infections in children with
asplenia or hyposplenia. Paediatr Child Health. 2014 May;19(5):271-8.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Bacterial Infections
Genetic Disorders
Immune System and Disorders
Spleen Diseases
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Abdominal MRI scan
Genetics
Immunodeficiency disorders
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page