Dornase Alfa: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dornase Alfa
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a694002.html
Dornase Alfa
pronounced as (door' nace)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dornase alfa is used to reduce the number of lung infections and to improve lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis. It breaks down the thick secretions in the airways, allowing air to flow better and preventing bacteria from building up.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Dornase alfa comes as a solution to inhale by mouth. It usually is taken one or two times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use dornase alfa exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Dornase alfa is used to treat cystic fibrosis but does not cure it. Continue to use dornase alfa even if you feel well. Do not stop using dornase alfa without talking to your doctor.
Before you use dornase alfa the first time, read the written instructions that come with it. Ask your doctor, pharmacist, or respiratory therapist to demonstrate the proper technique. Practice using the nebulizer while in his or her presence. Only use a nebulizer that is recommended by your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using dornase alfa,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dornase alfa or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking, including vitamins.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using dornase alfa, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dornase alfa may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away.
voice changes
sore throat
hoarseness
eye irritation
rash
If you experience either of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately.
increased difficulty breathing
chest pain
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it in the refrigerator and protect it from sunlight. Do not expose the drug to room temperature for more than 24 hours. Any ampule that has been open for more than 24 hours should be discarded. Discard ampules if the solution is cloudy or discolored.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to dornase alfa.
Do not dilute or mix dornase alfa with other drugs in the nebulizer.
Inhalation devices require regular cleaning. Follow the manufacturer's written instructions for the care of the nebulizer.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Pulmozyme
®
Other names
DNase
recombinant human deoxyribonuclease
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page