Minocycline Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Minocycline Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620003.html
Minocycline Topical
pronounced as (mi noe sye' kleen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Minocycline topical (Amzeeq) is used to treat certain types of acne in adults and children 9 years of age and older. Minocyclinetopical (Zilxi) is used to treat inflammatory lesions of rosacea in adults. Minocycline is in a class of medications called tetracycline antibiotics. It works to treat acne by killing the bacteria that infects pores and decreasing a certain natural oily substance that causes acne.
How should this medicine be used?
Minocycline topical comes as a foam to apply to the skin. It is usually used once daily, at least 1 hour before bedtime. Use minocycline at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use minocycline exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Minocycline foam may catch fire. Stay away from open fire, flames, and do not smoke while you are applying minocycline foam, and for a short time afterward.
To use the minocycline foam, follow these steps:
Shake the minocycline foam well before use. Allow the can to warm to room temperature before first use.
Wash the affected skin with water and a mild cleanser and pat dry with a soft towel.
Apply a thin layer onto the fingertips of the hand and apply it to the affected acne on the face. Be careful not to get minocycline in your eyes, nose, or mouth.
If acne is on the neck, shoulders, arms, back or chest, apply the minocycline foam to these parts. Do not let minocycline get into your eyes, mouth, corners along your nose, or vaginal area.
Do not bathe, shower or swim for at least 1 hour after applying the medication.
Wash your hands after applying minocycline to the affected skin.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using minocycline,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to minocycline, sarecycline, doxycycline, omadacycline, tetracycline, demeclocycline, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in minocycline foam. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking minocycline topical. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have diarrhea or watery stools. Also, tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, lupus (condition in which the immune system attacks many tissues and organs including the skin, joints, blood, and kidneys), intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri; high pressure in the skull that may cause headaches, blurry or double vision, vision loss, and other symptoms), or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using minocycline, call your doctor immediately. Minocycline can harm the fetus.
you should know that minocycline may make you lightheaded or dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Minocycline may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that when minocycline is used during pregnancy or in babies or children up to age 8, it can cause the teeth to become permanently stained or temporarily affect bone growth. Minocycline should not be used in pregnant women or in children 8 years of age or younger.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra foam to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Minocycline may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
redness
darkening of skin, scars, teeth, or gums
redness, dryness, itching, or skin peeling
flushing of face or blushing appearance
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, rash, joint pain, or extreme tiredness
yellowing of skin or eyes, itching, dark-colored urine, light colored bowel movements, loss of appetite, stomach pain, extreme tiredness, nausea, vomiting, or confusion
blurred vision, double vision, vision loss, or unusual headaches
rash, hives, mouth sores, skin blisters and peeling, swelling of your face, eyes, lips, tongue, or throat
difficulty swallowing or breathing
blood in urine
swelling in your legs, ankles, and feet
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps, or fever during treatment or for up to 2 or more months after stopping treatment
Minocycline may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not store it in the refrigerator.
Minocycline foam is flammable, keep it away from flames and extreme heat. Do not puncture or incinerate the container.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows topical minocycline, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using topical minocycline.
Minocycline topical may stain fabric.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Amzeeq
®
Zilxi
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page