Doxazosin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Doxazosin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a693045.html
Doxazosin
pronounced as (dox ay' zoe sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Doxazosin is used in men to treat the symptoms of an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH), which include difficulty urinating (hesitation, dribbling, weak stream, and incomplete bladder emptying), painful urination, and urinary frequency and urgency. It is also used alone or in combination with other medications to treat high blood pressure. Doxazosin is in a class of medications called alpha-blockers. It relieves the symptoms of BPH by relaxing the muscles of the bladder and prostate. It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can flow more easily through the body.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Doxazosin comes as a tablet and an extended-release tablet to take by mouth. The doxazosin tablet is usually taken with or without food once a day in the morning or in the evening. Doxazosin extended-release tablet is usually taken once a day with breakfast. Take doxazosin around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take doxazosin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the extended-release tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor will start you on a low dose of doxazosin and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 1 to 2 weeks. If you stop taking doxazosin for a few days or longer, call your doctor. Your doctor will have to start you again on the lowest dose of doxazosin and gradually increase your dose.
Doxazosin controls high blood pressure and the symptoms of BPH but does not cure them. It may take a few weeks before you feel the full benefit of doxazosin. Continue to take doxazosin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking doxazosin without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking doxazosin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to doxazosin, prazosin (Minipress), terazosin, any other medications, or any ingredients in doxazosin tablets or extended-release tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients..
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking doxazosin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have angina (chest pain); low blood pressure; if you have ever had low blood pressure after taking a medication; or if you have or have ever had prostate cancer, or liver disease. If you are taking the extended-release tablet, tell you doctor if you have constipation, short bowel syndrome (a condition where more than half of the small intestine has been removed by surgery or damaged by disease), or narrowing or a blockage of the intestines.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking doxazosin, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking doxazosin if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take doxazosin to treat high blood pressure, because it is not as safe as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking doxazosin. If you need to have eye surgery at any time during or after your treatment, be sure to tell your doctor that you are taking or have taken doxazosin.
you should know that doxazosin may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car, operate machinery, or perform dangerous tasks for 24 hours after the first time you take doxazosin or after your dose is increased.
you should know that doxazosin may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking doxazosin, when your dose is increased, or if your treatment has been stopped for more than a few days. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. If you experience these symptoms, sit or lie down. If these symptoms do not improve, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Follow your doctor's directions for your meals, including advice for a reduced salt (sodium) diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. Check with your doctor if you have missed two or more doses.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Doxazosin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section are severe or do not go away:
headache
tiredness
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
shortness of breath
weight gain
muscle or joint pain or weakness
abnormal vision
runny nose
decreased sexual ability
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical treatment:
rapid, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
chest pain
shortness of breath
hives
painful erection of the penis that lasts for hours
Doxazosin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
drowsiness
dizziness
lightheadedness
fainting
seizure
What other information should I know?
If you are taking doxazosin extended-release tablets, you may notice something that looks like a tablet in your stool. This is just the empty tablet shell, and this does not mean that you did not get your complete dose of medication.
Keep all appointments with your doctor. If you are taking doxazosin to control high blood pressure, your blood pressure should be checked regularly to determine your response to doxazosin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cardura
®
Cardura
®
XL
Last Revised -
11/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page