Tipranavir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tipranavir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a606009.html
Tipranavir
pronounced as (tip ra' na veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Tipranavir may cause life-threatening bleeding in the brain. Tell your doctor if you have recently had surgery, or if you have recently been injured in any way. Also, tell your doctor if you have a bleeding disorder such as hemophilia (condition in which the blood does not clot normally). Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking any blood thinners or if you are taking vitamin E, other than the amount contained in a regular daily multivitamin. Call your doctor immediately if you experience unusual bruising or bleeding during your treatment with tipranavir.
Tipranavir may cause liver damage that may be life-threatening. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver problems, including hepatitis B or C (virus that infects the liver and may cause liver damage) or if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol. If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking tipranavir and call your doctor immediately: tiredness; flu-like symptoms; loss of appetite; nausea; vomiting; pain, ache, swelling, or sensitivity on your right side below your ribs; yellowing of the skin or eyes; dark (tea-colored) urine; or pale bowel movements.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests to check your body's response to tipranavir.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking tipranavir.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tipranavir is used to treat human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV). Tipranavir is in a class of medications called protease inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood.
Although tipranavir does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Taking these medications and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of giving the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Tipranavir comes as a capsule to take by mouth. Take twice a day with meals. Take tipranavir and ritonavir at around the same times every day.
Take tipranavir exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You will take ritonavir and other medications for HIV while you are taking tipranavir. Your doctor will tell you whether these medications should be taken at the same time as tipranavir, or several hours before or after you take tipranavir. Follow this schedule carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have questions about the times you should take your medications.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not chew or open them. If you are unable to swallow the capsules, tell your doctor or pharmacist.
Tipranavir helps to control HIV infection but does not cure it. Continue to take tipranavir even if you feel well. Do not stop taking tipranavir without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking tipranavir or skip doses, your condition may become more difficult to treat.
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient. Read this information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tipranavir,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
Some medications should not be taken with tipranavir. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with tipranavir. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting tipranavir with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking tipranavir, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with tipranavir: fluticasone (Flonase
®
), omeprazole (Prilosec
®
OTC, in Zegerid
®
OTC), and St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking tipranavir. Do not start any of these medications while taking tipranavir without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes or high blood sugar; high blood cholesterol or triglycerides (blood fats); or an infection that comes and goes such as tuberculosis (TB), cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes, Mycobacterium avium, shingles, or pneumonia.
you should know that some people with diabetes develop worsening of their diabetes while taking tipranavir. If you have diabetes, it is important to carefully monitor your blood sugar while taking tipranavir and call your doctor if your blood sugar becomes difficult to control. Your doctor may need to change your diabetes medication or prescribe new medication to control your blood sugar.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking tipranavir, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are taking tipranavir.
you should know that tipranavir may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking tipranavir. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Tipranavir may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that your body fat may increase or move to different areas of your body such as the back of your neck and upper shoulders ('buffalo hump'), stomach, and breasts. Your body may lose fat from your arms, legs, face, and buttocks. Talk to your doctor if you notice any of these changes in your body fat.
you should know that you may experience hyperglycemia (increases in your blood sugar) while you are taking this medication, even if you do not already have diabetes. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking tipranavir: extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, or weakness.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections. If you have new or worsening symptoms at any time during your treatment with tipranavir, be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose together with ritonavir as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tipranavir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
tiredness
headache
stomach pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING or SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, chills, cough, or other signs of infection
rash; itching; redness, blistering, or peeling of skin; difficulty breathing or swallowing; shortness of breath; muscle or joint pain or stiffness
Tipranavir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store unopened bottles of tipranavir capsules in the refrigerator. After opening, bottles of tipranavir capsules may be stored at room temperature, and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Discard any capsules that are not used within 60 days after opening the bottle.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aptivus
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page