Glasdegib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Glasdegib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619004.html
Glasdegib
pronounced as (glas deg' ib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Glasdegib must not be taken by patients who are pregnant or who may become pregnant. There is a high risk that glasdegib will cause severe birth defects (physical problems that are present at birth) or death of the unborn baby.
If you are a female who can become pregnant, you must have a negative pregnancy test within 7 days before you start treatment with glasdegib. You will need to use effective birth control during you treatment with glasdegib and for at least 30 days after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control options that will work for you.
If you are a male with a female partner who can become pregnant or who is pregnant, you should know glasdegib may be present in the semen and may cause harm to the unborn baby. Use a condom during your treatment with glasdegib and for at least 30 days after the final dose even if you have had a vasectomy (surgery to prevent sperm from leaving your body and causing pregnancy). Do not donate semen during your treatment and for at least 30 days after yourfinal dose.
If you have had unprotected sex, think that your birth control has failed, or think you or your female partner may be pregnant call your doctor right away.
Do not donate blood or blood products during your treatment with glasdegib and for at least 30 days after your last dose.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with glasdegib and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Glasdegib is used along with cytarabine as a first treatment for acute myeloid leukemia (AML; a type of cancer that begins in the white blood cells) in people over 75 years of age, or in adults who have other medical conditions and can not be treated with other chemotherapy medications. Glasdegib is in a class of medications called hedgehog pathway inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of a protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop or slow the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Glasdegib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually given with or without food once a day for at least 6 months, or as long as your doctor recommends treatment. Take glasdegib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take glasdegib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you vomit after taking glasdegib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may need to interrupt your treatment, reduce your dose, or stop your treatment depending on your response to the medication and any side effects that you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with glasdegib.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking glasdegib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to glasdegib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in glasdegib tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking glasdegib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with glasdegib: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking glasdegib. Do not start this medication while taking glasdegib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death), heart failure (condition in which the heart cannot pump enough blood to other parts of the body), or low levels of magnesium or potassium in your blood.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breast-feed during your treatment with glasdegib and for at least 30 days after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking glasdegib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it less than 12 hours until your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Glasdegib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
muscle spasms
muscle, bone or joint pain
extreme tiredness
nausea
vomiting
abdominal pain
constipation
pain or sores in your mouth or throat
decreased appetite
change in the way things taste
weight loss
headache
rash
swelling of hands or legs
hair loss
toothache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
feeling faint, lightheaded, or dizzy; fast or irregular heartbeat
unusual bruising or bleeding
fever alone or along with chills, weakness. or other signs of infection
decreased urination
chest pain
Glasdegib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
extreme tiredness
dizziness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests such as electrocardiograms (EKG, test that records the electrical activity of the heart) and blood tests before and during therapy to make sure it is safe for you to take glasdegib and to check your body's response to the medication.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Daurismo
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page