Pemivibart injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pemivibart injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624061.html
Pemivibart injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Pemivibart injection is currently being studied for the prevention of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Only limited clinical trial information is available at this time to support the use of pemivibart injection for the prevention of COVID-19. More information is needed to know how well the pemivibart works for the prevention of COVID-19 and the possible adverse events from it.
Pemivibart has been associated with hypersensitivity (severe allergic) reactions, including anaphylaxis, during the first or second infusions. Your doctor or nurse will monitor you very closely during your infusion and for 2 hours after. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical care: headache; nausea; vomiting; diarrhea; stomach pain; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat; rash; hives; itching; fever; chills; dizziness; weakness; difficulty breathing; fast or irregular heartbeat; or chest pain.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pemivibart is used to prevent COVID-19 in people 12 years of age and older who weigh at least 88 pounds (40 kg) and who are
not
currently infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus and who have
not
had recent exposure to an individual infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus and are immunocompromised (have a weakened immune system) due to a medical condition or being on certain medicines which may cause them not to respond to a COVID-19 vaccine.
Pemivibart is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by preventing the virus from entering and infecting human cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Pemivibart injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into the vein) by a doctor or a nurse in a medical clinic or in an office. It is usually given every 3 months. Your doctor will decide how long you should receive pemivibart.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving pemivibart injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pemivibart, COVID-19 vaccines, polysorbate 80, polyethylene glycol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pemivibart injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving pemivibart, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pemivibart may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
cough, nasal congestion, runny nose, sneezing, fever, and shortness of breath
fatigue
headache
nausea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
brain fog
dry, itchy skin or redness of skin
muscle aches or pains
tingling, burning or numbness of skin
Pemivibart injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. If you miss an appointment to receive pemivibart, call your doctor right away.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about pemivibart injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Pemgarda
®
Last Revised -
10/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page