Crisaborole Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Crisaborole Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617019.html
Crisaborole Topical
pronounced as (kris" a bor' ole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Crisaborole is used to treat eczema (atopic dermatitis; a skin condition which causes the skin to be dry and itchy and to sometimes develop red, scaly rashes) in adults and children 3 years of age and older. Crisaborole is in a class of medications called phosphodiesterase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of certain natural substances in the body that cause inflammation.
How should this medicine be used?
Crisaborole comes as an ointment to apply to the skin. It is usually applied twice a day. Use crisaborole at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use crisaborole exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The ointment is only for use on the skin. Be careful not to get crisaborole ointment in your eyes, mouth, or vagina.
To use the ointment, follow these steps:
Wash your hands with soap and water.
Be sure that the skin in the affected area is dry.
Apply a thin layer of crisaborole ointment to all affected areas of your skin. Rub the ointment into your skin gently and completely.
Wash your hands with soap and water to remove any leftover crisaborole ointment. Do not wash your hands if you are treating them with crisaborole ointment. If a caregiver has applied the ointment, they should wash their hands after applying the ointment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using topical crisaborole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to crisaborole, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in crisaborole ointment. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal or topical products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using crisaborole, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra ointment to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Crisaborole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning or stinging on the area of skin where the ointment was applied
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
hives
skin redness, itching, or swelling where crisaborole was applied or anywhere on the body
Crisaborole may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the tube it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Eucrisa
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page