Penicillin G Benzathine and Penicillin G Procaine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Penicillin G Benzathine and Penicillin G Procaine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615053.html
Penicillin G Benzathine and Penicillin G Procaine Injection
pronounced as (pen" sil' in g ben' za theen and pen" i sil' in g proe' kane)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection should never be given intravenously (into a vein), because this may cause serious or life-threatening side effects or death.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection is used to treat and prevent certain infections caused by bacteria. Penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection should not be used to treat sexually transmitted diseases (STD) or early in the treatment of certain serious infections. Penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection is in a class of medications called penicillins. It works by killing bacteria that cause infections.
Antibiotics such as penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection comes as a suspension (liquid) in a prefilled syringe to inject into the muscles of the buttocks or thigh by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. Penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection may be given as a single dose or divided into 2 doses given 2 days apart. In some cases, you may need to receive additional doses spaced 2 to 3 days apart.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
If your doctor has told you that you will need additional doses of penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection, make sure to keep all appointments to receive your doses on schedule even if you are feeling better. If you stop using penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection; penicillin antibiotics; cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil, cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefditoren (Spectracef), cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefoxitin, cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftazidime (Fortaz, Tazicef), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Ceftin, Zinacef), and cephalexin (Keflex); procaine; or any other medications. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure if a medication you are allergic to belongs to one of these groups of medications. Also tell your doctor if you are allergic to any of the ingredients in penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, allergies, hay fever, hives, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
pain, swelling, lump, bleeding, or bruising in the area where the medication was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
sore throat
chills
fever
headache
muscle or joint pain
weakness
fast heartbeat
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) with or without fever and stomach cramps that may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment
sudden onset of lower back pain, muscle weakness, numbness, and tingling
blue or black skin discoloration in the area where the medication was injected
skin blistering, peeling, or shedding in the area where the medication was injected
numbness of the arm or leg in which the medication was injected
severe agitation, confusion, seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist, or being fearful of dying
Penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
twitching
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bicillin CR
®
Bicillin CR
®
900/300
Last Revised -
12/15/2015
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page