Famotidine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Famotidine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601142.html
Famotidine Injection
pronounced as (fa moe' ti deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Famotidine injection is used in people who are hospitalized to treat certain conditions in which the stomach produces too much acid or to treat ulcers (sores in the lining of the stomach or intestine) that were not successfully treated with other medications. Famotidine injection is also used on a short-term basis in people who cannot take oral medication
to treat ulcers,
to prevent ulcers from returning after they have healed,
to treat gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD, a condition in which backward flow of acid from the stomach causes heartburn and injury of the esophagus [tube between the throat and the stomach]),
and to treat conditions where the stomach produces too much acid, such as Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (tumors in the pancreas and small intestine that caused increased production of stomach acid).
Famotidine injection is in a class of medications called H
2
blockers. It works by decreasing the amount of acid made in the stomach.
How should this medicine be used?
Famotidine injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be mixed with another fluid and injected intravenously (into a vein) over 2 to 30 minutes. It also is available as a premixed product to inject intravenously over 15 to 30 minutes. It is usually given every 12 hours.
You may receive famotidine injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving famotidine injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving famotidine injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to famotidine, cimetidine, nizatidine (Axid), ranitidine (Zantac), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in famotidine injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving famotidine injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Famotidine injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
dizziness
constipation
diarrhea
pain or swelling in the area where the medication was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
Famotidine injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Pepcid
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page