SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/scn8a-related-epilepsy-with-encephalopathy/
SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy
Description
SCN8A
-related epilepsy with encephalopathy is a condition characterized by recurrent seizures (epilepsy), abnormal brain function (encephalopathy), and intellectual disability. The signs and symptoms of this condition typically begin in infancy.
The seizures in
SCN8A
-related epilepsy with encephalopathy include involuntary muscle contractions that occur before age 1 (infantile spasms), partial or complete loss of consciousness (absence seizures), involuntary muscle twitches (myoclonic seizures), or loss of consciousness with muscle rigidity and convulsions (tonic-clonic seizures). Most people with
SCN8A
-related epilepsy with encephalopathy have more than one type of seizure. The frequency of seizures in different individuals with this condition ranges from hundreds per day to fewer than one per month. In many individuals, the seizures are described as refractory because they do not respond to therapy with anti-epileptic medications.
Other signs and symptoms of
SCN8A
-related epilepsy with encephalopathy include intellectual disability that may be mild to severe. Some affected infants have normal early development but begin to lose previously acquired skills (developmental regression) and have a gradual loss in thinking ability (cognitive decline) when epilepsy develops. Problems with movement are common, and about half of affected infants cannot perform intentional movements. Behavior disorders may also occur.
In rare cases, individuals with this condition die unexpectedly for no known reason (sudden unexpected death in epilepsy or SUDEP).
Frequency
There are at least 140 individuals with
SCN8A
-related epilepsy with encephalopathy. This condition is estimated to account for 1 percent of all cases of epilepsy with encephalopathy.
Causes
As its name suggests,
SCN8A
-related epilepsy with encephalopathy is caused by mutations in the
SCN8A
gene. This gene provides instructions for making one part (the alpha subunit) of a
sodium channel
called Na
v
1.6. This channel allows positively charged sodium (Na) atoms (sodium ions) to pass into nerve cells (
neurons
) and plays a key role in the ability of neurons to communicate by generating and transmitting electrical signals.
SCN8A
gene mutations result in altered Na
v
1.6 channels that stay open longer than usual, which increases the flow of sodium ions into neurons. The persistently open channels abnormally increase electrical signals, which can lead to excess activation (excitation) of neurons in the brain. The increased neuronal activity leads to seizures in people with
SCN8A
-related epilepsy with encephalopathy.
It is unknown how
SCN8A
gene mutations lead to intellectual disability, movement problems, and the other features of
SCN8A
-related epilepsy with encephalopathy. Because some affected children experience developmental regression after the onset of seizures, it has been suggested that the seizures may impair brain function, but it is unclear if that is the case.
Learn more about the gene associated with SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy
SCN8A
Inheritance
This condition follows an
autosomal dominant pattern
of inheritance, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
Most cases of this condition result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 13
EIEE13
SCN8A encephalopathy
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, 13
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy 13
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
DEVELOPMENTAL AND EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY 13; DEE13
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Butler KM, da Silva C, Shafir Y, Weisfeld-Adams JD, Alexander JJ, Hegde M,
Escayg A. De novo and inherited SCN8A epilepsy mutations detected by gene panel
analysis. Epilepsy Res. 2017 Jan;129:17-25. doi:
10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2016.11.002. Epub 2016 Nov 6.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Hammer MF, Xia M, Schreiber JM. SCN8A-Related Epilepsy and/or
Neurodevelopmental Disorders. 2016 Aug 25 [updated 2023 Apr 6]. In: Adam MP,
Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK379665/
Citation on PubMed
Larsen J, Carvill GL, Gardella E, Kluger G, Schmiedel G, Barisic N, Depienne
C, Brilstra E, Mang Y, Nielsen JE, Kirkpatrick M, Goudie D, Goldman R, Jahn JA,
Jepsen B, Gill D, Docker M, Biskup S, McMahon JM, Koeleman B, Harris M, Braun K,
de Kovel CG, Marini C, Specchio N, Djemie T, Weckhuysen S, Tommerup N, Troncoso
M, Troncoso L, Bevot A, Wolff M, Hjalgrim H, Guerrini R, Scheffer IE, Mefford HC,
Moller RS; EuroEPINOMICS RES Consortium CRP. The phenotypic spectrum of SCN8A
encephalopathy. Neurology. 2015 Feb 3;84(5):480-9. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0000000000001211. Epub 2015 Jan 7.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Meisler MH, Helman G, Hammer MF, Fureman BE, Gaillard WD, Goldin AL, Hirose S,
Ishii A, Kroner BL, Lossin C, Mefford HC, Parent JM, Patel M, Schreiber J,
Stewart R, Whittemore V, Wilcox K, Wagnon JL, Pearl PL, Vanderver A, Scheffer IE.
SCN8A encephalopathy: Research progress and prospects. Epilepsia. 2016
Jul;57(7):1027-35. doi: 10.1111/epi.13422. Epub 2016 Jun 8.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Wagnon JL, Barker BS, Hounshell JA, Haaxma CA, Shealy A, Moss T, Parikh S,
Messer RD, Patel MK, Meisler MH. Pathogenic mechanism of recurrent mutations of
SCN8A in epileptic encephalopathy. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2015 Dec
21;3(2):114-23. doi: 10.1002/acn3.276. eCollection 2016 Feb.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Related Health Topics
Epilepsy
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page