Silodosin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Silodosin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a609002.html
Silodosin
pronounced as (sye'' lo doe' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Silodosin is used in men to treat the symptoms of an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia; BPH), which include difficulty urinating (hesitation, dribbling, weak stream, and incomplete bladder emptying), painful urination, and urinary frequency and urgency. Silodosin is in a class of medications called alpha-blockers. It relieves the symptoms of BPH by relaxing the muscles of the bladder and prostate.
How should this medicine be used?
Silodosin comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food once a day. Do not take silodosin on an empty stomach. Take silodosin at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take silodosin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Silodosin controls the symptoms of BPH but does not cure it. Continue to take silodosin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking silodosin without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking silodosin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to silodosin or any other medications.
some medications should not be taken with silodosin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with silodosin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting silodosin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking silodosin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist
tell your doctor if you have kidney or liver disease. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take silodosin.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had low blood pressure.
you should know that silodosin is only for use in men. Women should not take silodosin, especially if they are or could become pregnant or are breast-feeding. If a pregnant woman takes silodosin, she should call her doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking silodosin. If you need to have eye surgery at any time during or after your treatment, be sure to tell your doctor that you are taking or have taken silodosin.
you should know that silodosin may make you drowsy or dizzy, especially when you first start taking it. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that silodosin may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking silodosin. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. If you experience these symptoms, sit or lie down. If these symptoms do not improve, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose with a meal as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Silodosin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
orgasm with little or no semen (fluid)
diarrhea
dizziness
low blood pressure
stuffy or runny nose
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms , call your doctor immediately:
painful erection of the penis that lasts for several hours
Silodosin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
dizziness
fainting
lightheadedness
blurred vision
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Rapaflo
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page