Glycoprotein VI deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Glycoprotein VI deficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/glycoprotein-vi-deficiency/
Glycoprotein VI deficiency
Description
Glycoprotein VI deficiency is a bleeding disorder associated with a decreased ability to form blood clots. Normally, blood clots protect the body after an injury by sealing off damaged blood vessels and preventing further blood loss. Because people with glycoprotein VI deficiency cannot form blood clots normally, they have an increased risk of nosebleeds (epistaxis) and may experience abnormally heavy or prolonged bleeding following minor injury or surgery. In some affected individuals, spontaneous bleeding under the skin causes areas of discoloration (ecchymosis). Women with glycoprotein VI deficiency often have heavy or prolonged menstrual periods (menorrhagia).
Frequency
The prevalence of glycoprotein VI deficiency is unknown. At least 15 cases have been described in the scientific literature.
Causes
Glycoprotein VI deficiency can be caused by mutations in the
GP6
gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called glycoprotein VI (GPVI). This protein is embedded in the outer membrane of blood cells called platelets, which are an essential component of blood clots. In response to an injury that causes bleeding, the GPVI protein begins clot formation by attaching (binding) to another protein called collagen that is found on
blood vessel walls
. The binding of GPVI to collagen also signals additional platelets to come together to increase the size of the clot.
GP6
gene mutations can lead to the production of no GPVI protein; an abnormally short, nonfunctional GPVI protein; or a protein that is less able to bind to collagen. Without GPVI binding to collagen, platelets cannot come together efficiently to form a clot, leading to the bleeding problems associated with glycoprotein VI deficiency.
Some cases of glycoprotein VI deficiency are not caused by
GP6
gene mutations; instead these cases are acquired, which means they do not appear to be caused by inherited gene mutations. These acquired cases of glycoprotein VI deficiency are associated with autoimmune disorders such as
immune thrombocytopenia
purpura,
Graves' disease
, or
systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). Autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's own cells and tissues. Some individuals with these autoimmune disorders produce immune proteins called antibodies that attack and destroy the GPVI protein. As a result, there is a shortage (deficiency) of functional GPVI protein on the surface of platelets, which leads to bleeding problems characteristic of glycoprotein VI deficiency.
Learn more about the gene associated with Glycoprotein VI deficiency
GP6
Inheritance
When this condition is caused by mutations in the
GP6
gene, it is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
BDPLT11
Bleeding diathesis due to a collagen receptor defect
Bleeding disorder, platelet-type, 11
GP VI deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Platelet-type bleeding disorder 11
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Bleeding diathesis due to glycoprotein VI deficiency
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
BLEEDING DISORDER, PLATELET-TYPE, 11; BDPLT11
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Arthur JF, Dunkley S, Andrews RK. Platelet glycoprotein VI-related clinical
defects. Br J Haematol. 2007 Nov;139(3):363-72. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2141.2007.06799.x.
Citation on PubMed
Bender M, Hofmann S, Stegner D, Chalaris A, Bosl M, Braun A, Scheller J,
Rose-John S, Nieswandt B. Differentially regulated GPVI ectodomain shedding by
multiple platelet-expressed proteinases. Blood. 2010 Oct 28;116(17):3347-55. doi:
10.1182/blood-2010-06-289108. Epub 2010 Jul 19.
Citation on PubMed
Dumont B, Lasne D, Rothschild C, Bouabdelli M, Ollivier V, Oudin C, Ajzenberg
N, Grandchamp B, Jandrot-Perrus M. Absence of collagen-induced platelet
activation caused by compound heterozygous GPVI mutations. Blood. 2009 Aug
27;114(9):1900-3. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-213504. Epub 2009 Jun 23.
Citation on PubMed
Hermans C, Wittevrongel C, Thys C, Smethurst PA, Van Geet C, Freson K. A
compound heterozygous mutation in glycoprotein VI in a patient with a bleeding
disorder. J Thromb Haemost. 2009 Aug;7(8):1356-63. doi:
10.1111/j.1538-7836.2009.03520.x. Epub 2009 Jun 22.
Citation on PubMed
Matus V, Valenzuela G, Saez CG, Hidalgo P, Lagos M, Aranda E, Panes O, Pereira
J, Pillois X, Nurden AT, Mezzano D. An adenine insertion in exon 6 of human GP6
generates a truncated protein associated with a bleeding disorder in four Chilean
families. J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Sep;11(9):1751-9. doi: 10.1111/jth.12334.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Bleeding Disorders
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Bleeding disorders
Blood clotting
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page