Dalbavancin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dalbavancin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614036.html
Dalbavancin Injection
pronounced as (dal'' ba van' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dalbavancin injection is used to treat skin infections caused by certain types of bacteria. Dalbavancin is in a class of medications called lipoglycopeptide antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as dalbavancin will not kill viruses that can cause colds, flu, or other infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Dalbavancin injection comes as a powder to be mixed with fluid and given intravenously (into a vein) over 30 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or clinic. It is usually given as a single dose or once a week for 2 doses.
You may experience a reaction while you receive a dose of dalbavancin injection. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of these symptoms while you receive dalbavancin: sudden reddening of the face, neck, or upper chest; itching; rash; and hives. Your doctor may slow or stop the infusion until your symptoms improve.
You should begin to feel better after receiving treatment with dalbavancin injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving dalbavancin injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dalbavancin, oritavancin (Orbactiv), telavancin (Vibativ), vancomycin (Vancocin), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in dalbavancin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease, or if you are being treated with hemodialysis (treatment to remove waste from the blood when the kidneys are not working).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving dalbavancin injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive dalbavancin, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dalbavancin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives, rash, itching, difficulty breathing or swallowing
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
Dalbavancin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Dalvance
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page