Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type II: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type II
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/trichorhinophalangeal-syndrome-type-ii/
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type II
Description
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type II (TRPS II) is a condition that causes bone and joint malformations; distinctive facial features; intellectual disability; and abnormalities of the skin, hair, teeth, sweat glands, and nails. The name of the condition describes some of the areas of the body that are commonly affected: hair (tricho-), nose (rhino-), and fingers and toes (phalangeal).
People with this condition have multiple noncancerous (benign) bone tumors called osteochondromas. Affected individuals may develop a few to several hundred osteochondromas. These bone growths typically begin in infancy to early childhood and stop forming around adolescence. Depending on the location of the osteochondromas, they can cause pain, limited range of joint movement, or damage to blood vessels or the spinal cord. Individuals with TRPS II may have reduced bone mineral density (osteopenia). Affected individuals often have slow growth before and after birth resulting in short stature. In TRPS II, the ends (epiphyses) of one or more bones in the fingers or toes are abnormally cone-shaped. Additionally, the fingernails and toenails are typically
thin
and abnormally formed.
Children with TRPS II often have an unusually large range of joint movement (
hypermobility
). However, as osteochondromas begin to develop, typically starting between infancy and mid-childhood, the joints begin to stiffen, leading to decreased mobility. Individuals with TRPS II may also have a misalignment of the hip joints (hip dysplasia), which often develops in early adulthood but can occur in infancy or childhood.
The characteristic appearance of individuals with TRPS II involves
thick eyebrows
;
a broad nose
with a
rounded tip
; a
long
,
smooth
area between the nose and the upper lip (philtrum); a
thin upper lip
; and small teeth that are either decreased (oligodontia) or
increased (supernumerary)
in number. Almost all affected individuals have
sparse scalp hair
. Males are particularly affected by hair loss, with many being nearly or completely bald soon after puberty. Some children with this condition have loose skin, but the skin becomes tighter over time. Individuals with TRPS II may experience excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis).
Most individuals with TRPS II have mild intellectual disability.
Frequency
TRPS II is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown.
Causes
TRPS II is caused by the
deletion
of genetic material on the long arm (q) of
chromosome 8
. The size of the deletion varies among affected individuals; studies suggest that larger deletions tend to result in a greater number of features than do smaller deletions.
The signs and symptoms of TRPS II are related to the loss of multiple genes on chromosome 8. The
TRPS1
,
EXT1
, and
RAD21
genes are missing in people with TRPS II. These genes play significant roles in regulating gene activity, protein function, and cell division.
Researchers have determined that the loss of the
EXT1
gene is responsible for the multiple osteochondromas seen in people with TRPS II. Loss of the
TRPS1
gene is thought to cause the other bone and facial abnormalities. Deletion of the
RAD21
gene may contribute to intellectual disability. The loss of other genes from this region of chromosome 8 likely contributes to the additional features of this condition.
TRPS II is often described as a contiguous gene deletion syndrome because it results from the loss of several neighboring genes.
A condition similar to TRPS II is caused by gene changes that affect only the
TRPS1
gene. This condition, called
trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I
(TRPS I), features similar bone, joint, skin, and facial characteristics as TRPS II. Individuals with TRPSI do not have osteochondromas or intellectual disability, which are not associated with the
TRPS1
gene.
Learn more about the genes and chromosome associated with Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type II
EXT1
RAD21
TRPS1
chromosome 8
Inheritance
Most cases of TRPS II are not inherited, but occur as random events during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in a parent of an affected individual. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. In a very small number of cases, people with TRPS II have inherited the chromosomal deletion from
a parent with the condition
.
TRPS II is considered an
autosomal dominant
condition because one copy of the altered chromosome 8 in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
Other Names for This Condition
Chromosome 8q24.1 deletion syndrome
Giedion-Langer syndrome
Langer-Giedion syndrome
LGS
Tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type II
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome with exostosis
TRPS II
TRPS2
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Langer-Giedion syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type 2
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE II; TRPS2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Hilton MJ, Sawyer JM, Gutierrez L, Hogart A, Kung TC, Wells DE. Analysis of
novel and recurrent mutations responsible for the tricho-rhino-phalangeal
syndromes. J Hum Genet. 2002;47(3):103-6. doi: 10.1007/s100380200010.
Citation on PubMed
Maas SM, Shaw AC, Bikker H, Ludecke HJ, van der Tuin K, Badura-Stronka M,
Belligni E, Biamino E, Bonati MT, Carvalho DR, Cobben J, de Man SA, Den Hollander
NS, Di Donato N, Garavelli L, Gronborg S, Herkert JC, Hoogeboom AJ, Jamsheer A,
Latos-Bielenska A, Maat-Kievit A, Magnani C, Marcelis C, Mathijssen IB, Nielsen
M, Otten E, Ousager LB, Pilch J, Plomp A, Poke G, Poluha A, Posmyk R, Rieubland
C, Silengo M, Simon M, Steichen E, Stumpel C, Szakszon K, Polonkai E, van den
Ende J, van der Steen A, van Essen T, van Haeringen A, van Hagen JM, Verheij JB,
Mannens MM, Hennekam RC. Phenotype and genotype in 103 patients with
tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 May;58(5):279-92. doi:
10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.03.002. Epub 2015 Mar 16.
Citation on PubMed
Riedl S, Giedion A, Schweitzer K, Mullner-Eidenbock A, Grill F, Frisch H,
Ludecke HJ. Pronounced short stature in a girl with tricho-rhino-phalangeal
syndrome II (TRPS II, Langer-Giedion syndrome) and growth hormone deficiency. Am
J Med Genet A. 2004 Dec 1;131(2):200-3. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30374.
Citation on PubMed
Schinzel A, Riegel M, Baumer A, Superti-Furga A, Moreira LM, Santo LD, Schiper
PP, Carvalho JH, Giedion A. Long-term follow-up of four patients with
Langer-Giedion syndrome: clinical course and complications. Am J Med Genet A.
2013 Sep;161A(9):2216-25. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36062. Epub 2013 Aug 2.
Citation on PubMed
Shanske AL, Patel A, Saukam S, Levy B, Ludecke HJ. Clinical and molecular
characterization of a patient with Langer-Giedion syndrome and mosaic
del(8)(q22.3q24.13). Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Dec 15;146A(24):3211-6. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.32615.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Benign Tumors
Bone Diseases
Developmental Disabilities
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Hypermobile joints
Joint pain
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page