Cosyntropin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cosyntropin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625090.html
Cosyntropin Injection
pronounced as koe″ sin troe′ pin
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cosyntropin is used to screen for adrenocortical insufficiency (condition where the adrenal glands do not produce enough cortisol, hormone responsible for stress response in the body). Cosyntropin is in a class of medications called synthetic adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH). It works by acting like natural ACTH to stimulate the adrenal gland to produce cortisol.
How should this medicine be used?
Cosyntropin comes as a powder to be mixed with a liquid and be given intravenously (into the vein) or intramuscularly (into the muscle) by a healthcare provider. It is given as a one-time injection. Your doctor will measure your cortisol levels before the injection and then 30 minutes and 60 minutes after the injection.
Your doctor may ask you to stop taking certain medications for a period of time before your test. Make sure you tell your doctor if you are taking spironolactone, corticosteroid medication, or estrogen-containing medication.
If you are taking spironolactone, you should not take it the day of the test with cosyntropin.
If you are taking a corticosteroid medication (e.g. prednisone, prednisolone, dexamethasone, methylprednisolone, hydrocortisone, trimacinolone), ask your doctor or pharmacist how long you should stop taking it before your test with cosyntropin.
If you take estrogen-containing medication such as hormonal contraceptives or hormonal replacement therapy, you should stop taking it 4 to 6 weeks before your scheduled test with cosyntropin.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving cosyntropin,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications may interfere with the results of the cosyntropin test. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take when scheduling your cosyntropin test.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cosyntropin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
swelling in arms or legs
lightheadedness
redness of skin or rash
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives, itching or rash; swelling in face, lips, eyes, or throat; wheezing or trouble breathing; weak or rapid pulse, lightheadedness
Cosyntropin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cortrosyn
®
Other names
ACTH Stimulation test
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page