Complement component 8 deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Complement component 8 deficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/complement-component-8-deficiency/
Complement component 8 deficiency
Description
Complement component 8 deficiency is a disorder that causes the immune system to malfunction, resulting in a form of immunodeficiency. Immunodeficiencies are conditions in which the immune system is not able to protect the body effectively from foreign invaders such as bacteria. People with complement component 8 deficiency have a significantly increased risk of recurrent bacterial infections, particularly by a bacterium called
Neisseria meningitidis
. Infection by this bacterium causes inflammation of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis). Although meningitis can be life-threatening, individuals with complement component 8 deficiency are less likely to die from the infection than people in the general population who contract it.
The severity of complement component 8 deficiency varies widely. While some people with this condition experience one or more infections, others do not have any health problems related to the disorder.
There are two types of complement component 8 deficiency, types I and II, classified by their genetic cause. The two types have the same signs and symptoms.
Frequency
Complement component 8 deficiency is a rare disorder, although its prevalence is unknown. Type I occurs in several populations, particularly in people with Hispanic, Japanese, or African Caribbean heritage, whereas type II primarily occurs in people of Northern European descent.
Causes
Complement component 8 deficiency is caused by mutations in the
C8A
or
C8B
gene.
C8A
gene mutations underlie type I, and
C8B
gene mutations cause type II. These genes provide instructions for making pieces of a protein complex called complement component 8. This complex is composed of an alpha subunit, produced from the
C8A
gene, a beta subunit, produced from the
C8B
gene, and a gamma subunit, produced from another gene called
C8G
.
Complement component 8 aids in a part of the body's immune response known as the
complement system
. The complement system is a group of proteins that work together to destroy foreign invaders, trigger inflammation, and remove debris from cells and tissues. Complement component 8 combines with several other complement proteins to form the membrane attack complex (MAC), which inserts itself in the outer membrane of bacterial cells. This complex creates a hole (pore) in the membrane, which kills the bacterium.
Mutations in either
C8A
or
C8B
lead to a shortage of the respective subunit, which impairs formation of complement component 8. Without complement component 8, membrane attack complexes cannot form, which impairs the immune response, particularly against
Neisseria meningitidis
. This impaired immune response leaves affected individuals prone to recurrent episodes of meningitis.
Learn more about the genes associated with Complement component 8 deficiency
C8A
C8B
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
C8 deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Type i complement component 8 deficiency
Genetic Testing Registry: Type II complement component 8 deficiency
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Complement component 8 deficiency, type i
Complement component 8 deficiency, type ii
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 8 DEFICIENCY, TYPE II; C8D2
COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 8 DEFICIENCY, TYPE I; C8D1
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Bubeck D. The making of a macromolecular machine: assembly of the membrane
attack complex. Biochemistry. 2014 Apr 1;53(12):1908-15. doi: 10.1021/bi500157z.
Epub 2014 Mar 18.
Citation on PubMed
Kaufmann T, Hansch G, Rittner C, Spath P, Tedesco F, Schneider PM. Genetic
basis of human complement C8 beta deficiency. J Immunol. 1993 Jun
1;150(11):4943-7.
Citation on PubMed
Kojima T, Horiuchi T, Nishizaka H, Fukumori Y, Amano T, Nagasawa K, Niho Y,
Hayashi K. Genetic basis of human complement C8 alpha-gamma deficiency. J
Immunol. 1998 Oct 1;161(7):3762-6.
Citation on PubMed
Merle NS, Noe R, Halbwachs-Mecarelli L, Fremeaux-Bacchi V, Roumenina LT.
Complement System Part II: Role in Immunity. Front Immunol. 2015 May 26;6:257.
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00257. eCollection 2015.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Rosa DD, Pasqualotto AC, de Quadros M, Prezzi SH. Deficiency of the eighth
component of complement associated with recurrent meningococcal meningitis--case
report and literature review. Braz J Infect Dis. 2004 Aug;8(4):328-30. doi:
10.1590/s1413-86702004000400010. Epub 2004 Nov 19.
Citation on PubMed
Saucedo L, Ackermann L, Platonov AE, Gewurz A, Rakita RM, Densen P.
Delineation of additional genetic bases for C8 beta deficiency. Prevalence of
null alleles and predominance of C-->T transition in their genesis. J Immunol.
1995 Nov 15;155(10):5022-8.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Immune System and Disorders
Meningitis
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Complement
Genetics
Immunodeficiency disorders
Related Medical Tests
Complement Blood Test
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page