Sulfadiazine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sulfadiazine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682130.html
Sulfadiazine
pronounced as (sul fa dye' a zeen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sulfadiazine, a sulfa drug, eliminates bacteria that cause infections, especially urinary tract infections. Antibiotics will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Sulfadiazine comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken three to six times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take sulfadiazine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The tablets should be taken with a full glass of water.
Continue to take sulfadiazine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking sulfadiazine without talking to your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking sulfadiazine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to sulfadiazine, any other sulfa drugs, diuretic ('water pills'), oral diabetes medications, or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking sulfadiazine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with sulfadiazine: salicylates. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking sulfadiazine. Do not start any of these medications while taking sulfadiazine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease, asthma, severe allergies, or glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6PD) deficiency (an inherited blood disease).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking sulfadiazine, call your doctor.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Sulfadiazine may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
You should drink plenty of fluids and take sulfadiazine on an empty stomach.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sulfadiazine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
upset stomach
loss of appetite
dizziness
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash or skin changes
sore throat
fever
headache
joint or muscle aches
yellowing of the skin or eyes
swelling of the lips or tongue
swallowing problems
tiredness
weakness
blood in urine
difficulty breathing
unusual bleeding or bruising
ringing in ears
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable.
If you still have symptoms of an infection after you finish sulfadiazine, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Microsulfon
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
05/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page