Bendamustine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bendamustine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608034.html
Bendamustine Injection
pronounced as (ben'' da mus' teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bendamustine injection is used to treat chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL; a type of cancer of the white blood cells). Bendamustine injection is also used to treat a type of non-Hodgkins lymphoma (NHL: cancer that begins in a type of white blood cell that normally fights infection) that is slow spreading, but has continued to worsen during or after treatment with another medication. Bendamustine is in a class of medications called alkylating agents. It works by killing existing cancer cells and limiting the growth of new cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Bendamustine comes as a solution (liquid) or as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected intravenously (into a vein) over 10 minutes or infused intravenously over 30 or 60 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or hospital outpatient clinic. When bendamustine injection is used to treat CLL, it is usually injected once a day for 2 days, followed by 26 days when the medication is not given. This treatment period is called a cycle, and the cycle may be repeated every 28 days for as long as 6 cycles. When bendamustine injection is used to treat NHL, it is usually injected once a day for 2 days, followed by 19 days when the medication is not given. This treatment cycle may be repeated every 21 days for up to 8 cycles.
Your doctor may need to delay your treatment and adjust your dose if you experience certain side effects. Your doctor may also give you other medication(s) to prevent or treat certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with bendamustine injection.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving bendamustine injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bendamustine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in bendamustine injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any of the following: ciprofloxacin (Cipro), fluvoxamine (Luvox, and omeprazole (Prilosec). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects. Many other medications may interact with bendamustine, so be sure to tell your doctor about all the medications you are taking, even those that do not appear on this list.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had cytomegalovirus infection (CMV; a viral infection that may cause symptoms in patients with weak immune systems), hepatitis B virus infection (HBV; an ongoing liver infection), tuberculosis (TB; a serious infection that affects the lungs and sometimes other parts of the body), herpes zoster (shingles; a rash that can occur in people who have had chickenpox in the past), or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are receiving bendamustine injection. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy in yourself or your partner during your treatment with bendamustine injection and for 3 months afterwards. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner becomes pregnant while receiving bendamustine injection, call your doctor. Bendamustine injection can harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with bendamustine.
you should know that bendamustine injection may make you tired. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Smoking may decrease the effectiveness of this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Call your doctor right away if you are unable to keep an appointment to receive a dose of bendamustine injection.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bendamustine injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
heartburn
constipation
stomach pain or swelling
sores or white patches in the mouth
dry mouth
bad taste in the mouth or difficulty tasting food
loss of appetite
weight loss
headache
anxiety
depression
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
back, bone, joint, arm or leg pain
dry skin
sweating
night sweats
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
pain in the place where the medication was injected
hives
rash
itching
blistering or peeling skin
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
shortness of breath
chest pain
fast heartbeat
excessive tiredness or weakness
pale skin
fever, chills, cough, or other signs of infection
nausea; vomiting; unusual bleeding or bruising; yellowing of the skin or eyes, dark urine, or light colored stool; tenderness on the right upper side of the stomach
Bendamustine injection may cause infertility in some men. This infertility may end after treatment, may last for several years, or may be permanent. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving this medication.
Some people developed other types of cancer while they were using bendamustine injection. There is not enough information to tell whether bendamustine injection caused these cancers to develop. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving this medication.
Bendamustine injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
rapid, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to bendamustine injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Belrapzo
®
Bendeka
®
Treanda
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page