Trihexyphenidyl: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Trihexyphenidyl
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682160.html
Trihexyphenidyl
pronounced as (trye hex ee fen' i dil)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Trihexyphenidyl is used along with other medications to treat the symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD; a disorder of the nervous system that causes difficulties with movement, muscle control, and balance) and to control extrapyramidal symptoms (tremor, slurred speech) caused by certain medications. Trihexyphenidyl is in a class of medications called antimuscarinics. It works by relaxing muscles and nerve impulses that control the function of muscles.
How should this medicine be used?
Trihexyphenidyl comes as a tablet and elixir (liquid) to take by mouth. It usually is taken with or without food three or four times a day. Take trihexyphenidyl at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take trihexyphenidyl exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Do not stop taking trihexyphenidyl suddenly without talking with your doctor, especially if you are also taking other medications. Sudden stoppage can cause symptoms of Parkinson's disease to return.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking trihexyphenidyl,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to trihexyphenidyl, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in trihexyphenidyl preparation. Ask your doctor or pharmacist or check the package label for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking trihexyphenidyl. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glaucoma, high blood pressure, problems with your urinary system or prostate, stomach problems, or heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking trihexyphenidyl, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking trihexyphenidyl.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking trihexyphenidyl if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take trihexyphenidyl because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Trihexyphenidyl may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness or blurred vision
dry mouth
upset stomach
vomiting
constipation
headache
difficulty urinating
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
fever
confusion
delusions or hallucinations
Trihexyphenidyl may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to trihexyphenidyl.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Artane
®
¶
Tremin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page