Entacapone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Entacapone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601236.html
Entacapone
pronounced as (en ta' ka pone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Entacapone is an inhibitor of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). It is used in combination with levodopa and carbidopa (Sinemet) to treat the end-of-dose 'wearing-off' symptoms of Parkinson's disease. Entacapone helps the levodopa and carbidopa work better by allowing more of it to reach the brain, where it has its effects.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Entacapone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is taken with every dose of levodopa and carbidopa, up to 8 times a day. Entacapone may be taken with or without food. Read your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take entacapone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Entacapone helps control the symptoms of Parkinson's disease, but it does not cure it. Continue to take entacapone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking entacapone without talking to your doctor. Stopping entacapone suddenly may make your Parkinson's disease worse and could have other dangerous effects. Your doctor probably will decrease your dose gradually if necessary.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking entacapone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to entacapone or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking entacapone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease or a history of alcoholism.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking entacapone, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking entacapone.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate heavy machinery until you know how entacapone affects you.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Entacapone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
diarrhea
upset stomach
movements you cannot control
stomach pain
drowsiness
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
difficulty breathing
hallucinations
high fever
confusion
muscle stiffness
weakness with or without a fever
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. You may become dizzy when you get up after sitting or lying down, especially when you begin taking entacapone. To avoid this problem, make sure to get up slowly, especially if you have been sitting or lying down for a long time.
Entacapone may cause your urine to change to a brownish-orange color. This effect is common and is not harmful.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Comtan
®
Brand names of combination products
Stalevo
®
(containing Carbidopa, Entacapone, Levodopa)
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page