Spironolactone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Spironolactone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682627.html
Spironolactone
pronounced as spir on'' oh lak' tone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Spironolactone has caused tumors in laboratory animals. Talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of using this medication for your condition.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Spironolactone is used to treat certain patients with hyperaldosteronism (the body produces too much aldosterone, a naturally occurring hormone); low potassium levels; heart failure; and in patients with edema (fluid retention) caused by various conditions, including liver, or kidney disease. It is also used alone or with other medications to treat high blood pressure. Spironolactone is in a class of medications called aldosterone receptor antagonists. It causes the kidneys to eliminate unneeded water and sodium from the body into the urine but reduces the loss of potassium from the body.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Spironolactone comes as a tablet and suspension (liquid; Carospir) to take by mouth. It usually is taken once or twice a day. Take spironolactone suspension consistently either with food or without food each time. Take spironolactone at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take spironolactone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the oral suspension well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of spironolactone and gradually increase your dose.
Spironolactone tablets and suspension release the medication differently in your body and cannot be substituted for one another. Only take the spironolactone product prescribed by your doctor and do not switch to a different spironolactone product unless your doctor says that you should.
Spironolactone controls high blood pressure, edema, heart failure, and hyperaldosteronism but does not cure these conditions. It may take about 2 weeks or longer before the full effect of spironolactone occurs. Continue to take spironolactone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking spironolactone without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Spironolactone also is used in combination with other medicines to treat precocious puberty (a condition causing children to enter puberty too soon, resulting in the development of sexual characteristics in girls usually younger than 8 years of age and in boys usually younger than 9 years of age) or myasthenia gravis (MG, a disease in which the nerves do not function properly and patients may experience weakness; numbness; loss of muscle coordination; and problems with vision, speech, and bladder control). Spironolactone also may be used to treat certain female patients with abnormal facial hair. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking spironolactone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to spironolactone; any other medications; or any of the ingredients in spironolactone tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking eplerenone (Inspra). Your doctor may tell you not to take spironolactone if you are taking this medication.
some medications should not be taken with spironolactone. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with spironolactone. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting spironolactone with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking spironolactone, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription products may interact with spironolactone: potassium supplements; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve); acetylsalicylic acid. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking spironolactone. Do not start any of these medications while taking spironolactone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have Addison's disease or other conditions that may cause high blood levels of potassium, or kidney disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take spironolactone.
tell your doctor if you have liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking spironolactone, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking spironolactone.
you should know that drinking alcohol with this medication may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. Talk to your doctor about drinking alcohol while you are taking spironolactone.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Follow your doctor's directions for your meals, including advice for a reduced-salt (sodium) diet and daily exercise program. Avoid potassium-containing salt substitutes while you are taking this medication. Talk with your doctor about the amount of potassium-rich foods (e.g., bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice) that you may have in your diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Spironolactone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting
diarrhea
stomach pain or cramps
enlarged or painful breasts in men or women
irregular menstrual periods
vaginal bleeding in post-menopausal ('after the change of life', the end of monthly menstrual periods) women
difficulty maintaining or achieving an erection
deepening of voice
increased hair growth on parts of the body
drowsiness
tiredness
restlessness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
muscle weakness, pain, or cramps
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet
inability to move arms or legs
changes in heartbeat
confusion
nausea
extreme tiredness
dry mouth, thirst, dizziness, unsteadiness, headache, or other signs of dehydration
unusual bleeding or bruising
lack of energy
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
flu-like symptoms
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
vomiting blood
blood in stools
decreased urination
fainting
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
drowsiness
confusion
rash
nausea
vomiting
dizziness
diarrhea
tingling in arms and legs
loss of muscle tone
weakness or heaviness in legs
irregular or slow heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to spironolactone.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking spironolactone.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aldactone
®
Carospir
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page