Tepotinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tepotinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621012.html
Tepotinib
pronounced as (tep oh' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tepotinib is used to treat a certain type of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that has spread to other parts of the body. Tepotinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of an abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps slow or stop the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Tepotinib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once daily with food. Take tepotinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take tepotinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you cannot swallow the tablets whole, place the tablets in a glass of 1 ounce (30 mL) of non-carbonated water. Do not use any other liquids other than water. Stir until the tablets are in small pieces. Do not crush the tablets; they will not completely dissolve. Drink the mixture right away or within 1 hour of preparing. Do not chew pieces of the tablet. Rinse the glass with an additional 1 ounce (30 mL) of water and drink to make sure that you have taken the full dose.
If you have a nasogastric (NG) tube, your doctor or pharmacist will explain how to give tepotinib through a NG tube.
If you vomit after taking tepotinib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may decrease your dose or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment depending on if you experience any side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with tepotinib.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tepotinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tepotinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in tepotinib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had lung or breathing problems other than lung cancer, pancreatitis (swelling of the pancreas), or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should not become pregnant while you are taking tepotinib. You will need to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment, and you should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for at least 1 week after your final dose. If you are a male with a female partner who may become pregnant, you should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during you treatment and for at least 1 week after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. Tepotinib may harm your unborn baby. If you or your partner become pregnant during your treatment with tepotinib, call your doctor immediately.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breast-feed while you are taking tepotinib and for at least 1 week after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is within 8 hours of your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tepotinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, or lower legs
nausea
diarrhea
constipation
vomiting
loss of appetite
abdominal pain
tiredness
muscle, joint, or bone pain
rash or itching
dizziness
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
shortness of breath, trouble breathing, fever, or cough
pain in right upper part of the stomach, swelling in your stomach area, unusual bruising or bleeding, dark urine, light colored stools, yellowing of the skin and eyes, or weakness
confusion
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area, but may spread to the back; nausea; vomiting; weight loss
Tepotinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to tepotinib. Your doctor will also order a lab test before you begin your treatment to find out if your cancer can be treated with tepotinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tepmetko
®
Last Revised -
08/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page