Difelikefalin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Difelikefalin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622055.html
Difelikefalin Injection
pronounced as (dye fel" i kef' a lin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Difelikefalin injection is used to treat itching in people with chronic kidney disease who are on hemodialysis (medical treatment to remove waste from the blood when the kidneys are not working properly). Difelikefalin is in a class of medications called kappa opioid receptor agonists. It works by changing the way your nerves respond to itching.
How should this medicine be used?
Difelikefalin comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually given at the end of each dialysis session by a healthcare provider.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before you receive difelikefalin injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to difelikefalin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in difelikefalin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving difelikefalin injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving difelikefalin injection.
you should know that difelikefalin injection may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car, operate machinery, or participate in any other possibly dangerous activities until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Difelikefalin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
dizziness
problems with walking
falling
headache
drowsiness
sudden changes in mental status
confusion
Difelikefalin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
dizziness
drowsiness
excessive tiredness
sudden changes in mental status
confusion
vomiting
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Korsuva
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page