Mexiletine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mexiletine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607064.html
Mexiletine
pronounced as (mex il' e teen )
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Antiarrhythmic drugs, similar to mexiletine, have been reported to increase the risk of death or heart attack, especially in people who have had a heart attack within the past 2 years. Mexiletine may increase the chance of having arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats) and has not been proven to help people without life-threatening arrhythmias to live longer. Mexiletine should be used only to treat people with life-threatening arrhythmias.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking mexiletine.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Mexiletine is used to treat certain types of ventricular arrhythmias (abnormal heart rhythms). Mexiletine is in a class of medications called antiarrhythmics. It works by blocking certain electrical signals in the heart to stabilize the heart rhythm.
How should this medicine be used?
Mexiletine comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken three times a day, every 8 hours. Some people may take it twice daily, every 12 hours, once their arrhythmias have been controlled with mexiletine. Mexiletine should be taken with food or an antacid to prevent stomach upset. Take mexiletine at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take mexiletine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You will probably be hospitalized when you begin your treatment with mexiletine. Your doctor will monitor you carefully during this time and for as long as you continue to take mexiletine. Your doctor will probably start you on an average dose of mexiletine and gradually increase or decrease your dose, not more than once every 2 to 3 days.
Mexiletine controls arrhythmias but does not cure them. Continue to take mexiletine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking mexiletine without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop taking mexiletine, your condition may become worse.
Other uses for this medicine
Mexiletine is also used to treat diabetic neuropathy (nerve damage caused by diabetes). Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking mexiletine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to mexiletine, lidocaine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in mexiletine. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking mexiletine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription product may interact with mexiletine: cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking mexiletine. Do not start this medication while taking mexiletine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a heart attack, heart failure, low blood pressure, liver disease, or seizures.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking mexiletine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking mexiletine.
you should know that mexiletine may make you dizzy or lightheaded. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Cigarette smoking may decrease the effectiveness of this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking caffeine-containing beverages while taking this medicine.
Tell your doctor if you are a vegetarian or if you usually eat large amounts of citrus fruits, cranberries, vegetables, meat, or dairy products. If you do not regularly eat large amounts of these foods, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Mexiletine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
heartburn
changes in appetite
lightheadedness or dizziness
shaking of a part of your body that you cannot control
loss of coordination
numbness or tingling sensation
headache
blurred vision
nervousness
difficulty speaking
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
rash
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
irregular heartbeat
chest pain
extreme tiredness
unusual bleeding or bruising
lack of energy
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
flu-like symptoms
Mexiletine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
drowsiness
confusion
nausea
fainting
dizziness
numbness or tingling sensation
slow, fast, or irregular heartbeat
coma
sudden death
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to mexiletine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mexitil
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
08/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page