X-linked sideroblastic anemia: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
X-linked sideroblastic anemia
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/x-linked-sideroblastic-anemia/
X-linked sideroblastic anemia
Description
X-linked sideroblastic anemia belongs to a group of disorders that are characterized by a shortage of healthy red blood cells (anemia). X-linked sideroblastic anemia prevents developing red blood cells from making enough
hemoglobin
, which is the protein that carries oxygen in the blood. People with X-linked sideroblastic anemia have red blood cells that are smaller than normal (microcytic) and appear pale (hypochromic) because of the shortage of hemoglobin. This disorder also leads to an abnormal accumulation of iron in red blood cells. The iron-loaded red blood cells, which are present in bone marrow, are called ring sideroblasts.
The signs and symptoms of X-linked sideroblastic anemia are caused by a combination of too little hemoglobin and too much iron. Common
signs and symptoms
include extreme tiredness (fatigue), dizziness, a rapid heartbeat, pale skin, and an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly). Over time, severe health problems such as heart disease and liver damage (cirrhosis), can result from the buildup of iron in these organs.
Males with X-linked sideroblastic anemia typically have the classic signs and symptoms of the condition, while females tend to be less severely affected. Females with X-linked sideroblastic anemia usually develop features of the condition in mid to late adulthood, while affected males often first experience symptoms in adolescence to early adulthood.
Frequency
X-linked sideroblastic anemia is a rare form of anemia, and its exact prevalence is unknown. Hundreds of families with this condition have been described in the scientific literature.
Causes
Variants (also called mutations) in the
ALAS2
gene cause X-linked sideroblastic anemia. The
ALAS2
gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called 5-aminolevulinate synthase. This enzyme is active in the bone marrow, where it plays a critical role in the production of
heme
(a component of hemoglobin).
ALAS2
gene variants lead to the production of a 5-aminolevulinate synthase enzyme that does not function properly. As a result, normal heme production is disrupted and red blood cells cannot make enough hemoglobin. Because most of the iron in red blood cells is normally used for heme, reduced heme production causes a
buildup of iron
in these cells. The body compensates by absorbing more iron from the diet, which leads to an accumulation of iron in the body's organs. Low hemoglobin levels and iron accumulation lead to the characteristic features of X-linked sideroblastic anemia.
Learn more about the gene associated with X-linked sideroblastic anemia
ALAS2
Inheritance
X-linked sideroblastic anemia is inherited in an X-linked pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the altered gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two
sex chromosomes
in each cell. Males have only one X chromosome in each cell, and females have two. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
Females with one altered copy of the
ALAS2
gene in each cell may have mild features of the condition, or they may have no related signs or symptoms. However, some females with one altered copy of this gene have signs and symptoms of X-linked sideroblastic anemia that are similar to those seen in affected males. In these cases, the affected females may have the X chromosome with the normal copy of the
ALAS2
gene turned off through a process called X-inactivation.
Early in embryonic development in females, one of the two X chromosomes is permanently inactivated in somatic cells, which are cells other than egg and sperm cells. X-inactivation ensures that females, like males, have only one active copy of the X chromosome in each somatic cell. Usually, X-inactivation occurs randomly, so that each X chromosome is active in about half of the body's cells. Sometimes, X-inactivation is not random, and one X chromosome is active in more than half of cells. When X-inactivation does not occur randomly, it is called skewed X-inactivation.
In people with X-linked sideroblastic anemia, X-inactivation can be skewed. In females who develop signs and symptoms, the X chromosome with the normal copy of the
ALAS2
may be turned off, especially in red blood cells. Skewed X-inactivation tends to increase with age. As a result, affected females produce less 5-aminolevulinate synthase over time and typically develop signs and symptoms of X-linked sideroblastic anemia later in life.
Other Names for This Condition
ANH1
X-linked pyridoxine-responsive sideroblastic anemia
XLSA
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: X-linked sideroblastic anemia 1
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
X-linked sideroblastic anemia
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
ANEMIA, SIDEROBLASTIC, 1; SIDBA1
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Ducamp S, Campagna DR, Sendamarai AK, Schmidt PJ, Tsai HK, Heeney MM,
Bottomley SS, Fleming MD. X-linked sideroblastic anemia in females. Blood. 2025
Apr 3;145(14):1583-1587. doi: 10.1182/blood.2024024475.
Citation on PubMed
Fujiwara T, Harigae H. Molecular pathophysiology and genetic mutations in
congenital sideroblastic anemia. Free Radic Biol Med. 2019 Mar;133:179-185. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2018.08.008. Epub 2018 Aug 8.
Citation on PubMed
Jove-Solavera D, Ramila M, Ferrer-Cortes X, Olivella M, Venturi V, Morado M,
Hernandez-Rodriguez I, Khan A, Perez-Montero S, Tornador C, Germing U, Gattermann
N, Sanchez M. The role of genetic testing in accurate diagnosis of X-linked
sideroblastic anemia: novel ALAS2 mutations and the impact of X-chromosome
inactivation. Sci Rep. 2025 Apr 7;15(1):11843. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-95590-x.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Anemia
Blood Disorders
Genetic Disorders
Iron
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Anemia
Genetics
Hemoglobin
Related Medical Tests
Red Blood Cell (RBC) Indices
What You Need to Know About Blood Testing
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page