Tamsulosin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tamsulosin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a698012.html
Tamsulosin
pronounced as (tam soo' loe sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tamsulosin is used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH; enlarged prostate that can cause difficulty urinating, painful urination or increased urinary frequency or urgency). Tamsulosin is in a class of medications called alpha blockers. It works by relaxing the muscles in the prostate and bladder so that urine can flow easily.
How should this medicine be used?
Tamsulosin comes as a capsule to take by mouth. Take once a day 30 minutes after a meal. Take around the same time every day.
Take tamsulosin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow tamsulosin capsules whole; do not split, chew, crush, or open them.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of tamsulosin and may increase your dose after 2 to 4 weeks.
Tamsulosin may help control your condition, but it will not cure it. Continue to take tamsulosin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking tamsulosin without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Tamsulosin is also sometimes used to treat kidney stones. This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tamsulosin,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with tamsulosin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with tamsulosin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting tamsulosin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking tamsulosin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription product may interact with tamsulosin: cimetidine (Tagamet
®
). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking tamsulosin. Do not start this medication while taking tamsulosin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had prostate cancer or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking tamsulosin, call your doctor.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility (ability to produce or have children) in women and men. This does not mean you can't get pregnant while taking tamsulosin and you should still use effective contraception. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication if you have concerns about fertility.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking tamsulosin. If you need to have eye surgery at any time during or after your treatment, be sure to tell your doctor that you are taking or have taken tamsulosin.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car, operate machinery, or perform dangerous tasks until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that tamsulosin may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, a spinning sensation, and fainting, especially when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking tamsulosin or after your dose is increased. To help avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. Call your doctor if these symptoms are severe or do not go away.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. If you interrupt your treatment for several days or longer, call your doctor before restarting the medication, especially if you take more than one capsule of tamsulosin a day.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tamsulosin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section are severe or do not go away:
sleepiness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
weakness
back pain
diarrhea
runny or stuffy nose
pain or pressure in the face
sore throat, cough, fever, chills, or other signs of infection
blurred vision
difficulty ejaculating
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
painful erection of the penis that lasts for hours
rash
itching
hives
swelling of the eyes, face, tongue, lips, throat, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
dizziness
fainting
blurred vision
upset stomach
headache
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Flomax
®
¶
Brand names of combination products
Jalyn
®
(containing Dutasteride, Tamsulosin)
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page