Droxidopa: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Droxidopa
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614025.html
Droxidopa
pronounced as (drox'' i doe' pa)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Droxidopa may cause or worsen supine hypertension (high blood pressure that occurs when lying flat on your back) that may increase the risk of cardiovascular events such as heart attack and stroke. You should raise the head of your bed when resting or sleeping and take droxidopa at least 3 hours before bedtime to reduce the risk of supine hypertension. You should have your blood pressure checked before starting treatment, anytime your dose is increased, and regularly while you are taking droxidopa.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking droxidopa.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Droxidopa is used to treat symptoms (dizziness, lightheadedness, or a fainting sensation [feeling that you are about to black out]) of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (a sudden fall in blood pressure that occurs when a person assumes a standing position caused by certain nervous system conditions). Droxidopa is in a class of medications called alpha and beta-adrenergic agonists. It works by increasing the levels of norepinephrine, a natural substance in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Droxidopa comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken three times a day (morning, midday, and late afternoon). Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take droxidopa exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of droxidopa and gradually increase your dose every 1 to 2 days.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking droxidopa,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to droxidopa, aspirin, tartrazine (a yellow dye in some processed foods and medications), other medications, or any of the ingredients in the capsule. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking droxidopa. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, coronary artery disease (blockage or narrowing of the blood vessels that lead to the heart), irregular heartbeat, heart failure, or heart or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking droxidopa, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Droxidopa may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
dizziness
nausea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
confusion
high fever
muscle stiffness
unusual movements that you cannot control
changes in awareness, thinking, or behavior
Droxidopa may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Northera
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page