Somatrogon-ghla injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Somatrogon-ghla injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623041.html
Somatrogon-ghla injection
pronounced as (soe ma′ troe gon)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Somatrogon-ghla injection is used to replace growth hormone (a natural hormone produced by your body) and to increase growth in children 3 years of age or older with growth hormone deficiency. Somatrogon-ghla is a human growth hormone (hGH) analog. It works by replacing growth hormones that are normally produced in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Somatrogon-ghla comes as a solution (liquid) in a prefilled injection pen to be injected subcutaneously (under the skin). It is usually injected once a week, on the same day of the week, and at any time of the day. Follow the directions on the prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use somatrogon-ghla injection exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The first dose of somatrogon-ghla injection may be given in a doctor's office. Your doctor may allow you or a caregiver to perform the injections at home. Carefully read the manufacturer's instructions for use that comes with the medication. These instructions describe how to inject a dose of somatrogon-ghla. Be sure to ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how to inject the medication. To help you remember to use somatrogon-ghla injection, mark a calendar to keep track of when you are to receive a dose.
You can inject somatrogon-ghla anywhere on the front of the thighs (upper leg), buttocks, upper arms, or on the stomach except around the navel (belly button) and the area 2 inches (5 centimeters) around it. Choose a different spot each time you inject your medication. Do not inject into an area where the skin is tender, bruised, red, or hard or where you have scars.
Do not stop using somatrogon-ghla injection without talking to your doctor.
Always look at somatrogon-ghla solution before injecting it. Check that the expiration date has not passed and that the liquid is clear and colorless to slightly yellow. The liquid should not contain visible particles. Do not use a pen if it is expired or if the liquid is cloudy or contains particles.
Do not share pens and needles. Dispose of used pens and needles in a puncture resistant container that is out of the reach of children. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using somatrogon-ghla injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to somatrogon-ghla, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in somatrogon-ghla injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have recently had heart or stomach surgery, an accident or trauma, or serious breathing problems, sleep apnea (stopping breathing for short periods of time during sleep), or if you have cancer, diabetic retinopathy (damage to the eyes caused by diabetes), or Prader-Willi syndrome (a genetic condition that can cause physical, mental and behavioral problems). Your doctor may tell you not to use somatrogon-ghla injection. Somatrogon-ghla should not be used in children whose growth plate has closed and whose bones are no longer growing (usually after puberty).
tell your doctor if you have ever had cancer or if you have ever been treated with radiation therapy to the head or brain; or if you have or have ever had diabetes; adrenal insufficiency (condition in which the adrenal glands do not produce enough of certain hormones needed for important body functions); pancreatitis (swelling of the pancreas); papilledema (swelling of the optic nerve caused by increased pressure in the brain); scoliosis (curving of the spine); high blood levels of phosphate; or thyroid or parathyroid problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using somatrogon-ghla injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using somatrogon-ghla injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Give the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is more than 3 days after the time you were supposed to use the dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed dose.
You may use a dose of somatrogon-ghla 3 days before or 3 days after your scheduled dosing day and then continue your regular dosing schedule; make sure that there are at least 3 days between doses.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Somatrogon-ghla injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
skin thickening at injection site
injection site pain, redness, swelling, bleeding, or itching
headache
vomiting
sore throat, cough, runny nose, fever, or other signs of infection
ear pain
stomach pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
vision changes, headache, nausea, and vomiting
hives; rash; itching; difficulty breathing or swallowing; sweating; swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, lips, tongue or throat; hoarseness; lightheadedness; fainting; or chest pain
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area but may spread to the back nausea, vomiting, or loss of appetite
fast heartbeat
shortness of breath
pale skin
excessive tiredness, muscle or joint pain, weakness, or lightheadedness
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
numbness, burning, tingling, or tingling in the hands, fingers, arms, legs, or feet
fatigue, dizziness, weakness, vomiting, dehydration or weight loss
new or persistent knee or hip pain, limping
Somatrogon-ghla may increase the risk of developing certain types of cancer, including brain or skin cancer. Call your doctor right away if you have any of the following symptoms: changes in behavior or vision; headaches; or changes in moles, birthmarks, or skin color.
Somatrogon-ghla may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store somatrogon-ghla pens in the refrigerator and protect from light. Do not freeze. Dispose of any medication that has been frozen. Make a note of the date you first use a somatrogon-ghla pen, and dispose of the pen after 28 days, even if there is some solution left in the pen.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
excessive sweating and body odor
enlarged hands, feet, lips, nose, and tongue
joint or muscle weakness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check the body's response to somatrogon-ghla injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using somatrogon-ghla injection. Somatrogon-ghla injection may interfere with the results of home pregnancy tests.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ngenla
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page