Rimantadine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rimantadine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a698029.html
Rimantadine
pronounced as (ri man' ta deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rimantadine is used to prevent and treat infections caused by influenza A virus.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Rimantadine comes as a tablet and a liquid to take by mouth. It usually is taken once or twice a day for 2 to 12 weeks. A flu vaccine also will be given. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take rimantadine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking rimantadine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rimantadine or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking rimantadine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with rimantadine: aspirin; acetaminophen. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking rimantadine. Do not start any of these medications while taking rimantadine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease, seizures, or blood disorders.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking rimantadine, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Rimantadine may cause an upset stomach. Take rimantadine with food or milk.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rimantadine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
nervousness
tiredness
difficulty sleeping and concentrating
lightheadedness
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
skin rash
yellowing of the skin or eyes
mood changes
mental confusion
vision changes
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to rimantadine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the rimantadine, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Flumadine
®
Flumadine
®
Syrup
Last Revised -
01/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page