Nitroglycerin Sublingual: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nitroglycerin Sublingual
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601086.html
Nitroglycerin Sublingual
pronounced as (nye troe gli' ser in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nitroglycerin sublingual tablets are used to treat episodes of angina (chest pain) in people who have coronary artery disease (narrowing of the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart). It is also used just before activities that may cause episodes of angina in order to prevent the angina from occurring. Nitroglycerin is in a class of medications called vasodilators. It works by relaxing the blood vessels so the heart does not need to work as hard and therefore does not need as much oxygen.
How should this medicine be used?
Nitroglycerin comes as a sublingual tablet to take under the tongue. The tablets is usually taken as needed, either 5 to 10 minutes before activities that may cause attacks of angina or at the first sign of an attack. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take nitroglycerin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Nitroglycerin may not work as well after you have used it for some time or if you have taken many doses. Take the fewest tablets needed to relieve the pain of your attacks. If your angina attacks happen more often, last longer, or become more severe at any time during your treatment, call your doctor.
Talk to your doctor about how to use nitroglycerin tablets to treat angina attacks. Your doctor will probably tell you to sit down and take one dose of nitroglycerin when an attack begins. If your symptoms do not improve very much or if they worsen after you take this dose you may be told to call for emergency medical help right away. If your symptoms do not go away completely after you take the first dose, your doctor may tell you to take a second dose after 5 minutes have passed and a third dose 5 minutes after the second dose. Call for emergency medical help right away if your chest pain has not gone away completely 5 minutes after you take the third dose.
Do not chew, crush, or swallow nitroglycerin sublingual tablets. Instead, place the tablet under your tongue or between your cheek and gum and wait for it to dissolve. You may feel burning or tingling in your mouth as the tablet dissolves. This is normal but is not a sign that the tablet is working. Do not be concerned that the tablet is not working if you do not feel the burning or tingling.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking or using nitroglycerin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nitroglycerin patches, capsules, tablets, ointment, or spray; any other medications; or any of the ingredients in nitroglycerin sublingual tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with nitroglycerin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with nitroglycerin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting nitroglycerin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking nitroglycerin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription product may interact with nitroglycerin: aspirin. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking or using nitroglycerin. Do not start this medication while taking or using nitroglycerin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
you should know that nitroglycerin sublingual tablets may not dissolve easily in your mouth if you are taking medications that cause dry mouth such as antihistamines; antidepressants including amitriptyline, amoxapine, clomipramine (Anafranil), desipramine (Norpramin), doxepin (Silenor), imipramine (Tofranil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), protriptyline (Vivactil), and trimipramine (Surmontil); ipratropium (Atrovent); or medications for irritable bowel disease, motion sickness, Parkinson's disease, ulcers, or urinary problems. If this happens, use an artificial saliva product or chew gum to increase the amount of saliva in your mouth so that the tablet will dissolve.
tell your doctor if you have recently had a heart attack and if you have anemia (low number of red blood cells) or any condition that causes increased pressure in your skull. Your doctor may tell you not to take nitroglycerin.
tell your doctor if you think you may be dehydrated and if you have or have ever had heart failure, low blood pressure, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (thickening of the heart muscles).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking nitroglycerin, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking nitroglycerin.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking nitroglycerin. Alcohol can make the side effects from nitroglycerin worse.
you should know that nitroglycerin may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position, or at any time, especially if you have been drinking alcoholic beverages. To avoid this problem, get up slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. Take extra precautions to avoid falling during your treatment with nitroglycerin.
you should know that you may experience headaches during your treatment with nitroglycerin. These headaches may be a sign that the medication is working as it should. Do not try to change the times that you take nitroglycerin in order to avoid headaches because then the medication may not work as well.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Nitroglycerin sublingual tablets are usually taken as needed to treat episodes of angina; do not take them on a regular basis.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nitroglycerin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those listed in SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section are severe or do not go away:
flushing
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
blurred vision
dry mouth
rash, blistering, or peeling of the skin
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
nausea
vomiting
weakness
sweating
pale skin
Nitroglycerin sublingual may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed after each use, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
headache
confusion
fever
dizziness
slow or pounding heartbeat
vision changes
nausea
vomiting
bloody diarrhea
fainting
shortness of breath
sweating
flushing
cold, clammy skin
loss of ability to move the body
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking nitroglycerin sublingual.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nitrostat
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page