Varenicline Nasal Spray: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Varenicline Nasal Spray
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621057.html
Varenicline Nasal Spray
pronounced as (var en' i kleen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Varenicline nasal spray is used to treat the signs and symptoms of dry eye disease (an eye disorder in which tears do not provide sufficient eye lubrication). Varenicline is in a class of medications called cholinergic agonists. It works by activating nerve endings in your nose resulting in increased production of tears in the eyes.
How should this medicine be used?
Varenicline comes as a liquid to spray in the nose. Varenicline usually is sprayed in each nostril twice daily, about 12 hours apart. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use varenicline exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Do not shake the bottle that contains varenicline nasal spray.
To use the nasal spray, follow these steps:
Remove the blue plastic cap and safety clip from the nasal spray pump.
If you are using the nasal spray pump for the first time, you must prime the pump. Hold the bottle upright with the applicator between your forefinger and middle finger and your thumb under the bottle. Point the bottle upright and away from your face. Press your thumb and fingers firmly and quickly against the pump 7 times. If you have not used the nasal spray for more than 5 days, reprime the pump with 1 spray.
Blow your nose to clear your nostrils if necessary.
Tilt your head slightly backwards and carefully put the nasal applicator tip into your nostril. Tilt and point the tip towards the top of the ear on the same side as the nostril. Be careful not let the applicator tip touch the inside of your nose.
Place your tongue on the roof of your mouth and breath in gently through your nose. At the same time, press firmly and quickly down on the pump to release a spray.
Repeat steps 4 and 5 in the other nostril.
Wipe the applicator with a clean tissue and replace the blue plastic cap and safety clip on the bottle.
Each bottle has enough medication for 15 days of treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using varenicline nasal spray,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to varenicline, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in varenicline nasal spray. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using varenicline nasal spray, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Varenicline nasal spray may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
cough
sneezing
throat irritation
nasal irritation
Varenicline nasal spray may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze. Discard the bottle 30 days after opening.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
A 1-month supply of varenicline nasal spray will include 2 nasal spray bottles. Finish using the first bottle before opening the second bottle.
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tyrvaya
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page