Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/leri-weill-dyschondrosteosis/
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
Description
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is a disorder of bone growth. Affected individuals typically have shortening of the long bones in the arms and legs (mesomelia). As a result of the shortened leg bones, people with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis typically have short stature. Most people with the condition also have an abnormality of the wrist and forearm bones called Madelung deformity, which may cause pain and limit wrist movement. This abnormality usually appears in childhood or early adolescence. Other features of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis can include increased muscle mass (muscle hypertrophy); bowing of a bone in the lower leg called the tibia; a greater-than-normal angling of the elbow away from the body (increased carrying angle); and a high arched palate.
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis occurs in both males and females, although its signs and symptoms tend to be more severe in females. Researchers believe that the more severe features may result from hormonal differences.
Frequency
The prevalence of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is unknown. It is diagnosed more often in females than in males.
Causes
Most cases of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis result from changes involving the
SHOX
gene. The protein produced from this gene plays a role in bone development and is particularly important for the growth and maturation of bones in the arms and legs. The most common cause of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is a deletion of the entire
SHOX
gene. Other genetic changes that can cause the disorder include mutations in the
SHOX
gene or deletions of nearby genetic material that normally helps regulate the gene's activity. These changes reduce the amount of SHOX protein that is produced. A shortage of this protein disrupts normal bone development and growth, which underlies the major features of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.
In affected people who do not have a genetic change involving the
SHOX
gene, the cause of the condition is unknown.
Learn more about the gene associated with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
SHOX
Inheritance
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis has a pseudoautosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. The
SHOX
gene is located on both the X and Y chromosomes (sex chromosomes) in an area known as the pseudoautosomal region. Although many genes are unique to either the X or Y chromosome, genes in the pseudoautosomal region are present on both sex chromosomes. As a result, both females (who have two X chromosomes) and males (who have one X and one Y chromosome) normally have two functional copies of the
SHOX
gene in each cell. The inheritance pattern of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is described as dominant because one missing or altered copy of the
SHOX
gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In females, the condition results when the gene is missing or altered on one of the two copies of the X chromosome; in males, it results when the gene is missing or altered on either the X chromosome or the Y chromosome.
A related skeletal disorder called
Langer mesomelic dysplasia
occurs when both copies of the
SHOX
gene are mutated in each cell. This disorder has signs and symptoms that are similar to, but typically more severe than, those of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.
Other Names for This Condition
DCO
Dyschondrosteosis
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
LWD
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
LERI-WEILL DYSCHONDROSTEOSIS; LWD
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Belin V, Cusin V, Viot G, Girlich D, Toutain A, Moncla A, Vekemans M, Le
Merrer M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V. SHOX mutations in dyschondrosteosis
(Leri-Weill syndrome). Nat Genet. 1998 May;19(1):67-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0198-67.
Citation on PubMed
Benito-Sanz S, Barroso E, Heine-Suner D, Hisado-Oliva A, Romanelli V, Rosell
J, Aragones A, Caimari M, Argente J, Ross JL, Zinn AR, Gracia R, Lapunzina P,
Campos-Barros A, Heath KE. Clinical and molecular evaluation of SHOX/PAR1
duplications in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and idiopathic short stature
(ISS). J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;96(2):E404-12. doi:
10.1210/jc.2010-1689. Epub 2010 Dec 8.
Citation on PubMed
Benito-Sanz S, Gorbenko del Blanco D, Huber C, Thomas NS, Aza-Carmona M,
Bunyan D, Maloney V, Argente J, Cormier-Daire V, Campos-Barros A, Heath KE.
Characterization of SHOX deletions in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) reveals
genetic heterogeneity and no recombination hotspots. Am J Hum Genet. 2006
Aug;79(2):409-14; author reply 414. doi: 10.1086/506390. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Benito-Sanz S, Thomas NS, Huber C, Gorbenko del Blanco D, Aza-Carmona M,
Crolla JA, Maloney V, Rappold G, Argente J, Campos-Barros A, Cormier-Daire V,
Heath KE. A novel class of Pseudoautosomal region 1 deletions downstream of SHOX
is associated with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. Am J Hum Genet. 2005
Oct;77(4):533-44. doi: 10.1086/449313. Epub 2005 Aug 15.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Binder G, Renz A, Martinez A, Keselman A, Hesse V, Riedl SW, Hausler G,
Fricke-Otto S, Frisch H, Heinrich JJ, Ranke MB. SHOX haploinsufficiency and
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis: prevalence and growth failure in relation to
mutation, sex, and degree of wrist deformity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004
Sep;89(9):4403-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2004-0591.
Citation on PubMed
Hirschfeldova K, Solc R, Baxova A, Zapletalova J, Kebrdlova V, Gaillyova R,
Prasilova S, Soukalova J, Mihalova R, Lnenicka P, Florianova M, Stekrova J. SHOX
gene defects and selected dysmorphic signs in patients of idiopathic short
stature and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. Gene. 2012 Jan 10;491(2):123-7. doi:
10.1016/j.gene.2011.10.011. Epub 2011 Oct 14.
Citation on PubMed
Ross JL, Kowal K, Quigley CA, Blum WF, Cutler GB Jr, Crowe B, Hovanes K, Elder
FF, Zinn AR. The phenotype of short stature homeobox gene (SHOX) deficiency in
childhood: contrasting children with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and Turner
syndrome. J Pediatr. 2005 Oct;147(4):499-507. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2005.04.069.
Citation on PubMed
Salmon-Musial AS, Rosilio M, David M, Huber C, Pichot E, Cormier-Daire V,
Nicolino M. Clinical and radiological characteristics of 22 children with SHOX
anomalies and familial short stature suggestive of Leri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis.
Horm Res Paediatr. 2011;76(3):178-85. doi: 10.1159/000329359. Epub 2011 Sep 10.
Citation on PubMed
Shears DJ, Vassal HJ, Goodman FR, Palmer RW, Reardon W, Superti-Furga A,
Scambler PJ, Winter RM. Mutation and deletion of the pseudoautosomal gene SHOX
cause Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. Nat Genet. 1998 May;19(1):70-3. doi:
10.1038/ng0198-70.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Bone Diseases
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Carrying angle of the elbow - excessive
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page