Neomycin, Polymyxin, and Bacitracin Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Neomycin, Polymyxin, and Bacitracin Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604019.html
Neomycin, Polymyxin, and Bacitracin Ophthalmic
pronounced as (nee oh mye' sin) (pol i mix' in) (bass i tray' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin ophthalmic combination is used to treat eye and eyelid infections. Neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin are in a class of medications called antibiotics. Neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin combination works by stopping the growth of bacteria infecting a surface of the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin combination comes as an ointment to apply inside the lower lid of an infected eye. The ointment is usually applied to the eye every 3 to 4 hours for 7 to 10 days, as directed by your doctor. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin ophthalmic ointment exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your eye or eyelid infection should begin getting better during the first few days of treatment with neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin combination. If your symptoms do not go away or get worse, call your doctor.
Continue to use neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin combination as directed, even if your symptoms improve. Do not stop using neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin combination without talking to your doctor. If you stop using this medication too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely cured and bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
This medication is for use in the eye only. Do not let neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin combination get into your nose or mouth, and do not swallow it.
Never share your tube of ophthalmic ointment, even with someone who was also prescribed this medication. If more than one person uses the same tube, infection may spread.
To apply the eye ointment, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Use a mirror or have someone else apply the ointment.
Avoid touching the tip of the tube against your eye or anything else. The ointment must be kept clean.
Tilt your head forward slightly.
Holding the tube between your thumb and index finger, place the tube as near as possible to your eyelid without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your cheek or nose.
With the index finger of your other hand, pull the lower lid of your eye down to form a pocket.
Place a small amount of ointment into the pocket made by the lower lid and the eye. A 1/2-inch (1.25-centimeter) strip of ointment usually is enough unless otherwise directed by your doctor.
Gently close your eyes and keep them closed for 1 to 2 minutes to allow the medication to be absorbed.
Replace and tighten the cap right away.
Wipe off any excess ointment from your eyelids and lashes with a clean tissue. Wash your hands again.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin ointment,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to neomycin (Myciguent, others); polymyxin; bacitracin (Baciguent, others); aminoglycoside antibiotics such as amikacin (Amikin), gentamicin (Garamycin), kanamycin (Kantrex), paromomycin (Humatin), streptomycin, and tobramycin (Nebcin, Tobi); zinc; or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking while using neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin ointment. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had hearing problems or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin ointment, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin ointment may cause side effects. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
eye pain
irritation, burning, itching, swelling, or redness of the eye or eyelid
worsening eye discharge
red or scaly patches around eye or eyelid
rash
hives
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
chest tightness
faintness
dizziness
Neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin combination may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin combination ointment, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Mycitracin
®
Ophthalmic Ointment (containing Bacitracin, Neomycin, Polymyxin B)
¶
Neo-polycin
®
Ophthalmic Ointment (containing Bacitracin, Neomycin, Polymyxin B)
¶
Neosporin
®
Ophthalmic Ointment (containing Bacitracin, Neomycin, Polymyxin B)
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
04/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page