Macrozoospermia: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Macrozoospermia
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/macrozoospermia/
Macrozoospermia
Description
Macrozoospermia is a condition that affects only males. It is characterized by abnormal sperm and leads to an inability to father biological children (infertility).
In affected males, almost all sperm cells have abnormally large and misshapen heads. The head of the sperm cell contains the male's genetic information that is to be passed on to the next generation. Normally, the head of a sperm cell contains
one copy of each chromosome
. In men with macrozoospermia, the sperm cell head contains extra chromosomes, usually four copies of each instead of the usual one. This additional genetic material accounts for the larger head size of the sperm cell. Additionally, instead of having one tail (flagellum) per sperm cell, affected sperm have multiple flagella, most often four.
Because of the additional genetic material, if one of these abnormal sperm cells combines with an egg cell, the embryo will not develop or the pregnancy will result in miscarriage.
Frequency
Macrozoospermia is estimated to affect 1 in 10,000 males in North Africa. The prevalence of the condition outside this region is unknown.
Causes
Mutations in the
AURKC
gene cause macrozoospermia. The
AURKC
gene provides instructions for making a protein called aurora kinase C. This protein is abundant in male testes, which are the male reproductive organs in which sperm are produced and stored. In the testes, this protein regulates the division of sperm cells. Aurora kinase C ensures that the mechanisms for cell division are in place and helps chromosomes properly align with each other so that every new sperm cell contains
one copy of each chromosome
after cell division.
AURKC
gene mutations that cause macrozoospermia lead to the production of a nonfunctional protein or a protein that is quickly broken down. This lack of aurora kinase C blocks cell division in sperm cells. Without cell division, the chromosomes are not split among multiple new sperm cells. As a result, affected sperm cells contain extra chromosomes, usually four copies of each instead of the usual one.
Learn more about the gene associated with Macrozoospermia
AURKC
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Infertility associated with multi-tailed spermatozoa and excessive DNA
Large-headed multiflagellar polyploid spermatozoa
Spermatogenic failure 5
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Infertility associated with multi-tailed spermatozoa and excessive DNA
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Male infertility due to large-headed multiflagellar polyploid spermatozoa
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
SPERMATOGENIC FAILURE 5; SPGF5
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Ben Khelifa M, Coutton C, Blum MG, Abada F, Harbuz R, Zouari R, Guichet A,
May-Panloup P, Mitchell V, Rollet J, Triki C, Merdassi G, Vialard F, Koscinski I,
Viville S, Keskes L, Soulie JP, Rives N, Dorphin B, Lestrade F, Hesters L, Poirot
C, Benzacken B, Jouk PS, Satre V, Hennebicq S, Arnoult C, Lunardi J, Ray PF.
Identification of a new recurrent aurora kinase C mutation in both European and
African men with macrozoospermia. Hum Reprod. 2012 Nov;27(11):3337-46. doi:
10.1093/humrep/des296. Epub 2012 Aug 11.
Citation on PubMed
Ben Khelifa M, Zouari R, Harbuz R, Halouani L, Arnoult C, Lunardi J, Ray PF. A
new AURKC mutation causing macrozoospermia: implications for human
spermatogenesis and clinical diagnosis. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Dec;17(12):762-8.
doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar050. Epub 2011 Jul 6.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Dieterich K, Soto Rifo R, Faure AK, Hennebicq S, Ben Amar B, Zahi M, Perrin J,
Martinez D, Sele B, Jouk PS, Ohlmann T, Rousseaux S, Lunardi J, Ray PF.
Homozygous mutation of AURKC yields large-headed polyploid spermatozoa and causes
male infertility. Nat Genet. 2007 May;39(5):661-5. doi: 10.1038/ng2027. Epub 2007
Apr 15.
Citation on PubMed
Dieterich K, Zouari R, Harbuz R, Vialard F, Martinez D, Bellayou H, Prisant N,
Zoghmar A, Guichaoua MR, Koscinski I, Kharouf M, Noruzinia M, Nadifi S, Sefiani
A, Lornage J, Zahi M, Viville S, Sele B, Jouk PS, Jacob MC, Escalier D, Nikas Y,
Hennebicq S, Lunardi J, Ray PF. The Aurora Kinase C c.144delC mutation causes
meiosis I arrest in men and is frequent in the North African population. Hum Mol
Genet. 2009 Apr 1;18(7):1301-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp029. Epub 2009 Jan 15.
Citation on PubMed
Eloualid A, Rouba H, Rhaissi H, Barakat A, Louanjli N, Bashamboo A, McElreavey
K. Prevalence of the Aurora kinase C c.144delC mutation in infertile Moroccan
men. Fertil Steril. 2014 Apr;101(4):1086-90. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2013.12.040. Epub 2014 Jan 30.
Citation on PubMed
Ounis L, Zoghmar A, Coutton C, Rouabah L, Hachemi M, Martinez D, Martinez G,
Bellil I, Khelifi D, Arnoult C, Faure J, Benbouhedja S, Rouabah A, Ray PF.
Mutations of the aurora kinase C gene causing macrozoospermia are the most
frequent genetic cause of male infertility in Algerian men. Asian J Androl. 2015
Jan-Feb;17(1):68-73. doi: 10.4103/1008-682X.136441.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Assisted Reproductive Technology
Genetic Disorders
Male Infertility
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Semen analysis
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page