RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, encephalomyopathic form with renal tubulopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, encephalomyopathic form with renal tubulopathy
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/rrm2b-related-mitochondrial-dna-depletion-syndrome-encephalomyopathic-form-with-renal-tubulopathy/
RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, encephalomyopathic form with renal tubulopathy
Description
RRM2B
-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, encephalomyopathic form with renal tubulopathy (
RRM2B
-MDS) is a severe condition that begins in infancy and affects multiple body systems. It is associated with brain dysfunction combined with muscle weakness (encephalomyopathy). Many affected individuals also have a
kidney
dysfunction known as renal tubulopathy.
Infants with
RRM2B
-MDS have weak muscle tone (hypotonia) and a failure to grow or gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Many have a smaller-than-normal head size (microcephaly). Due to muscle weakness, affected infants typically have difficulty controlling head movement and may have delayed development of other motor skills, such as rolling over or sitting. Weakness of the muscles used for breathing leads to serious breathing difficulties and can result in life-threatening respiratory failure. Most affected infants have a buildup of a chemical called lactic acid in the body (lactic acidosis), which can also be life-threatening.
Some individuals with
RRM2B
-MDS have a digestion problem known as gastrointestinal dysmotility, in which the muscles and nerves of the digestive system do not move food through
the digestive tract
efficiently. This disorder may lead to swallowing difficulties, vomiting, and diarrhea and can contribute to a failure to thrive. Less commonly, individuals with
RRM2B
-MDS develop seizures or hearing loss that is caused by nerve damage in the
inner ear
(sensorineural hearing loss).
Because of the severity of the signs and symptoms, people with
RRM2B
-MDS usually live only into early childhood.
Frequency
RRM2B
-MDS is a rare condition; the exact prevalence is unknown. At least 15 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Causes
As the condition name suggests, mutations in the
RRM2B
gene cause
RRM2B
-MDS. The
RRM2B
gene provides instructions for making one piece, called the p53 inducible small subunit (p53R2), of a protein called ribonucleotide reductase (RNR). RNR helps produce DNA building blocks (
nucleotides
), which are joined to one another in a particular order to form DNA.
RNRs containing p53R2 make nucleotides that are used for the formation of DNA in specialized cell structures called
mitochondria
. Although most DNA is packaged in chromosomes within the cell's
nucleus
(nuclear DNA), mitochondria also have a small amount of their own DNA (mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA). Mitochondria are the energy-producing centers in cells, and the DNA in these structures contains genes essential for the process of energy production (called oxidative phosphorylation). The production of nucleotides by p53R2 helps maintain a normal amount of mtDNA in cells.
RRM2B
gene mutations reduce the activity or amount of RNR, which likely impairs production of mtDNA nucleotides. A shortage of nucleotides available for the production of mtDNA molecules leads to a reduction in the amount of mtDNA (known as mtDNA depletion), which impairs mitochondrial function.
It is unclear why mtDNA depletion particularly affects the brain and kidneys in people with
RRM2B
-MDS, but the high energy demands of these tissues may make them especially susceptible to cell death when mtDNA is lost and less energy is produced in cells.
Learn more about the gene associated with RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, encephalomyopathic form with renal tubulopathy
RRM2B
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 8A (encephalomyopathic type with renal tubulopathy)
MTDPS8A
RRM2B-MDS
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome
Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, encephalomyopathic form with renal tubulopathy
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROME 8A (ENCEPHALOMYOPATHIC TYPE WITH RENAL TUBULOPATHY); MTDPS8A
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Bornstein B, Area E, Flanigan KM, Ganesh J, Jayakar P, Swoboda KJ, Coku J,
Naini A, Shanske S, Tanji K, Hirano M, DiMauro S. Mitochondrial DNA depletion
syndrome due to mutations in the RRM2B gene. Neuromuscul Disord. 2008
Jun;18(6):453-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2008.04.006. Epub 2008 May 27.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Bourdon A, Minai L, Serre V, Jais JP, Sarzi E, Aubert S, Chretien D, de Lonlay
P, Paquis-Flucklinger V, Arakawa H, Nakamura Y, Munnich A, Rotig A. Mutation of
RRM2B, encoding p53-controlled ribonucleotide reductase (p53R2), causes severe
mitochondrial DNA depletion. Nat Genet. 2007 Jun;39(6):776-80. doi:
10.1038/ng2040. Epub 2007 May 7.
Citation on PubMed
Lim AZ, McFarland R, Taylor RW, Gorman GS. RRM2B Mitochondrial DNA
Maintenance Defects. 2014 Apr 17 [updated 2021 Jun 24]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J,
Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R)
[Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK195854/
Citation on PubMed
Pontarin G, Ferraro P, Bee L, Reichard P, Bianchi V. Mammalian ribonucleotide
reductase subunit p53R2 is required for mitochondrial DNA replication and DNA
repair in quiescent cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 14;109(33):13302-7.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1211289109. Epub 2012 Jul 30.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Mitochondrial Diseases
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page