Atrasentan: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Atrasentan
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625070.html
Atrasentan
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Do not take atrasentan if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking atrasentan, call your doctor immediately. Atrasentan may harm the fetus. You may be asked to take a pregnancy test prior to starting atrasentan. If you are capable of becoming pregnant, you will be asked to use effective contraception during and for 2 weeks after your last dose of atrasentan. Ask your doctor about what contraception will be best for you.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Atrasentan is used to reduce proteinuria (protein in the urine) in certain patients with immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy (a kidney disease where IgA deposits build up in the kidneys causing inflammation). Atrasentan is in a class of medications called endothelin receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the substance, endothelin, to slow disease progression.
How should this medicine be used?
Atrasentan comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take with or without food once a day. Take atrasentan at around the same time every day.
Take atrasentan exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Atrasentan controls proteinuria from IgA nephropathy but does not cure it. Continue to take atrasentan even if you feel well. Do not stop taking atrasentan without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking atrasentan,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with atrasentan. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with atrasentan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting atrasentan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking atrasentan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with atrasentan: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking atrasentan. Do not start any of these medications while taking atrasentan without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease or heart failure.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking atrasentan.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Atrasentan may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
swelling in hands, ankles, feet or legs
fatigue, weakness, dizziness, headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
nausea or vomiting, pain in the upper right stomach, yellowing of skin or whites or eyes, dark urine, loss of appetite
unusual weight gain, trouble breath, swelling in legs, feet, hands or ankles
Atrasentan may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to atrasentan.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vanrafia
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page