Sodium Polystyrene Sulfonate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sodium Polystyrene Sulfonate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682108.html
Sodium Polystyrene Sulfonate
pronounced as (pol ee stye' reen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate is used to treat hyperkalemia (increased amounts of potassium in the body). Sodium polystyrene sulfonate is in a class of medications called potassium-removing agents. It works by removing excess potassium from the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate comes as a suspension and as an oral powder for suspension to take by mouth. The suspension may also be given rectally as an enema. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate is usually taken or used one to four times a day. Take or use sodium polystyrene sulfonate at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take or use sodium polystyrene sulfonate exactly as directed. Do not take or use more or less of it or take or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the suspension well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
If you are taking sodium polystyrene sulfonate powder by mouth, mix the powder with 20 to 100 mL (about 1 to 3 ounces) of water or syrup as directed by your doctor. Measure carefully, using level teaspoonfuls of the powder. Use the mixture shortly after preparation; do not store beyond 24 hours.
Do not heat sodium polystyrene sulfonate suspension or add it to heated foods or liquids.
If you are receiving sodium polystyrene sulfonate as an enema, you will probably be given a cleansing enema before and after you receive this medication. Hold the sodium polystyrene sulfonate enema contents as long as possible, up to several hours.
Do not use sorbitol along with sodium polystyrene sulfonate products. Serious problems have been reported when sorbitol was used with sodium polystyrene sulfonate.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking or receiving sodium polystyrene sulfonate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to sodium polystyrene sulfonate, other polystyrene sulfonate resins, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in sodium polystyrene sulfonate products. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking or receiving sodium polystyrene sulfonate. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects. .
If you are taking any other medications by mouth, take them at least 3 hours before or 3 hours before or after taking or receiving sodium polystyrene sulfonate.
the following nonprescription products may interact with sodium polystrene sulfonate: antacids; laxatives; sorbitol. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking or receiving sodium polystyrene sulfonate . Do not start any of these medications while taking or receiving sodium polystyrene sulfonate without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have low levels of potassium in your blood, a blockage in your intestine or colon, or if you have recently had surgery and your bowel function has not returned to normal. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take sodium polystyrene sulfonate. Newborn infants should not receive sodium polystyrene sulfonate.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had constipation; surgery to remove all or part of your large bowel or surgery for other intestinal problems; inflammatory bowel disease, ischemic colitis (decreased blood flow to the bowels), gastroparesis (slowed movement of food from the stomach to the small intestine) or other bowel problems; heart failure; high blood pressure; edema (fluid retention; excess fluid held in body tissues); or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking sodium polystyrene sulfonate, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are on a sodium-restricted diet.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor before using salt substitutes containing potassium or foods that are high in potassium.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take or use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take or use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking or using sodium polystyrene sulfonate and call your doctor immediately:
constipation
seizures
unusual bleeding
confusion
muscle weakness
abdominal pain
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking or using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature (unless told otherwise by your pharmacist) and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
irritability
confusion
muscle weakness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to sodium polystyrene sulfonate.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Kalexate
®
Kayexalate
®
Kionex
®
SPS
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page