Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/noonan-syndrome-with-multiple-lentigines/
Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines
Description
Noonan syndrome
with multiple lentigines (formerly called LEOPARD syndrome) is a condition that affects many areas of the body. As the condition name suggests, Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines is very similar to a condition called Noonan syndrome, and it can be difficult to tell the two disorders apart in early childhood. However, the features of these two conditions differ later in life. The characteristic features of Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines include brown skin spots called lentigines that are similar to freckles, heart defects, widely spaced eyes (
ocular hypertelorism
), a sunken chest (pectus excavatum) or protruding chest (
pectus carinatum
), and short stature. These features vary, however, even among affected individuals in the same family. Not all individuals with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines have all the characteristic features of this condition.
The lentigines seen in Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines typically first appear in mid-childhood, mostly on the face, neck, and upper body. Affected individuals may have thousands of small dark brown skin spots by the time they reach puberty. Unlike freckles, the appearance of lentigines has nothing to do with sun exposure. In addition to lentigines, people with this condition may have lighter brown skin spots called
café-au-lait spots
. Café-au-lait spots tend to develop before the lentigines, appearing within the first year of life in most affected people.
Of the people with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines who have heart defects, about 80 percent have
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
, which is a thickening of the heart muscle that forces the heart to work harder to pump blood. The hypertrophic cardiomyopathy most often affects the lower left chamber of the heart (
the left ventricle
). Up to 20 percent of people with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines who have heart problems have a narrowing of the artery from the heart to the lungs (pulmonary stenosis).
People with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines can have a distinctive facial appearance. In addition to ocular hypertelorism, affected individuals may have droopy eyelids (
ptosis
), thick lips, and low-set ears. Affected individuals also usually have an abnormal appearance of the chest; they either have pectus excavatum or pectus carinatum.
At birth, people with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines are typically of normal weight and height, but in some, growth slows over time. This slow growth results in affected individuals being shorter than average, although less than half of people with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines have significantly short stature.
Other signs and symptoms of Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines include hearing loss caused by abnormalities in
the inner ear
(sensorineural deafness), mild intellectual disability, and extra folds of skin on the back of the neck. Affected males often have
genital
abnormalities, which can include undescended testes (cryptorchidism) and a urethra that opens on the underside of the penis (hypospadias). These abnormalities may reduce the ability to have biological children (decreased fertility). Females with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines may have poorly developed
ovaries
and delayed puberty.
Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines is one of a group of related conditions collectively known as RASopathies. These conditions all have similar signs and symptoms and are caused by changes in the same cell signaling pathway. In addition to Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines, the RASopathies include Noonan syndrome,
cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
,
Costello syndrome
,
neurofibromatosis type 1
, and
Legius syndrome
.
Frequency
Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines is thought to be a rare condition; approximately 200 cases have been reported worldwide.
Causes
Variants (also known as mutations) in one of several genes can cause Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines. Approximately 85 percent of individuals with this condition have mutations in the
PTPN11
gene. Another 10 percent have mutations in the
RAF1
gene. In rare cases, mutations in the
BRAF
or
MAP2K1
gene have been found to cause this condition. The remaining individuals with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines do not have an identified mutation in any of these four genes. In these individuals, the cause of the condition is unknown.
The
PTPN11
,
RAF1
,
BRAF
, and
MAP2K1
genes all provide instructions for making proteins that are involved in important signaling pathways needed for the proper formation of several types of tissue during development. These proteins also play roles in the regulation of
cell division
, cell movement (migration), and cell differentiation (the process by which cells mature to carry out specific functions).
A mutation in the
PTPN11
,
RAF1
,
BRAF
, or
MAP2K1
gene leads to the production of a protein that functions abnormally, which impairs the protein's ability to respond to cell signals. A disruption in the regulation of systems that control cell growth and division leads to the characteristic features of Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines.
Learn more about the genes associated with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines
BRAF
MAP2K1
PTPN11
RAF1
Inheritance
Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition.
Some affected people inherit the variation from
one affected parent
. Other cases result from
new variants in the gene
and occur in people with no history of the condition in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
Cardio-cutaneous syndrome
Cardiomyopathic lentiginosis
Diffuse lentiginosis
Lentiginosis profusa
LEOPARD syndrome
Moynahan syndrome
Multiple lentigines syndrome
NSML
Progressive cardiomyopathic lentiginosis
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: LEOPARD syndrome 1
Genetic Testing Registry: LEOPARD syndrome 2
Genetic Testing Registry: LEOPARD syndrome 3
Genetic Testing Registry: Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
LEOPARD SYNDROME 1; LPRD1
LEOPARD SYNDROME 2; LPRD2
LEOPARD SYNDROME 3; LPRD3
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Kato H, Yoshida R, Tsukamoto K, Suga H, Eto H, Higashino T, Araki J, Ogata T,
Yoshimura K. Familial cases of atypical clinical features genetically diagnosed
as LEOPARD syndrome (multiple lentigines syndrome). Int J Dermatol. 2010
Oct;49(10):1146-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2010.04559.x.
Citation on PubMed
Limongelli G, Pacileo G, Marino B, Digilio MC, Sarkozy A, Elliott P, Versacci
P, Calabro P, De Zorzi A, Di Salvo G, Syrris P, Patton M, McKenna WJ,
Dallapiccola B, Calabro R. Prevalence and clinical significance of cardiovascular
abnormalities in patients with the LEOPARD syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2007 Aug
15;100(4):736-41. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2007.03.093. Epub 2007 Jun 27.
Citation on PubMed
Nishi E, Mizuno S, Nanjo Y, Niihori T, Fukushima Y, Matsubara Y, Aoki Y, Kosho
T. A novel heterozygous MAP2K1 mutation in a patient with Noonan syndrome with
multiple lentigines. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Feb;167A(2):407-11. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.36842. Epub 2014 Nov 25.
Citation on PubMed
Santoro C, Pacileo G, Limongelli G, Scianguetta S, Giugliano T, Piluso G,
Ragione FD, Cirillo M, Mirone G, Perrotta S. LEOPARD syndrome: clinical dilemmas
in differential diagnosis of RASopathies. BMC Med Genet. 2014 Apr 26;15:44. doi:
10.1186/1471-2350-15-44.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Sarkozy A, Digilio MC, Dallapiccola B. Leopard syndrome. Orphanet J Rare Dis.
2008 May 27;3:13. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-13.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Stevenson DA, Schill L, Schoyer L, Andresen BS, Bakker A, Bayrak-Toydemir P,
Burkitt-Wright E, Chatfield K, Elefteriou F, Elgersma Y, Fisher MJ, Franz D, Gelb
BD, Goriely A, Gripp KW, Hardan AY, Keppler-Noreuil KM, Kerr B, Korf B, Leoni C,
McCormick F, Plotkin SR, Rauen KA, Reilly K, Roberts A, Sandler A, Siegel D,
Walsh K, Widemann BC. The Fourth International Symposium on Genetic Disorders of
the Ras/MAPK pathway. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Aug;170(8):1959-66. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.37723. Epub 2016 May 7.
Citation on PubMed
Yu ZH, Zhang RY, Walls CD, Chen L, Zhang S, Wu L, Liu S, Zhang ZY. Molecular
basis of gain-of-function LEOPARD syndrome-associated SHP2 mutations.
Biochemistry. 2014 Jul 1;53(25):4136-51. doi: 10.1021/bi5002695. Epub 2014 Jun
17.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Skin Pigmentation Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines
Undescended testicle
Related Medical Tests
BRAF Genetic Test
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page