Zavegepant Nasal Spray: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Zavegepant Nasal Spray
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623065.html
Zavegepant Nasal Spray
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Zavegepant nasal spray is used to treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes are accompanied by nausea and sensitivity to sound or light). Zavegepant is in a class of medications called calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of a certain natural substance in the body that causes migraine headaches. Zavegepant does not prevent migraine attacks or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Zavegepant comes as a solution (liquid) to spray into the nose. It is usually used as a single dose sprayed into one nostril at the first sign of a migraine headache. Do not use more than one dose in a 24-hour period. Your doctor will tell you the maximum number of migraine headaches you should treat with zavegepant nasal spray in a 30-day period. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use zavegepant nasal exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more frequently after using zavegepant nasal spray.
To use the nasal spray, follow these steps:
Read all of the manufacturer's instructions for using the nasal spray before you use your first dose.
Blow your nose gently.
Remove one blister containing one device from the carton. Remove the device from the blister pack. Peel back the tab to open the spray.
Check the expiration date printed on the blister and device and do not use the device if the expiration date has passed.
Do not prime the nasal spray before using it.
Hold the zavegepant nasal spray with your thumb on the bottom of the plunger and two fingers on either side of the nozzle, but be careful not to press the plunger.
Use your other hand to block one nostril by pressing firmly on the side of your nose.
Put the tip of the sprayer into your other nostril as far as feels comfortable. Keep your head upright and close your mouth. Be careful not to press the plunger or spray the medication in your eyes.
Breathe in gently through your nose. At the same time, press the plunger firmly with your thumb.
Keep your head level and remove the tip from your nose.
Breathe gently in through your nose and out through your mouth for 10 to 20 seconds. Do not breathe in deeply.
The sprayer only contains one dose of medication. After you have used it, dispose of it safely, so that is out of the reach of children and pets.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using zavegepant nasal spray,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to zavegepant, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in zavegepant nasal spray. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are using nasal decongestants such as oxymetazoline (Afrin, Vicks Sinex, others) or phenylephrine (Neo-Synephrine), take them at least 1 hour after using zavegepant nasal spray.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using zavegepant nasal spray, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Zavegepant nasal spray may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
change in how things taste or loss of taste
nasal discomfort
nausea
vomiting
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
swelling of the face, throat, or around the mouth or eyes
difficulty breathing
hives
rash
itching
Zavegepant nasal spray may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you use zavegepant nasal spray.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zavzpret
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page