Mogamulizumab-kpkc Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mogamulizumab-kpkc Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618064.html
Mogamulizumab-kpkc Injection
pronounced as (moe gam" ue liz' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Mogamulizumab-kpkc injection is used to treat mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome, two types of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma ([CTCL], a group of cancers of the immune system that first appear as skin rashes), in adults whose disease has not improved, has gotten worse, or has come back after taking other medications. Mogamulizumab-kpkc injection is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by activating the immune system to attack cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Mogamulizumab-kpkc injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) over at least 60 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or medical office. It is usually given once a week for the first four doses, and then once every other week for as long as your treatment continues. The length of treatment depends on how well your body responds to the medication and the side effects that you experience.
You may experience a serious or life-threatening reaction while you receive a dose of mogamulizumab-kpkc injection. These reactions are more common with the first dose of mogamulizumab-kpkc injection but may occur at any time during treatment. Your doctor may tell you to take certain medications before receiving your dose to prevent these reactions. Your doctor will monitor you carefully while you are receiving the medication. If you experience any of the following symptoms during or after your infusion, tell your doctor immediately: chills, shaking, nausea, vomiting, flushing, itching, rash, fast heartbeat, shortness of breath, coughing, wheezing, dizziness, feeling like passing out, tiredness, headache, or fever. If you experience any of these symptoms, your doctor will slow down or stop your infusion and treat the symptoms of the reaction. If your reaction is severe, your healthcare provider may decide not to give you any more infusions of mogamulizumab-kpkc.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving mogamulizumab-kpkc injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic (such as a skin reaction or infusion reaction) to mogamulizumab-kpkc, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in mogamulizumab-kpkc injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have had or plan to have a stem cell transplant using cells from a donor, and if you have or have ever had any type of autoimmune disease, liver disease including Hepatitis B virus infection, or any type of lung or breathing problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you are able to become pregnant, your doctor will do a pregnancy test before you start treatment with mogamulizumab-kpkc injection. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with mogamulizumab-kpkc injection and for at least 3 months after your last dose of medication. Talk to your doctor about methods of birth control that will work for you. If you become pregnant while receiving mogamulizumab-kpkc injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving mogamulizumab-kpkc injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of mogamulizumab-kpkc injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Mogamulizumab-kpkc injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
muscle spasms or pain
tiredness or fatigue
headache
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
decreased appetite
changes in weight
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
depression
dry skin
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those in the HOW section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, skin pain, itching, blistering, or peeling
painful sores or ulcers in the mouth, nose, throat, or genital area
fever, cough, sore throat, chills, flu-like symptoms, or other signs of infection
nausea, diarrhea, or stomach pain
painful or frequent urination
easy bruising or bleeding
Mogamulizumab-kpkc injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to mogamulizumab-kpkc injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about mogamulizumab-kpkc injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Poteligeo
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page