Margetuximab-cmkb Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Margetuximab-cmkb Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621004.html
Margetuximab-cmkb Injection
pronounced as (mar" je tux' i mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Margetuximab-cmkb injection may cause serious or life-threatening heart problems. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease. Your doctor will order tests before and during your treatment to see if your heart is working well enough for you to safely receive margetuximab-cmkb injection. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are being treated with anthracycline medications for cancer such as daunorubicin (Cerubidine), doxorubicin (Doxil), epirubicin (Ellence), and idarubicin (Idamycin) or within 4 months after receiving margetuximab-cmkb injection. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: cough; shortness of breath; swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles or lower legs; weight gain (more than 5 pounds [about 2.3 kilograms] in 24 hours); dizziness; loss of consciousness; or fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat.
Margetuximab-cmkb injection should not be used by women who are pregnant or who may become pregnant. There is a risk that margetuximab-cmkb will cause loss of the pregnancy or will cause the baby to be born with birth defects (physical problems that are present at birth). Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You will need to have a pregnancy test before you receive this medication. You should use effective birth control during treatment with margetuximab-cmkb and for 4 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant during treatment with margetuximab-cmkb injection, or think you might be pregnant, call your doctor immediately.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests to check your body's response to margetuximab-cmkb.
Talk to your doctor about the risk(s) of receiving margetuximab-cmkb.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Margetuximab-cmkb is used along with chemotherapy to treat a certain type of breast cancer (HER-2 positive) that has spread to other parts of the body after treatment with at least two other chemotherapy medications. Margetuximab-cmkb is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by stopping the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Margetuximab-cmkb comes as a solution to be injected into a vein by a doctor or nurse in a hospital. It is usually given over 120 minutes for the first dose and then over 30 minutes once every 3 weeks (21 days) for the following doses. The length of your treatment will depend on the condition that you have and how well your body responds to treatment.
Margetuximab-cmkb may cause serious reactions during the infusion of the medication. A doctor or nurse will monitor you carefully while you are receiving the medication. Tell your doctor or nurse if you experience any of the following during your infusion: fever, chills, joint pain, cough, dizziness, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, headache, sweating, racing heartbeat, hives, rash, itching, or shortness of breath. Call your doctor immediately or get immediate emergency medical attention if you experience any of these symptoms after you leave your doctor's office or medical facility.
Your doctor may slow down your infusion or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with margetuximab-cmkb injection.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving margetuximab-cmkb injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to margetuximab-cmkb, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in margetuximab-cmkb injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any of the conditions mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section or any other medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with margetuximab-cmkb and for 4 months after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Call your doctor right away if you are unable to keep an appointment to receive a dose of margetuximab-cmkb injection.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Margetuximab-cmkb may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
fatigue
nausea
diarrhea
vomiting
constipation
loss of appetite
stomach pain
hair loss
pain in hands or feet
joint or muscle pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING or HOW sections, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash with blisters on hands and feet
Margetuximab-cmkb may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about margetuximab-cmkb.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Margenza
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page