Pazopanib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pazopanib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a610013.html
Pazopanib
pronounced as (paz oh' pa nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Pazopanib may cause severe or life-threatening liver damage. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: yellowing of the skin or eyes; dark urine; extreme tiredness; nausea; vomiting; loss of appetite; pain in the upper right part of the stomach; or unusual bleeding or bruising.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before you start taking pazopanib and at least once a month for the first 4 months of your treatment and then on a regular basis as needed.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with pazopanib and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking pazopanib.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pazopanib is used to treat advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC, a type of cancer that begins in the cells of the kidneys) in adults. Pazopanib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by slowing or stopping the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Pazopanib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken on an empty stomach once a day, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal. Take pazopanib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take pazopanib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor may adjust your dose of pazopanib during your treatment or may discontinue your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and any side effects you may experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Continue to take pazopanib even if you feel well. Do not stop taking pazopanib without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking pazopanib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pazopanib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pazopanib tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking pazopanib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with pazopanib: St. John's wort; acid-reducing agents for heart burn such as omeprazole (Prilosec), rabeprazole,esomeprazole, ranitidine, famotidine. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking pazopanib. Do not start any of these medications while taking pazopanib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have coughed up blood or had bleeding in your stomach, intestines, or brain in the last 6 months or had surgery in the last 7 days. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a tear in your stomach or intestine; an abnormal connection between two parts of your gastrointestinal tract; Gilbert's syndrome (a genetic condition which affects the liver and may cause jaundice [yellowing of the skin or eyes]); high blood pressure; a stroke; an irregular heartbeat; a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death); a heart attack; chest pain; or heart or thyroid disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant while you are taking pazopanib. If you become pregnant while taking pazopanib, call your doctor. Pazopanib may harm the fetus.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking pazopanib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is within 12 hours of your next scheduled dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pazopanib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
constipation
heartburn
change in ability to taste food
joint or muscle pain
swelling of the face
tender, red palms of the hands and soles of the feet
hair loss
thin, brittle fingernails or hair
change in hair color
lightening of an area of the skin
rash
weakness
depression
unusual discomfort in cold temperatures
weight loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
fast or irregular heartbeat
chest pain
pain in the arms, back, neck or jaw
shortness of breath
headache
slow or difficult speech
dizziness or faintness
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
wounds that do not heal
stomach pain or swelling
black and tarry stools
red blood in stools
bloody vomit
vomit that looks like coffee grounds
blood in urine
nosebleeds
coughing up blood
Pazopanib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
extreme tiredness
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Votrient
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page