Naratriptan: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Naratriptan
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601083.html
Naratriptan
pronounced as (nar' a trip tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Naratriptan is used to treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes come with nausea and a strong reaction to sound or light). Naratriptan is in a class of medications called selective serotonin receptor agonists. It works by narrowing blood vessels around the brain, stopping pain signals from being sent to the brain, which stops the release of certain natural substances that cause pain, nausea, and other symptoms of migraines. Naratriptan does not stop migraine attacks from coming or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Naratriptan comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take at the first sign of a migraine headache. If your symptoms improve after you take naratriptan but return after 4 hours or longer, you may take a second tablet. However, if your symptoms do not improve after you take naratriptan, do not take a second tablet before calling your doctor. Your doctor will tell you the maximum number of tablets you may take in a 24-hour period. Take naratriptan exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more frequently after taking naratriptan.
If you take naratriptan more often or for longer than the recommended period of time, your headaches may get worse or may occur more often. You should not take naratriptan or any other headache medication for more than 10 days per month. Call your doctor if you need to take naratriptan to treat more than 4 headaches in a 1-month period.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking naratriptan,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
do not take naratriptan if you have taken any of the following medications in the past 24 hours: other selective serotonin receptor agonists such as almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan, or zolmitriptan; or ergot-type medications such as bromocriptine, cabergoline, dihydroergotamine, ergoloid mesylates, ergonovine, ergotamine, methylergonovine, methysergide, and pergolide.
some medications should not be taken with naratriptan. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with naratriptan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting naratriptan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking naratriptan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past 2 weeks: isocarboxazid, phenelzine, selegiline, and tranylcypromine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease; a heart attack; angina (chest pain); irregular heartbeats; stroke or 'mini-stroke'; circulation problems such as varicose veins, blood clots in the legs, Raynaud's disease (problems with blood flow to the fingers, toes, ears, and nose), or ischemic bowel disease (bloody diarrhea and stomach pain caused by decreased blood flow to the intestines); Your doctor may tell you not to take naratriptan.
tell your doctor if you smoke or are overweight; if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, diabetes, high cholesterol, or kidney or liver disease; if you have gone through menopause; or if any family members have or have ever had heart disease or stroke.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you plan to be sexually active while you are taking this medication, talk to your doctor about effective methods of birth control. If you become pregnant while taking naratriptan, call your doctor.
you should know that naratriptan may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
talk to your doctor about your headache symptoms to make sure they are caused by migraine. Naratriptan should not be used to treat certain type of headaches.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Naratriptan may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
weakness, tiredness, dizziness
upset stomach, nausea
feeling warm or cold
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
tightness, pain, pressure, or heaviness in the chest, throat, neck, or jaw
rapid, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
shortness of breath
breaking out in a cold sweat
lightheadedness
weakness or numbness or an arm or leg
slow or difficult speech
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
hives, rash, itching
sudden or severe stomach pain
bloody diarrhea
constipation
vomiting
paleness or blue color of fingers or toes
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
lightheadedness
neck pain
tiredness
loss of coordination
chest pain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you take naratriptan.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Amerge
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page