Atorvastatin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Atorvastatin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a600045.html
Atorvastatin
pronounced as (a tore' va sta tin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Atorvastatin is used together with diet, weight loss, and exercise to reduce the risk of heart attack and stroke and to decrease the chance that heart surgery will be needed in people who have heart disease or who are at risk of developing heart disease. Atorvastatin is also used to decrease the amount of fatty substances such as low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol ('bad cholesterol') and triglycerides in the blood and to increase the amount of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol ('good cholesterol') in the blood. Atorvastatin may also be used to decrease the amount of cholesterol and other fatty substances in the blood in children and teenagers 10 to 17 years of age who have familial heterozygous hypercholesterolemia (an inherited condition in which cholesterol cannot be removed from the body normally). Atorvastatin is in a class of medications called HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins). It works by slowing the production of cholesterol in the body to decrease the amount of cholesterol that may build up on the walls of the arteries and block blood flow to the heart, brain, and other parts of the body.
Accumulation of cholesterol and fats along the walls of your arteries (a process known as atherosclerosis) decreases blood flow and, therefore, the oxygen supply to your heart, brain, and other parts of your body. Lowering your blood level of cholesterol and fats with atorvastatin has been shown to prevent heart disease, angina (chest pain), strokes, and heart attacks.
How should this medicine be used?
Atorvastatin comes as a tablet and suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. The tablet is usually taken once a day with or without food. The suspension is usually taken once a day on an empty stomach (at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal).Take atorvastatin at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take atorvastatin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of atorvastatin and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 2 to 4 weeks.
If you are taking the suspension, do not use a household spoon to measure your dose. Use a properly marked measuring device such as a medicine spoon or oral syringe. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you need help getting or using a measuring device.
Continue to take atorvastatin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking atorvastatin without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking atorvastatin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to atorvastatin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in atorvastatin tablets and suspension. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking atorvastatin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription products may interact with atorvastatin: cimetidine (Tagamet), and niacin. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking atorvastatin. Do not start any of these medications while taking atorvastatin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or ever had liver disease. Your doctor will order laboratory tests to see how well your liver is working even if you do not think you have liver disease. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take atorvastatin if you have liver disease or if the tests show you may be developing liver disease.
tell your doctor if you drink more than 2 alcoholic beverages daily, if you are 65 years of age or older, and if you have or have ever had muscle aches or weakness, diabetes, seizures, low blood pressure, or thyroid or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking atorvastatin, stop taking atorvastatin and call your doctor immediately. Atorvastatin may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while you are taking this medication.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking atorvastatin. If you are hospitalized due to serious injury or infection, tell the doctor who treats you that you are taking atorvastatin.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking atorvastatin. Alcohol can increase the risk of serious side effects.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Eat a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet. Be sure to follow all exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian. You can also visit the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) website for additional dietary information at
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/chol/chol_tlc.pdf
.
Avoid drinking large amounts [more than 1.2 liter (approximately 1 quart) per day] of grapefruit juice while taking atorvastatin.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose of the tablet, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
If you miss a dose of the suspension, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is less than 12 hours until your next scheduled dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Atorvastatin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
heartburn
gas
joint pain
forgetfulness or memory loss
confusion
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor or get emergency medical help immediately:
muscle pain, tenderness, or weakness
lack of energy
fever
chest pain
nausea
extreme tiredness
weakness
unusual bleeding or bruising
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
flu-like symptoms
dark colored urine
yellowing of the skin or eyes
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
Atorvastatin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests during your treatment , especially if you develop symptoms of liver damage.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking atorvastatin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Atorvaliq
®
Lipitor
®
Brand names of combination products
Caduet
®
(containing Amlodipine, Atorvastatin)
Lipqozet
®
(containing Atorvastatin, Ezetimibe)
Liptruzet
®
(containing Atorvastatin, Ezetimibe)
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page