Cabotegravir Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cabotegravir Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622053.html
Cabotegravir Injection
pronounced as (ka" boe teg' ra vir)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order a certain test to check for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection before receiving each dose of cabotegravir. You must have a negative test before receiving cabotegravir each time.
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: tiredness, fever, joint or muscle aches, headache, sore throat, vomiting or diarrhea, rash, night sweats, swollen lymph nodes in the neck or groin.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cabotegravir injection is used for prevention of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection. Cabotegravir is in a class of medications called HIV integrase inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood.
How should this medicine be used?
Cabotegravir injection comes as a suspension (liquid) to be injected into a muscle in your buttocks by a healthcare provider. You will receive cabotegravir injection once every month for 2 months and then every 2 months after those initial doses.
Before receiving your first cabotegravir injection, you may be asked to take cabotegravir tablet by mouth once daily for one month (at least 28 days) to see if you can tolerate this medication.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cabotegravir injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
Some medications should not be taken while receiving cabotegravir or their doses may need to be adjusted or additional monitoring may need to occur. Make sure you have discussed any prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are currently taking or plan to take before starting cabotegravir with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping or changing any medications while receiving cabotegravir, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression or other mental illness, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving cabotegravir, call your doctor.
you should know that cabotegravir may cause changes in your thoughts, behavior, or mental health. Call your doctor immediately if you develop any of the following symptoms while you are taking cabotegravir: new or worsening depression, or thinking about killing yourself or planning or trying to do so. Be sure your family knows which symptoms may be serious so that they can call your doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
It is very important to stay on your cabotegravir administration schedule for the medication to work to prevent HIV-1 infection. If you miss or think you will miss a cabotegravir injection appointment by more than 7 days, call your doctor right away to discuss your treatment options.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cabotegravir injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain, tenderness, swelling, redness, itching, bruising, or warmth at injection site
diarrhea
headache
fatigue
fever
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash with or without: fever; extreme tiredness; muscle or joint aches; blisters; mouth sores; swelling of the eyes, lips, tongue, or mouth; or difficulty breathing
yellow eyes or skin; right upper abdominal pain; bruising; bleeding; loss of appetite; confusion; yellow or brown-colored urine; or pale stools
Cabotegravir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to cabotegravir.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about cabotegravir injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Apretude
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page