Azelastine Nasal Spray: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Azelastine Nasal Spray
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a697014.html
Azelastine Nasal Spray
pronounced as (a zel' as teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Azelastine nasal spray is used to relieve symptoms such as sneezing and a runny, stuffy, or itchy nose and itchy, watery eyes. Azelastine is in a class of medications called antihistamines. It works by blocking the action of histamine, a substance in the body that causes allergic symptoms.
How should this medicine be used?
Azelastine comes as a liquid to spray in the nose. Spray in each nostril one or two times a day.
Use azelastine nasal spray exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
An adult should help children younger than 12 years old to use azelastine nasal spray. Children younger than 6 years of age should not use nonprescription (over the counter) azelastine nasal spray.
Azelastine nasal spray is only for use in the nose. Do not swallow the nasal spray or spray it into your eyes or mouth.
Each bottle of azelastine nasal spray should only be used by one person. Do not share azelastine nasal spray because this may spread germs.
Before you use azelastine nasal spray for the first time, read the written directions that come with it. Follow these steps:
Remove the cap and safety clip from the nasal spray pump.
If you are using the nasal spray pump for the first time, you must prime the pump. Hold the pump with the applicator between your forefinger and middle finger and the bottom of the bottle resting on your thumb. Point the bottle upright and away from your face. Press down and release the pump up to four times, until a fine mist appears. If you have not used your nasal spray for more than 3 days, reprime the pump with 2 sprays or until a fine mist appears.
Blow your nose until your nostrils are clear.
Close one nostril by gently placing your finger against the side of your nose, tilt your head slightly forward and, keeping the bottle upright, insert the nasal tip into the other nostril. Use your forefinger and middle finger to press firmly down on the nozzle and release a spray. Breath gently in through the nostril while keeping your head tilted forward to keep the medicine from going into your throat. Then, repeat in the second nostril.
If your doctor told you to use two sprays in each nostril, repeat step 4.
Wipe the applicator with a clean tissue and replace the plastic cap and safety clip on the bottle.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using azelastine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take, especially other cold and allergy products and antihistamines. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have recently had surgery on your nose, have injured your nose in any way, or if you have sores in your nose.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using azelastine nasal spray, call your doctor.
you should know that azelastine nasal spray may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking azelastine nasal spray. Alcohol can make the side effects from azelastine worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Azelastine nasal spray may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
bitter taste
nasal burning, pain, or discomfort
sneezing, runny nose
headache
sore throat
dry mouth
nose bleeds
dizziness
nausea
tiredness
Azelastine nasal spray may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
If the spray tip is clogged, soak it in warm water, spray several times while in the water, and then dry it. Do not use pins or other sharp objects to remove the blockage.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Astelin
®
Nasal Spray
¶
Astepro Allergy
®
Nasal Spray
Dymista
®
Nasal Spray (as a combination product containing Fluticasone, Azelastine)
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page