Dexmedetomidine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dexmedetomidine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625003.html
Dexmedetomidine Injection
pronounced as ( dex″ med e toe′ mi deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dexmedetomidine is used to provide short-term sedation (you are relaxed, sleepy or in some cases asleep) for adults in intensive care units that are receiving mechanical ventilation (a machine that takes over the work of breathing). It is also used to provide sedation in adults and children and infants 1 month of age and older during surgical and other procedures. Dexmedetomidine is in a class of medications called alpha
2
receptor agonists. It works by changing the activity of certain natural substances in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Dexmedetomidine comes as a solution to give intravenously (into a vein) by a specially trained healthcare provider. It is usually given by an infusion in amounts required to maintain anesthesia or sedation depending on age, health, and other factors. Your dose will be adjusted based on your response. You will be monitored carefully by your healthcare provider while you are receiving dexmedetomidine and for a period of time afterwards.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving dexmedetomidine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dexmedetomidine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in dexmedetomidine solution. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking dexmedetomidine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, hypertension, or heart or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or are breast-feeding. If you are breastfeeding after receiving dexmedetomidine, tell your doctor if your infant becomes irritable.
you should know that dexmedetomidine may make you drowsy and reduce mental alertness. Do not drive a car, operate machinery, or sign legal documents until your doctor recommends you to do so.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dexmedetomidine may cause side effects, usually within 48 hours after receiving the drug. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth
diarrhea
constipation
abdominal pain
salt cravings
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
slow or irregular heartbeat
lightheadedness or dizziness
fainting
nervousness, agitation, and headaches
weakness or confusion
fever, excessive sweating
Dexmedetomidine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems after receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Precedex
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page