CLN10 disease: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
CLN10 disease
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cln10-disease/
CLN10 disease
Description
CLN10 disease is a severe disorder that primarily affects the nervous system. Individuals with this condition typically show signs and symptoms soon after birth. These signs and symptoms can include muscle rigidity, respiratory failure, and prolonged episodes of seizure activity that last several minutes (status epilepticus). It is likely that some affected individuals also have seizures before birth while in the womb. Infants with CLN10 disease have unusually small heads (
microcephaly
) with brains that may be less than half the normal size. There is a loss of brain cells in areas that coordinate movement (the cerebellum) and control thinking and emotions (the cerebral cortex). Nerve cells in the brain also lack a fatty substance called
myelin
, which protects them and promotes efficient transmission of nerve impulses. Infants with CLN10 disease often die hours to weeks after birth.
In some individuals with CLN10 disease, the condition does not appear until later in life, between late infancy and adulthood. These individuals have a gradual loss of brain cells and often develop problems with balance and coordination (ataxia), loss of speech, a progressive loss in intellectual functioning (cognitive decline), and vision loss. Individuals with later-onset CLN10 disease have a shortened lifespan, depending on when their signs and symptoms first started.
CLN10 disease is one of a group of disorders known as neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs). All of these disorders affect the nervous system and typically cause progressive problems with vision, movement, and thinking ability. The different NCLs are distinguished by their genetic cause. Each disease type is given the designation "CLN," meaning ceroid lipofuscinosis, neuronal, and then a number to indicate its subtype.
Frequency
The prevalence of CLN10 disease is unknown; at least 11 cases have been described.
Causes
Mutations in the
CTSD
gene cause CLN10 disease. The
CTSD
gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called cathepsin D. Cathepsin D is one of a family of cathepsin proteins that act as protease enzymes, which modify proteins by cutting them apart. Cathepsin D is found in many types of cells and is active in
lysosomes
, which are compartments within cells that digest and recycle different types of molecules. By cutting proteins apart, cathepsin D can break down certain proteins, turn on (activate) other proteins, and regulate self-destruction of the cell (
apoptosis
).
CTSD
gene mutations found to cause CLN10 disease that is present at birth lead to a complete lack of cathepsin D enzyme activity. As a result, proteins and fats are not broken down properly and abnormally accumulate within lysosomes. While accumulations of these substances occurs in cells throughout the body, nerve cells appear to be particularly vulnerable to damage caused by the abnormal cell materials. Early and widespread loss of nerve cells in CLN10 disease leads to severe signs and symptoms and death in infancy.
In the later-onset cases of CLN10 disease,
CTSD
gene mutations likely result in the production of a cathepsin D enzyme whose function is greatly reduced but not eliminated. As a result, some proteins and fats are broken down by the enzyme, so it takes longer for these substances to accumulate in lysosomes and cause
nerve cell death
.
Learn more about the gene associated with CLN10 disease
CTSD
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Cathepsin D deficiency
Cathepsin D deficient neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
CLN10
Congenital neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 10
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis due to cathepsin D deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
CLN10 disease
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 10; CLN10
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Anderson GW, Goebel HH, Simonati A. Human pathology in NCL. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 2013 Nov;1832(11):1807-26. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.11.014. Epub 2012 Nov
29.
Citation on PubMed
Jalanko A, Braulke T. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2009 Apr;1793(4):697-709. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.11.004. Epub 2008 Nov 24.
Citation on PubMed
Kousi M, Lehesjoki AE, Mole SE. Update of the mutation spectrum and clinical
correlations of over 360 mutations in eight genes that underlie the neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinoses. Hum Mutat. 2012 Jan;33(1):42-63. doi: 10.1002/humu.21624.
Epub 2011 Nov 16.
Citation on PubMed
Siintola E, Partanen S, Stromme P, Haapanen A, Haltia M, Maehlen J, Lehesjoki
AE, Tyynela J. Cathepsin D deficiency underlies congenital human neuronal
ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Brain. 2006 Jun;129(Pt 6):1438-45. doi:
10.1093/brain/awl107. Epub 2006 May 2.
Citation on PubMed
Steinfeld R, Reinhardt K, Schreiber K, Hillebrand M, Kraetzner R, Bruck W,
Saftig P, Gartner J. Cathepsin D deficiency is associated with a human
neurodegenerative disorder. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Jun;78(6):988-98. doi:
10.1086/504159. Epub 2006 Mar 29.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Williams RE, Mole SE. New nomenclature and classification scheme for the
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. Neurology. 2012 Jul 10;79(2):183-91. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0b013e31825f0547.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Degenerative Nerve Diseases
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL)
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page