Linezolid: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Linezolid
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602004.html
Linezolid
pronounced as (li ne' zoh lid)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Linezolid is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria, including pneumonia and infections of the skin. Linezolid is in a class of antibacterials called oxazolidinones. It works by stopping the growth of bacteria.
Antibiotics such as linezolid will not work for colds, flu, and other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Linezolid comes as a tablet and oral suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food twice a day (every 12 hours) for 10 to 28 days. Children 11 years of age and younger usually take linezolid with or without food two to three times a day (every 8 to 12 hours) for 10 to 28 days. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection you have. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take linezolid exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Before using the oral suspension, gently mix it by turning over the bottle three to five times. Do not shake the suspension.
Take linezolid until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. Do not stop taking linezolid without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking linezolid too soon or if you skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking linezolid,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to linezolid, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in the linezolid product you have been prescribed. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients .
Some medications should not be taken with linezolid. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with linezolid. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting linezolid with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking linezolid, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: isocarboxazid (Marplan) phenelzine (Nardil). rasagiline (Azilect), selegiline (Eldepryl, Emsam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate).
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with linezolid: phenylephrine (Sudafed PE; in many cold or decongestant medications) and pseudoephedrine (Sudafed; in many cold or decongestant medications).. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking linezolid. Do not start any of these medications while taking linezolid without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have a chronic (long-lasting) infection, or if you have or have ever had carcinoid syndrome (a condition in which a tumor secretes serotonin). diabetes , high blood pressure, hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid), immune suppression (problems with your immune system), pheochromocytoma (a tumor of the adrenal gland),seizures, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking linezolid, call your doctor.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking linezolid.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking linezolid.
if you have phenylketonuria (PKU, an inherited condition in which a special diet must be followed to prevent damage to your brain that can cause severe intellectual disability), you should know that the oral suspension contains aspartame that forms phenylalanine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Avoid eating or drinking large amounts of foods and beverages containing tyramine while taking linezolid. Tyramine is found in many foods and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, such as beer and red wine; meat, poultry, fish, or cheese that has been smoked, aged, improperly stored, or spoiled; and certain fruits, vegetables, beans, and yeast products that have been pickled or fermented. Talk to your doctor or dietitian about which foods you should avoid during your treatment or if you do not feel well after eating or drinking certain foods while taking linezolid.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Linezolid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
headache
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
change in the way things taste
rash
itching
dizziness
white patches in the mouth
irritation, burning, or itching of the vagina
change in color of the tongue or teeth
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives;rash; itching; difficulty breathing or swallowing; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, or feet; or hoarseness
blistering or peeling skin
repeated nausea and vomiting; fast breathing; confusion; or feeling tired
pain, numbness, or weakness in hands, feet, or other parts of the body
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
unusual bleeding or bruising
changes in color vision, blurred vision, or other changes in vision
seizures
confusion, drowsiness, weakness, difficulty breathing
muscle pain or tenderness
muscle weakness
dark or cola-colored urine
Linezolid may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light and excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Linezolid oral suspension should be used within 21 days.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain blood tests to check your body's response to linezolid.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the linezolid, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zyvox
®
Last Revised -
10/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page