Amlexanox: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Amlexanox
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601017.html
Amlexanox
pronounced as (am lex' an ox)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Amlexanox is no longer available in the US. If you are currently using amlexanox, you should call your doctor to discuss switching to another treatment.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Amlexanox is used to treat ulcers of the mouth called aphthous ulcers or canker sores. It decreases the time ulcers take to heal. Because amlexanox decreases the healing time, it also decreases the pain you feel.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor, dentist, or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Amlexanox comes as a beige-colored paste. Amlexanox should be used as soon as possible after noticing symptoms of an ulcer. Amlexanox is usually applied four times a day, following brushing and flossing after breakfast, lunch, dinner, and at bedtime. Squeeze 1/4 inch (0.6 centimeters) of the paste on your finger. With gentle pressure, dab amlexanox onto each ulcer in the mouth. Wash hands immediately after using amlexanox. Amlexanox is only used until the ulcer has healed, usually within 10 days. Contact your physician or dentist if significant healing has not occurred within 10 days.
Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor, dentist, or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use amlexanox exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor or dentist.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using amlexanox,
tell your doctor or dentist and pharmacist if you are allergic to amlexanox or any other drugs.
Tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using amlexanox. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor or dentist if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using amlexanox, call your doctor or dentist.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Amlexanox may cause side effects. Tell your doctor or dentist if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
slight pain, stinging, or burning of the skin that comes and goes
nausea
diarrhea
If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor or dentist immediately:
rash
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor or dentist. Amlexanox is for external use only. Do not let amlexanox get into your eyes. If it does get into your eyes, rinse them promptly.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription. Tell your doctor or dentist if your ulcers get worse or do not get better within 10 days.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aphthasol
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page