Umbralisib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Umbralisib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621019.html
Umbralisib
pronounced as (um" bra lis' ib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
MEDWATCH ALERT
FDA Drug Safety Communication Posted June 1, 2022
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has removed approval of umbralisib. Studies have continued to show treatment with umbralisib to be associated with a light increased risk of death. The FDA has decided that risk of treatment with umbralisib is greater than any potential benefit.
Health care professionals
should stop prescribing umbralisib and put patients on alternative treatments.
Patients
should talk to your health care professionals about alternative treatments and stop taking umbralisib. Any unused umbralisib can be disposed of using a drug take-back location (
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/disposal-unused-medicines-what-you-should-know/drug-disposal-drug-take-back-locations
) or by taking the following steps:
1. Mix the medicine with an unappealing substance like dirt, cat litter, or coffee grounds; do not crush them
2. Place mixture in a container like a sealed plastic bag
3. Throw away the container in your home trash
4. Remove all personal information from the prescription labels of empty medicine bottles or packaging and then dispose of the bottles
Why is this medication prescribed?
Umbralisib is used to treat marginal zone lymphoma (MZL; a slow growing cancer that begins in a type of white blood cells that normally fight infection) in adults whose cancer has returned or did not respond to a certain type of medication. It is also used to treat follicular lymphoma (FL; a type of cancer that begins in the white blood cells) in adults whose cancer has returned or did not respond to at least three other medications. Umbralisib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Umbralisib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once daily with food. Take umbralisib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take umbralisib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you vomit after taking the medication, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking umbralisib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to umbralisib, aspirin, any other medications, tartrazine (a yellow dye in some processed foods and medications), or any of the ingredients in umbralisib tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have an infection. Also, tell your doctor if have ever had have stomach or intestinal problems or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan on fathering a child. If you are female, you will need to take a pregnancy test before you start treatment and use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for at least 1 month after your final dose. If you are a male, you and your partner should use birth control during your treatment with umbralisib and for 1 month after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking umbralisib, call your doctor immediately. Umbralisib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking umbralisib and for 1 month after your final dose.
you should know that umbralisib may cause fertility problems in men. This may affect your ability to father a child. Talk to your healthcare provider if you have concerns about fertility.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose by less than 12 hours, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it and then take the next dose at the scheduled time. However, if you miss a dose by more than 12 hours, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Umbralisib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
vomiting
nausea
loss of appetite
stomach pain
tiredness
swelling of the face, hands, or feet
muscle, back, neck, or bone pain
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, sore throat, cough, difficulty breathing, wheezing, chills, or other signs of infection
severe diarrhea; blood in your stools or black, tarry stools; pink or brown urine; vomiting blood or coffee ground vomit; or coughing up blood
yellow eyes or skin; abdominal pain; bruising or bleeding; loss of appetite; yellow or brown-colored urine; pale stools; or pain in upper right part of stomach
rash
rash with fever or itching
blisters or peeling skin
painful sores or ulcers on your skin, lips, or mouth
Umbralisib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to umbralisib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ukoniq
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page