Leuprolide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Leuprolide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a685040.html
Leuprolide Injection
pronounced as (loo proe' lide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Leuprolide injection is used to treat
symptoms associated with advanced prostate cancer
central precocious puberty (CPP; a condition causing girls [usually younger than 8 years of age] and boys [usually younger than 9 years of age] to enter puberty too soon, resulting in faster than normal bone growth and development of sexual characteristics)
endometriosis (a condition in which the type of tissue that lines the uterus [womb] grows in other areas of the body and causes pain, heavy or irregular menstruation [periods], and other symptoms)
anemia (a lower-than-normal number of red blood cells) caused by uterine fibroids (noncancerous growths in the uterus).
Leuprolide injection is in a class of medications called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists. It works by decreasing the amount of certain hormones in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Leuprolide injection comes as a long-acting suspension that is injected intramuscularly (into a muscle) by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or clinic and is usually given once a month or every 1, 3, 4, or 6 months depending on the product chosen for you. Leuprolide injection also comes as a long-acting suspension that is injected subcutaneously (just under the skin) by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or clinic and is usually given every 1, 3, 4, or 6 months depending on the product chosen for you. Your doctor will select the best product for your condition and tell you how long your treatment will last. When used in children with precocious puberty, leuprolide injection will likely be stopped by your child's doctor before 11 years of age in girls and 12 years of age in boys.
Leuprolide may cause an increase in certain hormones in the first few weeks after injection. Your doctor will monitor you carefully for any new or worsening symptoms during this time.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
Leuprolide injection may also be used to stop ovulation in certain women with hormone-positive breast cancer that have not yet undergone menopause (stopping of menstrual periods). This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving leuprolide injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had osteoporosis (condition where bones are thin and more likely to break); if you have a history of drinking alcohol or using tobacco products for a long period of time; or if you have or have ever had depression, seizures, brain tumors, cancer that has spread to the spine (backbone), diabetes, a blockage that causes difficulty urinating, blood in your urine, a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death), (clogging or weakening of the blood vessels within the brain or leading to the brain, heart disease, stroke, high levels of cholesterol in your blood or a low level of potassium, calcium, or magnesium in your blood.
you should know that leuprolide is not to be used in women who are pregnant, can become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. Tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You may be given a pregnancy test prior to starting treatment with leuprolide injection. You will need to use a reliable nonhormonal method of birth control to prevent pregnancy while you are receiving leuprolide injection. Talk to your doctor about the types of birth control that are right for you, and continue to use birth control even though you should not have regular menstrual periods during your treatment. If you think you have become pregnant while receiving leuprolide injection, call your doctor immediately. Leuprolide injection can harm the fetus.
you should know that leuprolide injection may impair fertility (ability to make babies) in men
you should know that some patients who receive leuprolide injection may have increased difficulty controlling emotions, worsening mood or anxiety, or development of any new psychiatric illness. Report any new or worsening symptoms to your doctor, nurse, or pharmacist.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive an injection of leuprolide, you should call your healthcare provider right away to reschedule your appointment.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Leuprolide injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
hot flashes (a sudden wave of mild or intense body heat), sweating, or clamminess
breast tenderness, pain, or change in breast size in both men and women
vaginal discharge, dryness, or itching in women
spotting (light vaginal bleeding) or menstruation (periods)
decrease in size of testicles
decrease in sexual ability or desire
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
pain, burning, bruising, redness, or hardening at place where injection was given
change in weight
muscle or joint pain
runny nose, cough, sore throat, or flu-like symptoms
fever
stomach pain
constipation
headache
acne
weakness
dizziness
nausea
increase in frequency of urination or having to urinate at night
night sweats
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
itching, rash, or hives; difficulty breathing or swallowing
fever, achiness, sores in the mouth, growing rash, swollen lymph nodes
pain in the arms, back, chest, neck, or jaw
dizziness or fainting
slow or difficult speech; weakness, numbness, or inability to move an arm or leg
bone pain
painful, frequent, or difficult urination
blood in urine
extreme thirst, weakness, dry mouth, nausea, vomiting, breath that smells fruity
decreased consciousness
sudden headache
blurred vision or vision changes
difficulty moving eyes or drooping eyelids
confusion
seizures
Leuprolide injection may cause a decrease in the density of your bones which can increase the chance of broken bones. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication and to find out what you can do to decrease these risks.
In children receiving leuprolide injection for precocious puberty, new or worsening symptoms of sexual development may occur during the first few weeks of treatment. In girls receiving leuprolide injection for precocious puberty, the onset of menstruation or spotting (light vaginal bleeding) may occur during the first two months of treatment. If bleeding continues beyond the second month, call your doctor.
Leuprolide may worsen or cause certain metabolic disorders such as diabetes or hyperglycemia (elevated blood glucose), hyperlipidemia, or cirrhosis or non-alcoholic liver disease. Your doctor will monitor your cholesterol, glucose and liver functions carefully during treatment. Talk to your doctor about any concerns you may have before or during treatment.
Leuprolide injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests and take certain measurements to check your body's response to leuprolide injection. Your blood sugar and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) may also be checked regularly.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about leuprolide injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Camcevi
®
Eligard
®
Fensolvi
®
Lupron
®
Lupron Depot
®
Lupron Depot-PED
®
Lupaneta Pack
®
(as a combination product containing Leuprolide, Norethindrone)
Other names
Leuprorelin Acetate
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page