Lumateperone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lumateperone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620014.html
Lumateperone
pronounced as (loo" ma te' per one)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Studies have shown that older adults with dementia (a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities and that may cause changes in mood and personality) who take antipsychotics (medications for mental illness) such as lumateperone have an increased chance of death during treatment. Older adults with dementia may also have a greater chance of having a stroke or mini-stroke during treatment.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain tests to check your body's response to lumateperone.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lumateperone is used to treat the symptoms of schizophrenia (a mental illness that causes disturbed or unusual thinking, loss of interest in life, and strong or inappropriate emotions). Lumateperone is in a class of medications called atypical antipsychotics. It works by changing the activity of certain natural substances in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Lumateperone comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food once daily. Take lumateperone at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take lumateperone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Lumateperone may help control your symptoms, but it will not cure your condition. It may take several weeks or longer before you feel the full benefit of lumateperone. Continue to take lumateperone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking lumateperone without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking lumateperone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lumateperone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in lumateperone capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking lumateperone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with lumateperone: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking lumateperone. Do not start this medication while taking lumateperone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have severe diarrhea or vomiting or you think you may be dehydrated. Also, tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease, heart failure, a heart attack, an irregular heartbeat, high or low blood pressure, a stroke, or a ministroke; any condition that makes it difficult for you to swallow; seizures; trouble keeping your balance; diabetes; a low number of white blood cells; dyslipidemia (high cholesterol levels); or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, especially if you are in the last few months of your pregnancy, or if you plan to become pregnant or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking lumateperone, call your doctor. Lumateperone may cause problems in newborns following delivery if it is taken during the last months of pregnancy.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breastfeed while taking lumateperone.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking lumateperone.
you should know that lumateperone may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication. Do not drink alcohol while taking lumateperone.
you should know that lumateperone may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking lumateperone. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that lumateperone may make it harder for your body to cool down when it gets very hot. Tell your doctor if you plan to exercise or be exposed to extreme heat.
you should know that you may experience hyperglycemia (increases in your blood sugar) while you are taking this medication, even if you do not already have diabetes. If you have schizophrenia, you are more likely to develop diabetes than people who do not have schizophrenia, and taking lumateperone or similar medications may increase this risk. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking lumateperone: extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, or weakness. It is very important to call your doctor as soon as you have any of these symptoms, because high blood sugar can cause a serious condition called ketoacidosis. Ketoacidosis may become life-threatening if it is not treated at an early stage. Symptoms of ketoacidosis include: dry mouth, nausea and vomiting, shortness of breath, breath that smells fruity, and decreased consciousness.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat grapefruit while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it with food. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lumateperone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
extreme tiredness or fatigue
weight gain
nausea
dry mouth
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING or the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS sections, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, hives, or itching
problems with coordination or increased falls
unusual movements of your face or body that you cannot control
sore throat, fever, chills, or other signs of infection
fever; stiff muscles; sweating; confusion; sweating; or fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
tightening of neck muscles or throat; or difficulty breathing or swallowing
seizures
Lumateperone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Caplyta
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page