Diflorasone Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Diflorasone Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602019.html
Diflorasone Topical
pronounced as (dye flor' a sone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Diflorasone is used to treat the itching, redness, dryness, crusting, scaling, inflammation, and discomfort of various skin conditions, including psoriasis (a skin disease in which red, scaly patches form on some areas of the body and eczema (a skin disease that causes the skin to be dry and itchy and to sometimes develop red, scaly rashes). Diflorasone is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by activating natural substances in the skin to reduce swelling, redness, and itching.
How should this medicine be used?
Diflorasone comes as a cream and an ointment to apply to the skin. It is usually applied to the affected area one to three times a day. To help you remember to use diflorasone, apply it around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use diflorasone exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To use diflorasone topical, apply a small amount the ointment or cream to cover the affected area of skin with a thin film.
This medication is only for use on the skin. Do not let diflorasone topical get into your eyes or mouth and do not swallow it.Avoid use on the face, in the genital and rectal areas, and in skin creases and armpits unless directed by your doctor.
If you are using diflorasone on a child's diaper area, do not use tight-fitting diapers or plastic pants. Such use may increase side effects.
Do not apply other skin preparations or products on the treated area without talking with your doctor.
Do not wrap or bandage the treated area unless your doctor tells you that you should. Such use may increase side effects.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using diflorasone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to diflorasone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in diflorasone topical products. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking.
tell your doctor if you have an infection or any other skin problems or have ever had diabetes or Cushing's syndrome (an abnormal condition that is caused by excess hormones [corticosteroids]).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using diflorasone, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using betamethasone topical.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Diflorasone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, itching, irritation, redness, or drying or cracking of the skin
acne
rash
increased hair growth
change in skin color
bruising or shiny skin
tiny red bumps or rash around the mouth
small white or red bumps on the skin
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
redness, swelling, oozing pus or other signs of skin infection in the place where you applied diflorasone
changes in the way fat is spread around the body
sudden weight gain
unusual tiredness
muscle weakness
depression and irritability
Children who use diflorasone topical may have an increased risk of side effects including slowed growth and delayed weight gain. Talk to your doctor about the risks of applying medication to your child's skin..
Diflorasone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows diflorasone topical, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to diflorasone.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Do not use this medication for a skin condition other than the one for which it was prescribed. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Florone
®
¶
Psorcon
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page