Saquinavir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Saquinavir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a696001.html
Saquinavir
pronounced as (sa kwin' a veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Saquinavir is used in combination with ritonavir (Norvir) and other medications to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Saquinavir is in a class of medications called protease inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood. Although saquinavir does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses such as serious infections or cancer. Taking these medications along with practicing safer sex and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of transmitting the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Saquinavir comes as a capsule and a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken at the same time as ritonavir (Norvir) two times a day within 2 hours after a full meal. It may be easier to remember to take saquinavir if you take it with meals. Take saquinavir at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take saquinavir exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not chew, or crush them.
If you are not able to swallow the capsule whole, you can take saquinavir by opening the capsule and mixing the contents with sugar syrup, sorbitol, or jam. To prepare each dose, add 3 teaspoons (15 mL) of sugar syrup, sorbitol, or jam to an empty container. Open the saquinavir capsule and add the contents to the container. Stir the mixture for 30 to 60 seconds. If you used cold syrup, sorbitol, or jam, wait for the mixture to come to room temperature before eating. Be sure to eat the entire mixture so that you receive the full dose.
Continue to take saquinavir even if you feel well. Do not stop taking saquinavir without talking to your doctor. If you miss doses, take less than the prescribed dose or stop taking saquinavir, your condition may become more difficult to treat.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with saquinavir and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
Saquinavir is sometimes used with ritonavir (Norvir) and other medications to help prevent infection in healthcare workers or other people who were exposed to HIV. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking saquinavir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to saquinavir, any other medications, lactose, or any of the other ingredients in saquinavir capsules or tablets. Your doctor may tell you not to take saquinavir. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with saquinavir. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with saquinavir. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting saquinavir with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking saquinavir please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with saquinavir: St. John's wort; garlic; omeprazole (Prilosec). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking saquinavir. Do not start any of these medications while taking saquinavir without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, and if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had diabetes. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an irregular heartbeat, high cholesterol or triglycerides (fats in the blood); hemophilia (a bleeding disorder); conditions in which the body is not able to produce enough lactase or cannot tolerate lactose, or heart or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking saquinavir, call your doctor. You should not breastfeed if you are infected with HIV or are taking saquinavir.
you should know that saquinavir may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking saquinavir. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking saquinavir.
you should be aware that your body fat may increase or move to different areas of your body, such as your upper back, neck (''buffalo hump''), breasts, and around your stomach. You may notice a loss of body fat from your face, legs, and arms.
you should know that you may experience hyperglycemia (increases in your blood sugar) while you are taking this medication, even if you do not already have diabetes. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking saquinavir: extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, or weakness. It is very important to call your doctor as soon as you have any of these symptoms, because high blood sugar that is not treated can cause a serious condition called ketoacidosis. Ketoacidosis may become life-threatening if it is not treated at an early stage. Symptoms of ketoacidosis include dry mouth, nausea and vomiting, shortness of breath, breath that smells fruity, and decreased consciousness.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body or cause other conditions to occur. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections or conditions. If you have new or worsening symptoms after starting treatment with saquinavir, be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Saquinavir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
stomach pain
nausea
vomiting
constipation
tiredness
back pain
dry lips or skin
fever
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, itching, swelling of eyes, face, mouth, throat, or lips, difficulty breathing or swallowing
blistering or peeling skin
yellowing of the skin or eyes, loss of appetite, flu like symptoms, extreme tiredness, dark colored urine, light colored stools, pain in the upper right part of the stomach
dizziness, lightheadedness, slow, irregular, or pounding heartbeat, fainting
Saquinavir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
throat pain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to saquinavir. Your doctor may also order an electrocardiogram (ECG; test that measures the electrical activity in the heart) before and during your treatment.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Invirase
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page