Ergoloid Mesylates: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ergoloid Mesylates
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682097.html
Ergoloid Mesylates
pronounced as (er' goe loid) (mes' i lates)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
This medication, a combination of several drugs that belong to a group of drugs called ergoloid mesylates, is used to relieve the signs and symptoms of decreased mental capacity due to the aging process.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
This medication comes as a tablet to take by mouth or dissolve under the tongue and a liquid to take by mouth. It is usually taken three times a day. Take ergoloid mesylates with food or milk to prevent stomach upset. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take ergoloid mesylates exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To use the sublingual tablets, place a tablet under your tongue and allow it to dissolve. Do not chew or swallow the sublingual tablet. Do not eat or drink while the tablet is under your tongue.
The liquid comes with a specially marked dropper for measuring the dose. Ask your pharmacist to show you how to use the dropper if you have difficulty. The liquid may be mixed with water, juice, milk, or food.
Continue to take ergoloid mesylates even if you feel well. This drug must be taken regularly for a few weeks before its full effect is felt.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ergoloid mesylates,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ergoloid mesylates, other ergot alkaloids (Cafergot, Ergostat, Bellergal), or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a mental illness.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking ergoloid mesylates, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ergoloid mesylates may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
vomiting
loss of appetite
irritation under the tongue (with sublingual tablets)
stuffy or runny nose
lightheadedness
flushing (feeling of warmth)
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
itching
rash
blurred vision
trouble breathing
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature, away from light and excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Alkergot
®
¶
Circanol
®
¶
Gerimal
®
¶
Hydergine
®
Other names
Dihydroergotoxine
dihydrogenated ergot alkaloids
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
05/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page