Goserelin Implant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Goserelin Implant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601002.html
Goserelin Implant
pronounced as (goe' se rel in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Goserelin implant is used to treat certain types of prostate cancer and breast cancer. It is also used to manage endometriosis (a condition in which tissue similar to endometrium (uterus lining) grows in other areas of the pelvis and causes pain, heavy or irregular periods, and other symptoms) and abnormal bleeding of the uterus. Goserelin implant is in a class of medications called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists. It works by decreasing the amount of certain hormones in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Goserelin comes as an implant to be inserted subcutaneously (under the skin) in your stomach area by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or clinic. It is inserted either every 4 or 12 weeks depending on the strength of goserelin in the implant. The length of your treatment depends on the condition being treated and your response to the medication. Your doctor will determine how long you should continue to receive goserelin implant.
Goserelin may cause an increase in certain hormones in the first few weeks after insertion of the implant. Your doctor will monitor you carefully for any new or worsening symptoms during this time.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving goserelin implant,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have a history of drinking alcohol or using tobacco products for a long period of time, or if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had osteoporosis (a condition in which the bones become thin and weak and break easily) or a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death) or if you have or have ever had a compressed spinal cord, diabetes, depression, unusual vaginal bleeding, blockage that causes difficulty urinating(in men), heart failure, or heart or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. Goserelin implant should not be used in pregnant women, except for treatment of advanced breast cancer. You may be required to have a pregnancy test prior to receiving goserelin implant. Use appropriate birth control during and for 12 weeks after treatment with goserelin implant. Talk to your doctor about what birth control is right for you. Call your doctor right away if you think you have become pregnant during your treatment. Goserelin implant may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breast-feed during your treatment with goserelin implant.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive an implant of goserelin, call your healthcare provider right away to reschedule your appointment.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Goserelin implant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
hot flashes (a sudden wave of mild or intense body heat); sudden reddening of the face, neck, or upper chest
sweating
scaly patches, red skin, and dandruff, mostly on the scalp and face; acne
decrease in breast size in women
decreased sexual desire or ability
vaginal discharge, dryness, or itching
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
unable to control emotions and frequent mood changes
pain, itching, swelling, or redness at the place where the implant was inserted
bone pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
hives; rash; itching; difficulty breathing or swallowing
shortness of breath; chest pain; dizziness; pain in the arms, back, neck, or jaw
slow or difficult speech; weakness or numbness of an arm or leg; confusion
painful or difficult urination
frequent urination; extreme thirst; dry mouth; weakness; blurred vision;
nausea; vomiting; breath that smells fruity; decreased consciousness
stomach pain, or bloating
new or worsening depression
Goserelin implant may cause a decrease in the density of your bones which can increase the chance of broken bones and fractures. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication and to find out what you can do to decrease these risks.
Goserelin implant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to goserelin implant.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving goserelin implant.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about goserelin implant.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zoladex
®
Other names
Decapeptide I
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page