Nintedanib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nintedanib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615009.html
Nintedanib
pronounced as (nin ted' a nib )
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nintedanib is used to treat idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF; scarring of the lungs with an unknown cause). It is also used to treat certain types of chronic fibrosing interstitial lung diseases (ILD; an ongoing disease in which there is increased scarring of the lungs). Nintedanib is also used to slow the rate of decline in lung function in people with systemic sclerosis-associated interstitial lung disease (SSc-ILD; also known as scleroderma-associated ILD: a disease in which there is scarring of the lungs that is often fatal). Nintedanib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of enzymes involved in causing fibrosis.
How should this medicine be used?
Nintedanib comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food every 12 hours (twice a day). Take nintedanib capsules at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take nintedanib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole with liquid; do not chew or crush them.
Your doctor may need to decrease your dose or stop treatment if you experience certain severe side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking nintedanib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nintedanib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in nintedanib capsules. Ask your pharmacist or check the manufacturer's patient information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking nintedanib.Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with nintedanib: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking nintedanib. Do not start this medication while taking nintedanib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has ever had a bleeding problem, if you have or have ever had liver or heart disease, diverticular disease (diverticulitis; small pouches in the lining of the large intestine that can become inflamed), or blood clots, and if you have had recent abdominal surgery.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or can possibly become pregnant. You should not start taking nintedanib until a pregnancy test has shown that you are not pregnant. You should not become pregnant while you are taking nintedanib; the medication may harm your unborn baby. Nintedanib may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, or injections), so you should not use these as your only method of birth control. You must also use a barrier method of birth control (device that blocks sperm from entering the uterus such as a condom or a diaphragm). Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment and for at least 3 months after your last dose of nintedanib. If you become pregnant while taking nintedanib, call your doctor immediately.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Cigarette smoking may decrease the effectiveness of this medication. You should stop smoking before you start taking nintedanib and avoid smoking during your treatment.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose of nintedanib, skip the missed dose and continue your regular schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nintedanib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
decreased appetite
weight loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
diarrhea
extreme tiredness
unusual bleeding or bruising
lack of energy
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark or brown (tea-colored) urine
chest pain
pain in your arms, back, neck, or jaw
shortness of breath
numbness or weakness on one side of your body
difficulty speaking
headache
dizziness
wounds that do not heal
pain or swelling in your stomach area, nausea, vomiting, fever, chills, or blood in your stool
rash
itching
Nintedanib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to nintedanib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ofev
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page