Pneumococcal Polysaccharide Vaccine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pneumococcal Polysaccharide Vaccine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607022.html
Pneumococcal Polysaccharide Vaccine
Why get vaccinated?
Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23)
Talk with your health care provider
What are the risks of a vaccine reaction?
What if there is a serious problem?
How can I learn more?
Brand names
Other names
Why get vaccinated?
Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23)
can prevent
pneumococcal disease
.
Pneumococcal disease
refers to any illness caused by pneumococcal bacteria. These bacteria can cause many types of illnesses, including pneumonia, which is an infection of the lungs. Pneumococcal bacteria are one of the most common causes of pneumonia.
Besides pneumonia, pneumococcal bacteria can also cause:
Ear infections
Sinus infections
Meningitis (infection of the tissue covering the brain and spinal cord)
Bacteremia (bloodstream infection)
Anyone can get pneumococcal disease, but children under 5 years of age, people with certain medical conditions, adults 50 years or older, and cigarette smokers are at the highest risk.
Most pneumococcal infections are mild. However, some can result in long-term problems, such as brain damage or hearing loss. Meningitis, bacteremia, and pneumonia caused by pneumococcal disease can be fatal.
Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23)
PPSV23 protects against 23 types of bacteria that cause pneumococcal disease.
PPSV23 is recommended for:
Adults
50 years or older
who received pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV15)
Anyone
2 years or older with certain medical conditions that can lead to an increased risk for pneumococcal disease
Children 2–18 years of age in certain high-risk groups may receive one or more doses of PPSV23 if they completed their routine pneumococcal vaccine series with pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13 or PCV15) before 6 years of age. Your health care provider can give you more information.
People 50 years or older should get a dose of PPSV23 one year after receiving pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV15) for routine pneumococcal vaccination.
Adults 19 to 50 years of age in certain high-risk groups may receive a dose of PPSV23 if they received PCV15. Your health care provider can give you more information.
Talk with your health care provider
Tell your vaccine provider if the person getting the vaccine:
Has had an
allergic reaction after a previous dose of PPSV23, or has any severe, life-threatening allergies
.
In some cases, your health care provider may decide to postpone PPSV23 vaccination to a future visit.
People with minor illnesses, such as a cold, may be vaccinated. People who are moderately or severely ill should usually wait until they recover before getting PPSV23.
Your health care provider can give you more information.
What are the risks of a vaccine reaction?
Redness or pain where the shot is given, feeling tired, fever, or muscle aches can happen after PPSV23.
People sometimes faint after medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your provider if you feel dizzy or have vision changes or ringing in the ears.
As with any medicine, there is a very remote chance of a vaccine causing a severe allergic reaction, other serious injury, or death.
What if there is a serious problem?
An allergic reaction could occur after the vaccinated person leaves the clinic. If you see signs of a severe allergic reaction (hives, swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, or weakness), call
9-1-1
and get the person to the nearest hospital.
For other signs that concern you, call your health care provider. Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself. Visit the VAERS website at
https://www.vaers.hhs.gov
or call
1-800-822-7967
.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions, and VAERS staff do not give medical advice.
How can I learn more?
Ask your health care provider.Call your local or state health department.Contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Call
1-800-232-4636
(
1-800-CDC-INFO
) or visit CDC's website at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines
.
Brand names
Pneumovax
®
23
Other names
PPV23
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page