DNMT3A overgrowth syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
DNMT3A overgrowth syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/dnmt3a-overgrowth-syndrome/
DNMT3A overgrowth syndrome
Description
DNMT3A
overgrowth syndrome is a disorder characterized by faster than normal growth before and after birth, subtle differences in facial features, and intellectual disability.
Individuals with
DNMT3A
overgrowth syndrome are often longer than normal at birth and are taller than their peers throughout life. Many affected individuals become overweight in late childhood or adolescence. They may also have an abnormally large head size (
macrocephaly
).
The characteristic facial appearance of individuals with
DNMT3A
overgrowth syndrome includes
a round face
; thick, horizontal eyebrows; and narrowed openings of the eyes (narrowed palpebral fissures). Additionally, the upper front teeth are often larger than normal.
Intellectual disability in
DNMT3A
overgrowth syndrome ranges from mild to severe. Individuals may have features of
autism spectrum disorder
, which are characterized by impaired communication and socialization skills.
Individuals with
DNMT3A
overgrowth syndrome may have other signs and symptoms, including a rounded upper back that also curves to the side (
kyphoscoliosis
), heart defects, flat feet (
pes planus
), weak muscle tone (hypotonia), or joints that are loose and very flexible (
hypermobile joints
). Psychological disorders such as
depression
, anxiety, or
obsessive-compulsive disorder
can also occur in this disorder.
Frequency
The prevalence of
DNMT3A
overgrowth syndrome is unknown. More than 20 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
Causes
As its name suggests, mutations in the
DNMT3A
gene cause
DNMT3A
overgrowth syndrome. The
DNMT3A
gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called DNA methyltransferase 3 alpha. This enzyme is involved in DNA methylation, which is the addition of methyl groups, consisting of one carbon atom and three hydrogen atoms, to DNA molecules. DNA methylation is important in many cellular functions. These include regulating gene activity and certain chemical reactions and controlling the processing of chemicals that relay signals in the nervous system (neurotransmitters). DNA methyltransferase 3 alpha is particularly important for establishing DNA methylation patterns during development before birth.
Some
DNMT3A
gene mutations that cause
DNMT3A
overgrowth syndrome lead to a decrease in normal enzyme function. As a result, there is a reduction in DNA methylation, particularly affecting DNA methylation before birth. It is unclear how other mutations affect protein function. Decreased DNA methylation likely disrupts the normal regulation of important developmental genes, although how these change cause the specific features of
DNMT3A
overgrowth syndrome is unknown.
Learn more about the gene associated with DNMT3A overgrowth syndrome
DNMT3A
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from
one affected parent
. Other cases result from
new mutations in the gene
and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome
TBRS
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Tatton-Brown-Rahman overgrowth syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
TATTON-BROWN-RAHMAN SYNDROME; TBRS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Lemire G, Gauthier J, Soucy JF, Delrue MA. A case of familial transmission of
the newly described DNMT3A-Overgrowth Syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2017
Jul;173(7):1887-1890. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38119. Epub 2017 Apr 27.
Citation on PubMed
Okamoto N, Toribe Y, Shimojima K, Yamamoto T. Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome due
to 2p23 microdeletion. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 May;170A(5):1339-42. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.37588. Epub 2016 Feb 11.
Citation on PubMed
Ostrowski PJ, Tatton-Brown K. Tatton-Brown-Rahman Syndrome. 2022 Jun 30. In:
Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK581652/
Citation on PubMed
Tatton-Brown K, Seal S, Ruark E, Harmer J, Ramsay E, Del Vecchio Duarte S,
Zachariou A, Hanks S, O'Brien E, Aksglaede L, Baralle D, Dabir T, Gener B, Goudie
D, Homfray T, Kumar A, Pilz DT, Selicorni A, Temple IK, Van Maldergem L,
Yachelevich N; Childhood Overgrowth Consortium; van Montfort R, Rahman N.
Mutations in the DNA methyltransferase gene DNMT3A cause an overgrowth syndrome
with intellectual disability. Nat Genet. 2014 Apr;46(4):385-8. doi:
10.1038/ng.2917. Epub 2014 Mar 9.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Xin B, Cruz Marino T, Szekely J, Leblanc J, Cechner K, Sency V, Wensel C,
Barabas M, Therriault V, Wang H. Novel DNMT3A germline mutations are associated
with inherited Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome. Clin Genet. 2017 Apr;91(4):623-628.
doi: 10.1111/cge.12878. Epub 2017 Jan 22.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Growth Disorders
Scoliosis
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Increased head circumference
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page