Hepatitis B Vaccine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Hepatitis B Vaccine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607014.html
Hepatitis B Vaccine
Why get vaccinated against hepatitis B?
Who should receive the hepatitis B vaccine and when?
Talk with your health care provider
What are the risks from hepatitis B vaccine?
What if there is a serious problem?
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
How can I learn more?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Other names
Why get vaccinated against hepatitis B?
Hepatitis B vaccine can prevent hepatitis B. Hepatitis B is a liver disease that can cause mild illness lasting a few weeks, or it can lead to a serious, lifelong illness.
Acute hepatitis B virus infection
is a short-term illness that can lead to fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, jaundice (yellow skin or eyes, dark urine, clay-colored bowel movements), and pain in the muscles, joints, and stomach.
Chronic hepatitis B virus infection
is a long-term illness that occurs when the hepatitis B virus remains in a person's body. Most people who go on to develop chronic hepatitis B do not have symptoms, but it is still very serious and can lead to liver damage (cirrhosis), liver cancer, and death. Chronically infected people can spread hepatitis B virus to others, even if they do not feel or look sick themselves.
Hepatitis B is spread when blood, semen, or other body fluid infected with the hepatitis B virus enters the body of a person who is not infected. People can become infected with the virus through:
Birth (if a pregnant woman has hepatitis B, their baby can become infected)
Sharing items such as razors or toothbrushes with an infected person
Contact with the blood or open sores of an infected person
Sex with an infected partner
Sharing needles, syringes, or other drug-injection equipment
Exposure to blood from needlesticks or other sharp instruments
Most people who are vaccinated with hepatitis B vaccine are immune for life..
Who should receive the hepatitis B vaccine and when?
Hepatitis B vaccine is usually given as 2, 3, or 4 shots.
Infants
should get their first dose of hepatitis B vaccine at birth and will usually complete the series at 6-18 months of age. The birth dose of hepatitis B vaccine is an important part of preventing longterm illness in infants and the spread of hepatitis B in the United States.
Children and adolescents
younger than 19 years of age who have not yet gotten the vaccine should also be vaccinated.
Adults
19 through 59 years old who have not yet gotten the vaccine should also be vaccinated.
Adults
60 years of age and older who were not vaccinated previously and are at risk for getting hepatitis B should get the vaccine.
Adults
60 years of age and older who were not vaccinated previously,are not at risk for getting hepatitis B and want to be protected against hepatitis B can also get the vaccine.
Hepatitis B vaccine may be given as a stand-alone vaccine, or as part of a combination vaccine (a type of vaccine that combines more than one vaccine together into one shot).
Hepatitis B vaccine may be given at the same time as other vaccines.
Talk with your health care provider
Tell your vaccination provider if the person getting the vaccine:
Has had an allergic reaction after a previous dose of hepatitis B vaccine, or has any severe, life-threatening allergies
In some cases, your health care provider may decide to postpone hepatitis B vaccination until a future visit.
Pregnant or breastfeeding women who have not yet gotten the vaccine should be vaccinated. Pregnancy or breastfeeding are not reasons to avoid hepatitis B vaccination.
People with minor illnesses, such as a cold, may be vaccinated. People who are moderately or severely ill should usually wait until they recover before getting hepatitis B vaccine.
Your health care provider can give you more information.
What are the risks from hepatitis B vaccine?
Soreness where the shot was given or fever, headache, and fatigue (feeling tired) can happen after hepatitis B vaccination.
People sometimes faint after medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your provider if you feel dizzy or have vision changes or ringing in the ears.
As with any medicine, there is a very remote chance of a vaccine causing a severe allergic reaction, other serious injury, or death.
What if there is a serious problem?
An allergic reaction could occur after the vaccinated person leaves the clinic. If you see signs of a severe allergic reaction (hives, swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, or weakness), call 9-1-1 and get the person to the nearest hospital.
For other signs that concern you, call your health care provider.
Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself. Visit the VAERS website at
https://www.vaers.hhs.gov
or call
1-800-822-7967
.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions, and VAERS staff members do not give medical advice.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a federal program that was created to compensate people who may have been injured by certain vaccines. Claims regarding alleged injury or death due to vaccination have a time limit for filing, which may be as short as two years. Visit the VICP website at
https://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation
or call
1-800-338-2382
to learn about the program and about filing a claim.
How can I learn more?
Ask your healthcare provider. He or she can give you the vaccine package insert or suggest other sources of information.
Call your local or state health department.
Visit the website of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for vaccine package inserts and additional information at
https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/vaccines
.
Contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Call
1-800-232-4636
(
1-800-CDC-INFO
) or visit CDC's website at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines
.
Brand names
Engerix-B
®
Heplisav-B
®
Recombivax HB
®
PREHEVBRIO
®
Brand names of combination products
Comvax
®
(containing Haemophilus influenzae type b, Hepatitis B Vaccine)
Pediarix
®
(containing Diphtheria, Tetanus Toxoids, Acellular Pertussis, Hepatitis B, Polio Vaccine)
Twinrix
®
(containing Hepatitis A Vaccine, Hepatitis B Vaccine)
Vaxelis
®
(containing Diphtheria, Tetanus Toxoids, Acellular Pertussis, Polio Vaccine, Haemophilus influenzae type b, and Hepatitis B Vaccine)
Other names
DTaP-HepB-IPV
DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB
HepA-HepB
HepB
Hib-HepB
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page