Revumenib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Revumenib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624077.html
Revumenib
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Revumenib may cause a serious or life-threatening group of symptoms called differentiation syndrome. Your doctor will monitor you carefully to see whether you are developing this syndrome. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: fever; cough; rash; sudden weight gain; decreased urination; swelling of arms, legs, neck, groin, or underarm area; dizziness or lightheadedness, shortness of breath, difficulty breathing, severe headache, or confusion. These symptoms may occur 3 days to 6 weeks after starting treatment with revumenib. At the first sign that you are developing differentiation syndrome, your doctor will prescribe medications to treat the syndrome, and may tell you to stop taking revumenib for some time.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with revumenib and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Revumenib is used to treat a certain type of acute leukemia (a type of cancer of blood cells that begins in the bone marrow) that has worsened or returned after treatment with other chemotherapy medications. Revumenib is in a class of medications called menin inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of a certain naturally occurring substance that may be needed to help cancer cells multiply.
How should this medicine be used?
Revumenib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day, about 12 hours apart. Revumenib may be taken without food or with a low-fat meal (containing about 400 calories and less than 20% of calories from fat). Take revumenib at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take revumenib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with a cup of water; do not split or chew them.
If you are giving the medication to a child or if you cannot swallow the tablets whole, the tablets may be crushed with a pill crusher and dispersed in water. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to prepare and take revumenib tablets dispersed in water. Carefully read the written instructions for use that come with revumenib tablets.
If you vomit after taking revumenib do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may decrease your dose or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment depending on if you experience any side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with revumenib.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking revumenib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to revumenib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in revumenib tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking revumenib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with revumenib: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking revumenib. Do not start any of these medications while taking revumenib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death), heart failure or other heart problems, a low level of magnesium or potassium in your blood, bleeding problems, blood clots, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are taking revumenib. You may be required to have a pregnancy test at least 7 days before you start treatment. You or your partner should use birth control during your treatment and for 4 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking revumenib call your doctor. Revumenib may harm the fetus.tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with revumenib and for 1 week after your final dose.you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking revumenib.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking revumenib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your normal dosing schedule. Do not take 2 doses within 12 hours. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Revumenib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
constipation
diarrhea
decreased appetite
muscle, joint, or bone pain
tiredness
swelling in the arms and legs
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
dizziness, lightheadedness, or fainting
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
nosebleeds or bleeding from your gums; coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds; unusual bleeding or bruising; increased menstrual flow or vaginal bleeding; pink, red, or dark brown urine; or red or tarry black bowel movements
sore throat, cough, fever, chills, or other signs of infection
frequent, urgent, or painful urination
warm, red, or painful skin or sores on your body
pain, swelling, warmth, redness, or tenderness in one leg only
shortness of breath, coughing up blood, or sudden sharp chest pain
sudden severe headache; difficulty speaking or understanding; weakness or numbness in your face, arm or leg, especially on one side of your body; or sudden difficulty seeing in one or both eyes
Revumenib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and laboratory. Your doctor will order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with revumenib. Your doctor will also order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to revumenib. Your doctor may also order an electrocardiogram (ECG; test that measures the electrical activity in the heart) before and during your treatment.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking revumenib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Revuforj
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page