Granisetron Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Granisetron Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a694011.html
Granisetron Injection
pronounced as (gra ni' se tron)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Granisetron immediate-release injection is used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy and to prevent and treat nausea and vomiting that may occur after surgery. Granisetron extended-release (long-acting) injection is used with other medications to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy that may occur immediately or several days after receiving chemotherapy medications. Granisetron is in a class of medications called 5-HT
3
receptor antagonists. It works by blocking serotonin, a natural substance in the body that causes nausea and vomiting.
How should this medicine be used?
Granisetron immediate-release injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) and granisetron extended-release injection comes as a liquid to be injected subcutaneously (under the skin). To prevent nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy, granisetron immediate-release and extended-release injection(s) are usually given by a healthcare provider in a hospital or clinic within 30 minutes before the start of chemotherapy. To prevent nausea and vomiting caused by surgery, granisetron immediate-release is usually given during surgery. To treat nausea and vomiting caused by surgery, granisetron is given as soon as nausea and vomiting occurs.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using granisetron injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to granisetron, alosetron (Lotronex), dolasetron (Anzemet), ondansetron (Zofran, Zuplenz), palonosetron (Aloxi, in Akynzeo), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in granisetron injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using granisetron injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you more carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have recently had stomach surgery or have constipation. Also, tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had long QT syndrome (condition that increases the risk of developing an irregular heartbeat that may cause fainting or sudden death), another type of irregular heartbeat or heart rhythm problem, electrolyte imbalance, or kidney or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using granisetron injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Granisetron injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
constipation
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical treatment:
hives
rash
flushing
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
shortness of breath
swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, tongue, or throat
chest pain
injection site redness, swelling, or warmth with or without fever (for the extended-release injection)
injection site bleeding, bruising, or pain (for the extended-release injection)
stomach-area pain or swelling
dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting
changes in heartbeat
agitation, hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist). changes in mental status, or coma (loss of consciousness)
tremors, loss of coordination, or stiff or twitching muscles
fever
excessive sweating
confusion
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea
seizures
Granisetron injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
headache
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test (especially those that involve methylene blue), tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving granisetron injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sustol
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page