Telotristat: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Telotristat
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617029.html
Telotristat
pronounced as (tel oh' tri stat)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Telotristat is used in combination with another medication (a somatostatin analog [SSA] such as lanreotide, octreotide, pasireotide) to control diarrhea caused by carcinoid tumors (slow-growing tumors that release natural substances that can cause symptoms like diarrhea) in patients with diarrhea not controlled by a somatostatin analog alone. Telotristat is in a class of medications called antidiarrheal agents. It works by blocking the formation of a certain natural substance in the body that is released by the carcinoid tumors and causes diarrhea.
How should this medicine be used?
Telotristat comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food three times a day. Take telotristat at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take telotristat exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking telotristat,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to telotristat, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in telotristat tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking telotristat. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
If you are using short-acting octreotide (Sandostatin), use it at least 30 minutes after taking telotristat.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking telotristat, call your doctor. If you are breastfeeding while taking telotristat, call your doctor if you child becomes constipated.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking telotristat.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a later dose or a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Telotristat may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
headache
depression
swelling of your hands, feet, or legs
gas
decreased appetite
fever
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking telotristat and call your doctor immediately or get emergency treatment:
constipation
abdominal pain
rash or itching
swelling around the lips or eyes, difficulty breathing
Telotristat may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xermelo
®
Last Revised -
05/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page