Allopurinol Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Allopurinol Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622045.html
Allopurinol Injection
pronounced as (al oh pure' i nole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Allopurinol injection is used to treat high levels of uric acid (a natural substance that builds up in the blood as tumors break down) in people with certain types of cancer who are being treated with chemotherapy medications who cannot take oral allopurinol. Allopurinol is in a class of medications called xanthine oxidase inhibitors. It works by reducing the production of uric acid in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Allopurinol comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid to be injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually injected once a day or every 6, 8, or 12 hours. Allopurinol injection is usually given 24 to 48 hours before chemotherapy is started.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving allopurinol injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to allopurinol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in allopurinol injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking while you are receiving allopurinol injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, diabetes, kidney or liver disease or heart failure.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving allopurinol injection, call your doctor.
you should know that allopurinol may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Drink at least eight 8-ounce (240-milliter) cups of water or other liquids (64 ounces/2.72 liters total) each day while receiving allopurinol unless directed to do otherwise by your doctor.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Allopurinol injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain or itching at injection site
nausea
diarrhea
drowsiness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, itching, or hives
peeling, blistering, or shedding skin
red or purple spots on skin
painful urination
blood in the urine
irritation of the eyes
swelling of the lips or mouth
fever or flu-like symptoms
swollen glands
yellowing of the skin or eyes, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, nausea, vomiting, itching, or extreme tiredness
Allopurinol injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to allopurinol injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving allopurinol injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about allopurinol injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aloprim
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page