Burosumab-twza Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Burosumab-twza Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618034.html
Burosumab-twza Injection
pronounced as (bur oh' sue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Burosumab-twza injection is used to treat X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH; an inherited disease where the body doesn't maintain phosphorus and that leads to weak bones) in adults and children 6 months of age and older. It is also used to treat tumor-induced osteomalacia (a tumor that causes a loss of phosphorus in the body that leads to weak bones) that cannot be surgically removed in adults and children 2 years of age and older, Burosumab-twza injection is in a class of medications called fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) blocking antibodies. It works by blocking the action of a certain natural substance in the body which causes the symptoms of XLH.
How should this medicine be used?
Burosumab-twza injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected subcutaneously (under the skin) by a doctor or nurse. For the treatment of X-linked hypophosphatemia, it is usually injected once every 2 weeks for children 6 months to 17 years of age, and once every 4 weeks for adults. For the treatment of tumor-induced osteomalacia, in children 2 to 17 years of age, it is usually injected once every 2 weeks. For the treatment of tumor-induced osteomalacia in adults, it is usually injected every 4 weeks and as the dose is increased it may be injected every 2 weeks. Your doctor or nurse will inject the medication in either your upper arm, upper thigh, buttocks, or stomach area, and use a different injection site each time.
Tell your doctor if you are taking any phosphate supplements or certain vitamin D supplements such as calcitriol (Rocaltrol) or paricalcitol (Zemplar). You will need to stop taking these 1 week before you start treatment.
Your doctor may increase your dose (not more than once every 4 weeks), or may skip a dose, depending on the results of your lab tests.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using burosumab-twza injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to burosumab-twza, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in burosumab-twza injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with burosuma-twza injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with burosuma-twza injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before using burosuma-twza injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using burosuma-twza injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist
tell your doctor if you have kidney disease. Your doctor may tell you not to use burosumab-twza injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had restless leg syndrome (RLS; a condition that causes discomfort in the legs and a strong urge to move the legs, especially at night and when sitting or lying down).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving burosumab-twza injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose, make another appointment as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Burosumab-twza injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
vomiting
fever
pain in arms, legs, or back
muscle pain
constipation
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor:
redness, rash, hives, itching, swelling, pain, or bruising near or at the spot that the medication was injected
rash or hives
discomfort in the legs; a strong urge to move the legs, especially at night and when sitting or lying down
Burosumab-twza injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to burosumab-twza injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Crysvita
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page