Ceftaroline Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ceftaroline Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611014.html
Ceftaroline Injection
pronounced as (sef tar' oh leen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ceftaroline injection is used to treat some types of skin infections caused by certain bacteria in adults, children, and infants, including newborns. Ceftaroline injection is used to treat some types of pneumonia (lung infection) caused by bacteria in adults, children, and infants 2 months of age and older. Ceftaroline is in a class of medications called cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as ceftaroline injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Ceftaroline injection comes as a powder to be added to fluid and given through a needle or catheter placed in your vein. It is usually injected intravenously (into a vein) over a period of 5 to 60 minutes every 12 hours for adults and every 8 or 12 hours for children and every 8 hours for infants and newborns. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection you have and how your body responds to the medication.
You may receive ceftaroline injection in a hospital or you may give the medication at home. If you will be using ceftaroline injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of your treatment with ceftaroline injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Use ceftaroline injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using ceftaroline injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using ceftaroline injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ceftaroline; other cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil,cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefdinir, cefditoren (Spectracef), cefepime (Maxipime), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefotetan, cefoxitin (Mefoxin), cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftazidime (Fortaz, Tazicef, in Avycaz), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Zinacef), and cephalexin (Keflex); penicillin antibiotics; carbapenem antibiotics; or any other medications. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure if a medication you are allergic to belongs to one of these groups of medications. Also tell your doctor if you are allergic to any of the ingredients in ceftaroline injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using ceftaroline injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ceftaroline injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
constipation
nausea
vomiting
redness or irritation at the injection site
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the tongue or throat
extreme tiredness
pale skin
fast or irregular heartbeat
shortness of breath
chest pain
cold hands and feet
dizziness
tiredness, drowsiness, confusion, and slow thinking
seizures
Ceftaroline may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Your healthcare provider will tell you how to store your medication. Store your medication only as directed. Make sure you understand how to store your medication properly.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to ceftaroline injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking ceftaroline injection.
If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish your treatment with ceftaroline injection, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Teflaro
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page