Erythromycin and Benzoyl Peroxide Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Erythromycin and Benzoyl Peroxide Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603024.html
Erythromycin and Benzoyl Peroxide Topical
pronounced as (er ith roe mye' sin) (ben' zoe ill per ox' ide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide is used to treat acne. Erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide are in a class of medications called topical antibiotics. The combination of erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide works by killing the bacteria that cause acne.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide comes as a gel to apply to the skin. It is usually applied twice a day, in the morning and evening. To help you remember to use erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide gel, apply it at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide gel exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
It may take several weeks or longer before you feel the full benefit of this medication. Continue to use this medication even if you do not see much improvement at first.
To use the gel, follow these steps:
Wash the affected areas with a mild soapless cleanser and gently pat dry with a clean towel.
If your medication comes in a large jar, remove a pea-sized dab with your finger and go on to step 5.
If your medication comes in small pouches, use scissors or your fingers to tear off the top at the notched tab. Do not open the pouch with your teeth.
Squeeze the contents of the pouch onto your palm. You will see a clear gel and a white gel. Use your fingertip to blend the gels with 5-10 circular motions.
Use your fingertips to spread a thin layer of gel evenly over the affected area. Avoid getting the gel in your eyes, nose, mouth, or other body openings. If you do get the gel in your eyes, wash with warm water.
Look in the mirror. If you see a white film on your skin, you have used too much medication.
Dispose of the empty pouch and wash your hands.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to erythromycin (E.E.S., E-Mycin, Erythrocin), benzoyl peroxide (Benzac, Desquam, PanOxyl, Triaz, others), or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking. Be sure to mention other topical medications for acne. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide, call your doctor.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
ask your doctor or pharmacist to recommend a moisturizer to keep your skin soft during treatment.
you should know that Benzamycin Pak is flammable. Do not mix, apply, or store it near an open flame.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry skin
peeling, itching, stinging, burning, tingling, or redness of the skin
oily, tender, or discolored skin
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
severe diarrhea
blood or mucus in the stool
severe stomach pain or cramps
swelling of the face or nose
eye or eyelid irritation and swelling
hives
changes in your skin or nails that may be signs of infection with a fungus
Erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store Benzamycin Gel in the refrigerator but do not freeze it. If you forget to refrigerate the gel for 1 day, you may refrigerate it when you remember and continue to use it. Store Benzamycin Pak at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of any unused Benzamycin Gel after 3 months.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Avoid getting erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide gel on your hair or clothing. Erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide may bleach hair or colored fabric.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Benzamycin
®
(containing Benzoyl Peroxide, Erythromycin)
Last Revised -
03/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page