Penciclovir Cream: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Penciclovir Cream
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a697027.html
Penciclovir Cream
pronounced as (pen sye' kloe veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Penciclovir is used on the lips and faces of adults to treat cold sores caused by herpes simplex virus. Penciclovir does not cure herpes infections but decreases pain and itching if applied when the earliest symptoms first appear.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Penciclovir comes as a cream. It is usually used externally every 2 hours while you are awake for 4 days. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist or doctor to explain any part you do not understand. Use penciclovir exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor. Use this medication as soon as possible after symptoms appear.
Clean and dry the area before applying the cream to avoid spreading the infection. Rub the cream in gently, using enough cream to cover all sores completely.
Continue to use penciclovir even if you feel well. Do not stop using penciclovir without talking to your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using penciclovir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to penciclovir, acyclovir (Zovirax), or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking penciclovir, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it and apply any remaining doses for that day at evenly spaced intervals. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Penciclovir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
irritation at the site of application
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Penciclovir should only be used on the lips and face. Avoid getting it in your eyes. Keep the infected area clean and dry.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the penciclovir, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Denavir
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page