Spironolactone and Hydrochlorothiazide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Spironolactone and Hydrochlorothiazide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601111.html
Spironolactone and Hydrochlorothiazide
pronounced as (spir on'' oh lak' tone) (hye'' droe klor'' oh thye' a zide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Spironolactone has caused tumors in laboratory animals. Talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of using this medicine for your condition.
This medication should not be used when you first begin your treatment. You should take this medication only after the appropriate dosages of spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide are individually established by your doctor.
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide is used to treat high blood pressure. This medication is also used to treat patients with edema (fluid retention) caused by various conditions, including heart, liver, or kidney disease. Spironolactone is in a class of medications called aldosterone receptor antagonists. It causes the kidneys to eliminate unneeded water and sodium from the body into the urine, but reduces the loss of potassium from the body. Hydrochlorothiazide is in a class of medications called diuretics (''water pills''). It works by causing the kidneys to get rid of unneeded water and salt from the body into the urine.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken once or twice a day. To help you remember to take spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide, take it around the same time(s) every day. If you are to take it once a day, take it in the morning; if you are to take it twice a day, take it in the morning and in the late afternoon to avoid going to the bathroom during the night. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
This medication controls high blood pressure and edema, but does not cure these conditions. Continue to take spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medicine is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to spironolactone, hydrochlorothiazide, thiazide diuretics (''water pills''), sulfa-based medications, penicillin, other medications, or any of the ingredients in spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects. )
the following nonprescription products may interact with spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide: aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil
®
, Motrin
®
), naproxen (Naprosyn
®
); potassium supplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide. Do not start any of these medications while taking spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have high blood levels of calcium or potassium or have or ever had Addison's disease or other conditions that may cause high blood levels of potassium, or kidney or liver disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE, a chronic inflammatory condition), diabetes, or gout.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Follow your doctor's directions for a low-salt or low-sodium diet and daily exercise program. Avoid potassium-containing salt substitutes. Limit your intake of potassium-rich foods (e.g., bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice). Ask your doctor for advice on how much of these foods you may have.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
loss of appetite
stomach pain
frequent urination
dizziness
headache
enlarged or painful breasts
irregular menstrual periods
difficulty maintaining or achieving an erection
vaginal bleeding in post-menopausal ('after the change of life', the end of monthly menstrual periods) women
drowsiness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
muscle weakness or cramps
changes in vision or eye pain
rapid, excessive weight loss
fatigue
slow or irregular heartbeat
unusual bruising or bleeding
yellowing of the skin or eyes
skin rash
itching
fever
confusion
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly, and blood tests should be done occasionally.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Aldactazide
®
(containing Spironolactone, Hydrochlorothiazide)
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page