Carmustine Implant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Carmustine Implant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611045.html
Carmustine Implant
pronounced as (kar mus' teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Carmustine implant is used along with surgery and sometimes radiation therapy to treat malignant glioma (a certain type of cancerous brain tumor). Carmustine is in a class of medications called alkylating agents. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells in your body.
How should this medicine be used?
Carmustine implant comes as a small wafer that is placed in the brain by a doctor during surgery to remove the brain tumor. The doctor places carmustine wafers directly into a cavity in the brain that was created when the brain tumor was removed. After being placed in the brain, the wafers dissolve and slowly release carmustine into the surrounding areas where the tumor was located.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving carmustine implant,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to carmustine or any of the ingredients in carmustine implant. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving carmustine implant, call your doctor. Carmustine may harm the fetus.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Carmustine implant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
constipation
diarrhea
rash
confusion
depressed mood
pain
drowsiness or sleepiness
extreme tiredness or weakness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
seizures
severe headache, stiff neck, fever, and chills
slowed healing of wounds
sore throat; cough; fever; flu-like symptoms; warm, red, or painful skin; or other signs of infection
swelling of feet, hands, or face
unable to move one side of the body
severe bleeding
confusion
impaired speech
chest pain
Carmustine implant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to carmustine implant.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Gliadel
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2011
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page