Sugammadex Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sugammadex Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625008.html
Sugammadex Injection
pronounced as (soo gam′ ma dex)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sugammadex is to reverse the actions of certain neuromuscular (nerve and muscle) blocking medications (drugs used during surgery to assist with mechanical breathing needed to perform the surgery safely). Sugammadex is in a class of medications called neuromuscular blocking agent antidotes. It works by attaching to the neuromuscular blocking medications (i.e., rocuronium or vecuronium) to reduce the amount of active medication available to block the nerves and muscles.
How should this medicine be used?
Sugammadex comes as a solution (liquid) given intravenously (into a vein) by a specially trained medical professional during surgery. It is given at a time after surgery when the neuromuscular blocking is no longer necessary.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking sugammadex,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to sugammadex, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in sugammadex injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take when receiving sugammadex. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
you should know that sugammadex may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy for the next 7 days after receiving sugammadex. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease or are receiving dialysis treatment.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sugammadex may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
headache
feeling faint, lightheaded, or dizzy
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
itching, rash, hives
difficulty breathing or swallowing
slowed heartbeat
Sugammadex may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to sugammadex.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you received sugammadex.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bridion
®
Last Revised -
02/10/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page