Durvalumab Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Durvalumab Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617030.html
Durvalumab Injection
pronounced as (dur val' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Durvalumab injection is used to treat certain types of cancers of the lung, biliary tract (the organs and ducts that make and store bile, the liquid made by the liver), liver, endometrium (the lining of the uterus), and bladder. Durvalumab injection is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by helping your immune system to slow or stop the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Durvalumab injection comes as a liquid to be injected into a vein over 60 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or medical facility. It is usually injected once every 2 to 4 weeks. Your doctor will tell you how often you will receive durvalumab injection. The schedule depends on the condition you have and on how your body responds to the medication.
You will be watched closely during and shortly after your durvalumab infusion to be sure you are not having a serious reaction. Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you experience any of the following: chills, itching, rash, flushing, difficulty breathing, wheezing, dizziness, fever, feeling faint, back or neck pain, or swelling of your face.
Your doctor may pause or stop your treatment, or treat you with additional medications depending on your response to the medication and side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the Medication Guide. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving durvalumab injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have ever had an organ or bone marrow transplant and if you have or have ever had radiation therapy to your chest area. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an autoimmune disease (condition in which the immune system attacks a healthy part of the body) such as Crohn's disease (condition in which the immune system attacks the lining of the digestive tract causing pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fever), ulcerative colitis (condition that causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum), or lupus (condition in which the immune system attacks many tissues and organs including the skin, joints, blood, and kidneys); any condition that affects your nervous system such as myasthenia gravis (a disorder of the nervous system that causes muscle weakness) or Guillain-Barré syndrome (weakness, tingling, and possible paralysis due to sudden nerve damage); any type of lung disease or breathing problems; diabetes; thyroid problems; or kidney or liver disease. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had cytomegalovirus (CMV; a viral infection that may cause symptoms in patients with weak immune systems).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should not become pregnant while you are receiving durvalumab injection. You may need to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment. You should use effective birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for at least 3 months after your last dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant while receiving durvalumab injection, call your doctor immediately. Durvalumab injection may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while receiving durvalumab injection and for 3 months after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive durvalumab injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Durvalumab injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
swelling of your arms or legs
constipation
hair loss
trouble falling asleep or staying asleep
muscle or bone pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
new or worsening cough, chest pain, or shortness of breath
yellowing of your eyes or skin, decreased appetite, dark (tea colored) urine, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, extreme tiredness, or nausea or vomiting
unusual bleeding or bruising
diarrhea; stomach pain; or black, tarry, sticky, or bloody stools
decreased urination, blood in urine, swelling in your ankles, or loss of appetite
fever, cough, chills, flu like symptoms, frequent or painful urination, or other signs of infection
headaches that won't go away or unusual headaches; extreme tiredness; weight loss or gain; increased hunger or thirst; feeling dizzy or faint; feeling cold; deepening of voice; constipation; hair loss; changes in mood or behavior such as decreased sex drive, feeling irritable, confused, or forgetful; increased urination; or increased sweating
fast or irregular heartbeat
numbness or tingling in the arms or legs
persistent muscle pain, muscle weakness, muscle cramps, joint pain, joint stiffness or swelling
rash or itching; scaling or blistering skin; sores in mouth, nose, throat, or genital area; fever or flu-like symptoms; or swollen glands
neck stiffness
problems with balance
blurry or double vision, sensitivity to light, or other vision problems, eye redness or pain
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area but may spread to the back, nausea, vomiting, or loss of appetite
Durvalumab injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with durvalumab injection. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to durvalumab injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Imfinzi
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page