Bictegravir, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Alafenamide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bictegravir, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Alafenamide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618012.html
Bictegravir, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Alafenamide
pronounced as (bik teg' ra vir) (em tri sit' uh bean) (te noe' fo veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide (AF) should not be used to treat hepatitis B virus infection (HBV; an ongoing liver infection). Tell your doctor if you have or think you may have HBV. Your doctor may test you to see if you have HBV before you begin your treatment with bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir. If you have HBV and you take bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF, your condition may suddenly worsen when you stop taking this medication.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will examine you and order lab tests before, during, and regularly for several months after you stop taking bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir.
Talk to your doctor about the risk(s) of taking bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir.
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF is used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Bictegravir is in a class of medications called integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs). Emtricitabine and tenofovir AF are in a class of medications called nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs). The combination of bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the body.
Although bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF will not cure HIV, these medications may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Taking these medications and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of giving the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take once daily with or without food. Take bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF at around the same time every day.
Take bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If unable to swallow the tablet whole, you can cut the tablet in half and swallow each half separately as long as they are both swallowed within 10 minutes of each other.
Continue to take bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF even if you feel well. Do not stop taking it without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF even for a short time, or skip doses, the virus may become resistant to medications and may be harder to treat.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping or changing any medications while taking bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil
®
) and naproxen (Aleve
®
, Naprosyn
®
) and St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF. Do not start any of these medications while taking bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF without discussing you're your healthcare provider.
if you are taking an antacid containing calcium, magnesium, aluminum (Maalox
®
, Mylanta
®
, Tums
®
, others) or sucralfate (Carafate
®
), take bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF on an empty stomach 2 hours before you take the antacid or sucralfate.
if you are taking an iron or a calcium supplement, take it at the same time as bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF along with food.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had the conditions mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section or any type of infection that does not go away or that comes and goes such as tuberculosis (TB; a type of lung infection) or cytomegalovirus (CMV; a viral infection that may cause symptoms in people with weak immune systems) or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are taking bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body or cause other conditions to occur. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections or conditions. If you have new or worsening symptoms during your treatment with bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
headache
If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
decreased urination
swelling of feet and ankles
weakness, tiredness, muscle pain, shortness of breath, fast breathing, stomach pain with nausea and vomiting, cold or blue color of the hands and feet, fast or abnormal heartbeat, dizziness or lightheadedness
dark yellow or brown urine, light-colored bowel movements, yellowing of skin or eyes, loss of appetite, nausea, abdominal pain
Bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not remove the desiccant pack that comes in the bottle.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a supply of bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF on hand. Do not wait until you run out of medication to refill your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Biktarvy
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page