Reteplase Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Reteplase Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625038.html
Reteplase Injection
pronounced as ( re′ te plase)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Reteplase is used to treat a certain type of heart attack to reduce the risk of heart failure and death. Reteplase is in a class of medications called thrombolytic agents. It works by dissolving blood clots and restoring blood flow through the heart.
How should this medicine be used?
Reteplase comes as a powder to mix with liquid to inject intravenously (into a vein) by a healthcare provider. It is usually given as soon as possible after the symptoms of a heart attack begin. A second dose is given 30 minutes after the first dose.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving reteplase,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving reteplase. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you recently had a stroke; a serious head injury, or surgery on your spine or brain in the last 3 months; or if you have problems in your brain such as bleeding, a tumor, arteriovenous malformation (AVM), or aneurysm (weakening of a blood vessel wall). Also tell your doctor if you have very high blood pressure that is not controlled by medications or any condition that may cause an increased risk of bleeding or bruising. Your doctor will probably not give you reteplase.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Reteplase may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
bleeding, particularly at the site of injection
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, itching, redness, swelling of the tongue or throat, dizziness, fainting, and difficulty breathing
headache, confusion, trouble speaking, weakness or numbness in face, arm or leg (usually on one side)
skin or toes that are purple in color
decrease in amount of urine
changes in vision
chest pain, trouble breathing
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain that goes around your to your back
Reteplase may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to reteplase.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you have recently received reteplase.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Retavase
®
Other names
tPA
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page