Methocarbamol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Methocarbamol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682579.html
Methocarbamol
pronounced as (meth oh kar' ba mole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Methocarbamol is used with rest, physical therapy, and other measures to relax muscles and relieve pain and discomfort caused by strains, sprains, and other muscle injuries. Methocarbamol is in a class of medications called muscle relaxants. It works by slowing activity in the nervous system to allow the body to relax
How should this medicine be used?
Methocarbamol comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken four times a day at first, then it may be changed to three to six times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take methocarbamol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking methocarbamol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to methocarbamol, any other medications or any of the ingredients in methocarbamol tablets. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking methocarbamol. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking methocarbamol, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking methocarbamol if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take methocarbamol because it is not as safe or as effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how methocarbamol affects you.
talk to your doctor about the safe use of alcohol during your treatment with this medication. Alcohol can make the side effects of methocarbamol worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Methocarbamol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
dizziness
upset stomach
blurred vision
fever
black, blue, or green discoloration of urine
If you experience either of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
itching
Methocarbamol may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Robaxin
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page