Bezlotoxumab Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bezlotoxumab Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617003.html
Bezlotoxumab Injection
pronounced as (bez" loe tox' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bezlotoxumab injection is used to decrease the risk of
Clostridium difficile
infection (
C. difficile
or CDI; a type of bacteria that can cause severe or life-threatening diarrhea) from coming back in people who are at high risk for
C. difficile
infection and who are already taking an antibiotic drug to treat
Clostridium difficile
. Bezlotoxumab is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by binding to a
C. difficile
toxin to stop its effects on the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Bezlotoxumab comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) over 60 minutes. Bezlotoxumab is administered as a single dose by a doctor or nurse.
Bezlotoxumab injection does not take the place of antibiotic treatment for
C. difficile
infection; continue your antibiotic treatment as directed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving bezlotoxumab injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bezlotoxumab, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in bezlotoxumab infusion. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart failure.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bezlotoxumab injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
fever
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
shortness of breath or trouble breathing
swelling of the ankles, feet, leg, or stomach
Bezlotoxumab injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about bezlotoxumab injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zinplava
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page