Sepiapterin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sepiapterin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625095.html
Sepiapterin
pronounced as ( se" pi ap' ter in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sepiapterin is used to treat hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA; elevated levels of the amino acid phenylalanine) due to phenylketonuria (PKU; disorder where body cannot break down phenylalanine). Sepiapterin is in a class of medications called phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) activators. It works by helping the phenylalanine hydroxylase enzyme to break down phenylalanine to tyrosine.
How should this medicine be used?
Sepiapterin comes as a powder to be mixed with water or apple juice to be given by mouth. Take with food once a day. Take sepiapterin at around the same time every day.
Take sepiapterin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To take the powder for doses under 1000 mg, place the prescribed number of packets in a large enough container with the prescribed amount of liquid (water or applesauce), stir the contents for 30 seconds or more until it is mixed. Draw up the prescribed volume of the mixture in an oral syringe and give by mouth. Give immediately after mixing. If powder remains in the syringe, draw up more liquid (water or apple juice), and give immediately. Repeat this process until all powder particles are gone. Eat additional food after taking the entire dose.
For doses greater than 1000 mg, you may place the powder from the prescribed number of packets in prescribed amount of water, apple juice, strawberry jam or applesauce. If placing in water or apple juice, follow the directions above. If placing in strawberry jam or applesauce, mix for 60 seconds or until completely mixed. Eat the entire mixture immediately. Eat additional food after taking the entire dose.
If the dose is not taken immediately after mixing, you can cover and store the mixture at room temperature for up to 6 hours or store in the refrigerator for up to 24 hours. Make sure to mix for 30 seconds (liquid) or 60 seconds (applesauce or strawberry jam) before taking. Throw away any of the mixture not given in 6 hours (if at room temperature) or 24 hours (if in refrigerator).
Your prescription for sepiapterin will come with instructions for use. Read these instructions carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if there are parts you do not understand.
Sepiapterin controls HPA but does not cure it. Do not stop taking sepiapterin without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking sepiapterin,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with sepiapterin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with sepiapterin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting sepiapterin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking sepiapterin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a bleeding disorder or increased risk of bleeding, seizure disorder, or Parkinson's Disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking sepiapterin, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking sepiapterin.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Your doctor will prescribe a protein and a phenylalanine-restricted diet while you are receiving sepiapterin. Follow this diet carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sepiapterin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
headaches
stomach pain
orange-colored stool
mouth or throat pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
unusual bruising, bleeding from gums or prolonged bleeding from cuts or wounds, or heavy menstrual bleeding
seizures or convulsions, irritability
Septiapterin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to sepiapterin. If you miss a lab appointment, call your doctor right away to reschedule.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking sepiapterin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sephience
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page