Ospemifene: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ospemifene
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613039.html
Ospemifene
pronounced as (os pem' i feen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Taking ospemifene may increase the risk that you will develop endometrial cancer (cancer of the lining of the uterus). Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had cancer or if you have abnormal vaginal bleeding. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take ospemifene. If you have any unusual vaginal bleeding while you are taking ospemifene call your doctor immediately.
Taking ospemifene also may increase the risk of stroke and blood clots. Tell your doctor if you have ever had a stroke or heart attack or if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had blood clots. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take ospemifene. Also, tell your doctor if you smoke or if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, high blood levels of cholesterol or fats, diabetes, heart disease, or lupus (a condition in which the body attacks its own tissues causing damage and swelling). If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking ospemifene and call your doctor immediately: swelling or pain in your legs; warm or red skin; slow or difficult speech; dizziness or faintness; weakness or numbness of an arm or leg; sudden, severe headache; sudden changes in vision; pain in your chest, arms, back, neck or jaw; or shortness of breath.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain tests to check your body's response to ospemifene.
Talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking this medication.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ospemifene is used to treat painful sexual intercourse and vaginal dryness due to menopause (the end of monthly menstrual periods). Ospemifene is in a class of medications called hormones. It works by replacing estrogen that is normally produced by the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Ospemifene comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take with food once daily. Take ospemifene at around the same time every day.
Take ospemifene exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ospemifene,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking ospemifene. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with ospemifene: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking ospemifene. Do not start any of these medications while taking ospemifene without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. Ospemifene may cause fetal harm. If you become pregnant while taking ospemifene, call your doctor immediately.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, or will be on bed rest, tell the doctor or dentist you are taking ospemifene.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ospemifene may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
hot flashes or flushes
vaginal discharge
muscle spasms
increased sweating
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
hives, rash; itching; hoarseness; difficulty swallowing or breathing; or swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips or eyes
Ospemifene may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Osphena
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page