CHD2 myoclonic encephalopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
CHD2 myoclonic encephalopathy
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/chd2-myoclonic-encephalopathy/
CHD2 myoclonic encephalopathy
Description
CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy is a condition characterized by recurrent seizures (epilepsy), abnormal brain function (encephalopathy), and intellectual disability. Epilepsy begins in childhood, typically between ages 6 months and 4 years. Each individual may experience a variety of seizure types. The most common are myoclonic seizures, which involve involuntary muscle twitches. Other seizure types include sudden episodes of weak muscle tone (atonic seizures); partial or complete loss of consciousness (absence seizures); seizures brought on by high body temperature (febrile seizure); or tonic-clonic seizures, which involve loss of consciousness, muscle rigidity, and convulsions. Some people with
CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy have photosensitive epilepsy, in which seizures are triggered by flashing lights. Some people with
CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy experience a type of seizure called atonic-myoclonic-absence seizure, which begins with a drop of the head, followed by loss of consciousness, then rigid movements of the arms. Epilepsy can worsen, causing prolonged episodes of seizure activity that last several minutes, known as status epilepticus. The seizures associated with
CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy are called refractory because they usually do not respond to therapy with anti-epileptic medications.
Other signs and symptoms of
CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy include intellectual disability that ranges from mild to severe and delayed development of speech. Rarely, individuals can have a loss of acquired skills (developmental regression) following the onset of epilepsy. Some people with
CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy have autism spectrum disorders, which are conditions characterized by impaired communication and social interaction. In some instances, areas with a loss of brain tissue (atrophy) have been found with medical imaging.
Frequency
The prevalence of
CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy is unknown; at least 32 cases have been described in the scientific literature.
Causes
As its name suggests,
CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy is caused by mutations in the
CHD2
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called chromodomain DNA helicase protein 2. This protein is found in cells throughout the body and regulates gene activity (expression) through a process known as chromatin remodeling.
Chromatin
is the complex of DNA and proteins that packages DNA into chromosomes. The structure of chromatin can be changed (remodeled) to alter how tightly DNA is packaged. The role of chromodomain DNA helicase protein 2 in the brain is unknown. Researchers suspect that the protein may be involved in regulating the development and functioning of nerve cells.
CHD2
gene mutations either prevent the production of any chromodomain DNA helicase protein 2 or lead to the production of a nonfunctional version of the protein. As a result, chromatin remodeling and gene expression normally regulated by chromodomain DNA helicase protein 2 are disrupted. It is unclear why
CHD2
gene mutations seem to only affect nerve cells in the brain or how they lead to the signs and symptoms of
CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy.
Learn more about the gene associated with CHD2 myoclonic encephalopathy
CHD2
Inheritance
This condition is considered
autosomal dominant
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
This condition results from
new (de novo) mutations
in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
CHD2 encephalopathy
CHD2-related neurodevelopmental disorders
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy 94
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
DEVELOPMENTAL AND EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY 94; DEE94
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Lund C, Brodtkorb E, Oye AM, Rosby O, Selmer KK. CHD2 mutations in
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Epilepsy Behav. 2014 Apr;33:18-21. doi:
10.1016/j.yebeh.2014.02.005. Epub 2014 Mar 12.
Citation on PubMed
Suls A, Jaehn JA, Kecskes A, Weber Y, Weckhuysen S, Craiu DC, Siekierska A,
Djemie T, Afrikanova T, Gormley P, von Spiczak S, Kluger G, Iliescu CM, Talvik T,
Talvik I, Meral C, Caglayan HS, Giraldez BG, Serratosa J, Lemke JR,
Hoffman-Zacharska D, Szczepanik E, Barisic N, Komarek V, Hjalgrim H, Moller RS,
Linnankivi T, Dimova P, Striano P, Zara F, Marini C, Guerrini R, Depienne C,
Baulac S, Kuhlenbaumer G, Crawford AD, Lehesjoki AE, de Witte PA, Palotie A,
Lerche H, Esguerra CV, De Jonghe P, Helbig I; EuroEPINOMICS RES Consortium. De
novo loss-of-function mutations in CHD2 cause a fever-sensitive myoclonic
epileptic encephalopathy sharing features with Dravet syndrome. Am J Hum Genet.
2013 Nov 7;93(5):967-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.09.017. Epub 2013 Oct 24.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Thomas RH, Zhang LM, Carvill GL, Archer JS, Heavin SB, Mandelstam SA, Craiu D,
Berkovic SF, Gill DS, Mefford HC, Scheffer IE; EuroEPINOMICS RES Consortium. CHD2
myoclonic encephalopathy is frequently associated with self-induced seizures.
Neurology. 2015 Mar 3;84(9):951-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001305. Epub 2015
Feb 11.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Trivisano M, Striano P, Sartorelli J, Giordano L, Traverso M, Accorsi P,
Cappelletti S, Claps DJ, Vigevano F, Zara F, Specchio N. CHD2 mutations are a
rare cause of generalized epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures. Epilepsy
Behav. 2015 Oct;51:53-6. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.06.029. Epub 2015 Aug 7.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Epilepsy
Genetic Brain Disorders
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page