Neomycin, Polymyxin, Bacitracin, and Hydrocortisone Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Neomycin, Polymyxin, Bacitracin, and Hydrocortisone Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601061.html
Neomycin, Polymyxin, Bacitracin, and Hydrocortisone Topical
pronounced as (nee" oh mye' sin)(pol" ee mix' in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination is used to treat skin infections caused by certain bacteria and to treat the redness, swelling, itching, and discomfort of various skin conditions. Neomycin, polymyxin, and bacitracin are in a class of medications called antibiotics. They work by stopping the growth of bacteria. Hydrocortisone is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by activating natural substances in the skin to reduce swelling, redness, and itching.
How should this medicine be used?
This combination comes as a cream (containing neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone) and as an ointment (containing neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone) to apply to the skin. It is usually used two to four times a day. Use neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination is only for use on the skin. Do not use the medication in your eyes. Do not use the medication in your ears if you have a hole or tear in your eardrum.
To use neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination, apply a small amount of medication to cover the affected area of skin with a thin, even film and rub in gently.
Do not wrap or bandage the treated area unless your doctor tells you that you should.
Your symptoms should begin to improve during the first few days of treatment with neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination. If redness, irritation, swelling, or pain do not improve or get worse, stop using the medication and call your doctor. Do not use this medication longer than 7 days, unless directed to do so by your doctor.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination:
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to neomycin (Neo-Fradin
®
, Mycifradin
®
, others); polymyxin; bacitracin (Baciim
®
); hydrocortisone (Anusol
®
HC, Cortef
®
, others); aminoglycoside antibiotics such as amikacin, gentamicin (Gentak
®
, Genoptic
®
), kanamycin, paromomycin, streptomycin, and tobramycin (Tobrex
®
, Tobi
®
); any other medications; or any of the ingredients in neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone cream or ointment. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have any type of viral skin infection such as cold sores (fever blisters; blisters that are caused by a virus called herpes simplex), chickenpox, or herpes zoster (shingles; a rash that can occur in people who have had chickenpox in the past); tuberculosis (TB; a serious infection that infects the lungs and other parts of the body) infection of the skin; or a fungal skin infection. Your doctor will probably tell you not to use neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra cream or ointment to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stretch marks on the skin
skin thinning
small white or red bumps on the skin
acne
unwanted hair growth
skin color changes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination and call your doctor immediately:
skin redness, burning, swelling, or irritation
skin dryness or scaling
hearing loss, which may be permanent
decreased urination
swelling of the legs, ankles, or feet
unusual tiredness or weakness
puffy face
bone pain
weight gain
easy bruising
Children who use neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination for longer periods of time may have an increased risk of side effects including slowed growth. Talk to your child's doctor about the risks of applying this medication to your child's skin.
Neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, and hydrocortisone combination may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cortisporin Cream
®
(as a combination product containing Neomycin, Polymyxin B, Hydrocortisone)
Brand names of combination products
Cortisporin Ointment
®
(containing Neomycin, Polymyxin B, Bacitracin, Hydrocortisone)
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page