Metoclopramide Nasal Spray: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Metoclopramide Nasal Spray
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620064.html
Metoclopramide Nasal Spray
pronounced as (met oh kloe pra' mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Using metoclopramide nasal spray may cause you to develop a muscle problem called tardive dyskinesia. If you develop tardive dyskinesia, you will move your muscles, especially the muscles in your face in unusual ways. You will not be able to control or stop these movements. Tardive dyskinesia may not go away even after you stop using metoclopramide nasal spray. The longer you take metoclopramide, the greater the risk that you will develop tardive dyskinesia. Therefore, your doctor will probably tell you not to take metoclopramide products for longer than 12 weeks. The risk that you will develop tardive dyskinesia is also greater if you are taking medications for mental illness, if you have diabetes, or if you are elderly, especially if you are a woman. Call your doctor immediately if you develop any uncontrollable body movements, especially lip smacking, mouth puckering, chewing, frowning, scowling, sticking out your tongue, blinking, eye movements, or shaking arms or legs.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with metoclopramide nasal spray and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risk(s) of using metoclopramide nasal spray.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Metoclopramide nasal spray is used to relieve symptoms caused by slow stomach emptying in people who have diabetes. These symptoms include nausea, vomiting, heartburn, loss of appetite, and feeling of fullness that lasts long after meals. Metoclopramide is in a class of medications called prokinetic agents. It works by speeding the movement of food through the stomach and intestines.
How should this medicine be used?
Metoclopramide nasal spray comes as a solution (liquid) to spray into the nose. It is usually sprayed into one nostril 4 times a day, 30 minutes before each meal and at bedtime for 2 to 8 weeks. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use metoclopramide nasal spray exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To use the nasal spray, follow these steps:
Remove the cap and the safety clip from the nasal spray pump.
If you are using the nasal spray pump for the first time, you must prime the pump. Hold the bottle with your thumb at the base and your index and middle fingers on the white shoulder area. Point the bottle upright and away from your eyes. Press down and release the nozzle to release 10 sprays into the air away from the face. If you have not used your nasal spray for more than 14 days, reprime the pump with 10 sprays.
Close one nostril by gently placing your finger against the side of your nose, tilt your head slightly forward and, keeping the bottle upright, insert the nasal tip into the other nostril. Point the tip toward the back and outer side of the nose. Use your forefinger and middle finger to press firmly down on the nozzle and release a spray. Following the spray, sniff gently and breathe out slowly through your mouth.
Wipe the applicator with a clean tissue and cover it with the cap.
If you are not sure that the nasal spray entered your nose, do not repeat the dose, and continue your regular dosing schedule.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using metoclopramide nasal spray,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to metoclopramide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in metoclopramide nasal spray. Ask your doctor or pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using metoclopramide nasal spray. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you more carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had blockage, bleeding, or a tear in your stomach or intestines; pheochromocytoma (tumor on a small gland near the kidneys); problems controlling or moving your muscles after taking any other medication; or seizures. Your doctor will probably tell you not to use metoclopramide nasal spray.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had Parkinson's disease (PD; a disorder of the nervous system that causes difficulties with movement, muscle control, and balance); high blood pressure; depression or other mental illness; breast cancer; asthma; glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6PD) deficiency (an inherited blood disorder); NADH cytochrome B5 reductase deficiency (an inherited blood disorder); heart failure, irregular heartbeat, or other heart problems; or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using metoclopramide nasal spray, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using metoclopramide nasal spray.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are taking this medication. Alcohol can make the side effects of metoclopramide worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Metoclopramide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
unpleasant taste in mouth
drowsiness
excessive tiredness
weakness
headache
dizziness
diarrhea
nausea
breast enlargement or discharge
missed menstrual period
decreased sexual ability
frequent urination
inability to control urination
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
tightening of the muscles, especially in the jaw or neck
depression
thinking about harming or killing yourself
fever
muscle stiffness
confusion
fast, slow, or irregular heartbeat
sweating
restlessness
nervousness or jitteriness
agitation
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
pacing
foot tapping
slow or stiff movements
blank facial expression
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
difficulty keeping your balance
rash
hives
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, mouth, throat, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
difficulty breathing or swallowing
high-pitched sounds while breathing
Metoclopramide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the bottle it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of the bottle 4 weeks after opening, even if there is some solution left in the bottle.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
drowsiness
confusion
seizures
unusual, uncontrollable movements
lack of energy
bluish coloring of the skin
headache
shortness of breath
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Gimoti
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page