Fruquintinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fruquintinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623060.html
Fruquintinib
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fruquintinib is used to treat a certain type of colon or rectal cancer (cancer that begins in the large intestine). Fruquintinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop or slow the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Fruquintinib comes as a capsule to take by mouth. Take with or without food once daily for 21 days in a row and then stop for 7 days. This is one cycle of treatment which may be repeated as recommended by your doctor. Take fruquintinib at around the same time every day.
Take fruquintinib exactly as directed. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor
Swallow the capsules whole; do not open, chew, or crush them.
If you vomit after taking fruquintinib, do not take another dose. Take your next dose at your regular time the next day.
Your doctor may lower your dose or stop your treatment depending on how well the medication works for you and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Continue to take fruquintinib even if you feel well. Do not stop taking fruquintinib without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fruquintinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with fruquintinib: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking fruquintinib. Do not start any of this medication while taking fruquintinib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have an infection or an unhealed wound. Also, tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a bleeding problem, a blood clot, a heart attack, a stroke, high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol or high triglycerides (a fatty substance in the blood), proteinuria (increased protein in urine) or any other kidney problem, or thyroid or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are taking fruquintinib. Fruquintinib may harm the fetus. You may be required to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment. You or your partner should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 2 weeks after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you or your partner can use during your treatment.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while taking fruquintinib and for 2 weeks after your final dose.
you should know that fruquintinib may slow the healing of wounds, such as cuts made by a doctor during surgery. Tell your doctor if you have recently had surgery or if you plan to have surgery, including dental surgery. Your doctor will probably tell you that you should not take fruquintinib injection until at least 2 weeks after your surgery and until the area has completely healed. If you are scheduled to have surgery, your doctor will stop your treatment with fruquintinib at least 2 weeks before the surgery or procedure.
you should know that fruquintinib may cause high blood pressure. Your doctor will check your blood pressure before starting treatment, once a week for the first month of treatment, and then at least once a month thereafter, while you are taking fruquintinib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is less than 12 hours before you are scheduled to take your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fruquintinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
voice changes
hoarseness
diarrhea
stomach pain
mouth sores
decreased appetite
tiredness or lack of energy
weakness
muscle, joint, or bone pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
nosebleeds; and other unusual bruising or bleeding; bloody or black and tarry stools; pink, red, or dark-brown urine; vomiting or coughing up blood; unusual vaginal bleeding or heavy menstrual bleeding
severe or persistent stomach pain, fever or chills, nausea, vomiting, bloody or black and tarry stools
cough, fever, sore throat, pain or burning while urinating, or other signs of an infection
sudden weakness, tingling, or numbness in your face, arm, or leg, especially on one side of your body; sudden confusion; difficulty speaking or understanding; sudden difficulty seeing in one or both eyes; sudden difficulty walking; dizziness; loss of balance or coordination; or sudden severe headache
chest pain; shortness of breath or trouble breathing; discomfort or pain in the arms, shoulders, neck, jaw, stomach, or upper back; or excessive sweating
seizures, headaches, vision changes, or confusion
wound that is red, oozing pus, or slow to heal
increased urination; swelling of your face, hands, legs, ankles, or feet
yellow eyes or skin, dark urine, loss of appetite, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, or pain or discomfort in right upper stomach area
rash or redness, pain, swelling or blisters on the palms of the hands or soles of the feet
Fruquintinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests, such as blood tests and urine tests before and during your treatment with fruquintinib to check your body's response to the medication.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Fruzaqla
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page