Gordon Holmes syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Gordon Holmes syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/gordon-holmes-syndrome/
Gordon Holmes syndrome
Description
Gordon Holmes syndrome is a rare condition characterized by reproductive and neurological problems. One of the key features of the condition is reduced production of hormones that direct sexual development (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism). Many affected individuals have a delay in development of the typical signs of puberty, such as the growth of facial hair and deepening of the voice in males, and the start of monthly periods (menstruation) and breast development in females. Some never undergo puberty. While some people with Gordon Holmes syndrome seem to have normal puberty, they develop other problems with the reproductive system later in life.
In early adulthood, individuals with Gordon Holmes syndrome develop neurological problems, usually beginning with speech difficulties (dysarthria). As the condition worsens, affected individuals have problems with balance and coordination (
cerebellar ataxia
), often leading to difficulties with activities of daily living and a need for wheelchair assistance. Some affected individuals also develop memory problems and a decline in intellectual function (dementia).
Frequency
Gordon Holmes syndrome is a rare condition. Its prevalence is unknown.
Causes
Gordon Holmes syndrome can be caused by mutations in the
RNF216
or
PNPLA6
gene. Some people with the condition do not have mutations in these genes, indicating that mutations in other genes are likely involved in the condition.
The protein produced from the
RNF216
gene is involved in a cellular process, called ubiquitination, by which unneeded proteins are tagged with a molecule called ubiquitin. The ubiquitin tag signals for the protein to be broken down. One of several proteins tagged by RNF216 is a protein found in nerve cells (
neurons
) that plays a role in a process called synaptic plasticity. Synaptic plasticity is the ability of the connections between neurons (
synapses
) to change and adapt over time in response to experience. This process is critical for learning and memory.
RNF216
gene mutations impair the ability of the RNF216 protein to tag unneeded proteins to be broken down. Impaired breakdown of the neuronal protein disrupts normal synaptic connections and plasticity, which likely contributes to dementia in people with Gordon Holmes syndrome. It is unclear how a lack of RNF216 protein function causes hypogonadotropic hypogonadism or cerebellar ataxia.
The
PNPLA6
gene provides instructions for making a protein called neuropathy target esterase (NTE), which helps regulate the amount of certain fats (lipids) that make up the outer membrane surrounding cells. The correct levels of these lipids are critical to the stability and function of cell membranes. NTE is found most abundantly in the nervous system and is thought to help maintain the stability of membranes surrounding neurons. NTE is also thought to play a role in the release of hormones from the pituitary gland, a process that requires particular changes in the cell membrane. The pituitary gland is located at the base of the brain and produces several hormones, including those that help direct sexual development and growth.
PNPLA6
gene mutations are thought to impair NTE's function. Researchers speculate that such an impairment alters the balance of lipids in the cell membrane. This imbalance may damage neurons in the brain, causing cerebellar ataxia, and impair the pituitary gland's release of hormones involved in sexual development, leading to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Individuals with Gordon Holmes syndrome caused by
PNPLA6
gene mutations do not appear to develop dementia.
Learn more about the genes associated with Gordon Holmes syndrome
PNPLA6
RNF216
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Cerebellar ataxia and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Deficiency of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone with ataxia
LHRH deficiency and ataxia
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Cerebellar ataxia-hypogonadism syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Cerebellar ataxia-hypogonadism syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
GORDON HOLMES SYNDROME; GDHS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Alqwaifly M, Bohlega S. Ataxia and Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism with
Intrafamilial Variability Caused by RNF216 Mutation. Neurol Int. 2016 Jun
15;8(2):6444. doi: 10.4081/ni.2016.6444. eCollection 2016 Jun 15.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Husain N, Yuan Q, Yen YC, Pletnikova O, Sally DQ, Worley P, Bichler Z, Shawn
Je H. TRIAD3/RNF216 mutations associated with Gordon Holmes syndrome lead to
synaptic and cognitive impairments via Arc misregulation. Aging Cell. 2017
Apr;16(2):281-292. doi: 10.1111/acel.12551. Epub 2016 Dec 20.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Margolin DH, Kousi M, Chan YM, Lim ET, Schmahmann JD, Hadjivassiliou M, Hall
JE, Adam I, Dwyer A, Plummer L, Aldrin SV, O'Rourke J, Kirby A, Lage K, Milunsky
A, Milunsky JM, Chan J, Hedley-Whyte ET, Daly MJ, Katsanis N, Seminara SB.
Ataxia, dementia, and hypogonadotropism caused by disordered ubiquitination. N
Engl J Med. 2013 May 23;368(21):1992-2003. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1215993. Epub 2013
May 8.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Topaloglu AK, Lomniczi A, Kretzschmar D, Dissen GA, Kotan LD, McArdle CA, Koc
AF, Hamel BC, Guclu M, Papatya ED, Eren E, Mengen E, Gurbuz F, Cook M, Castellano
JM, Kekil MB, Mungan NO, Yuksel B, Ojeda SR. Loss-of-function mutations in PNPLA6
encoding neuropathy target esterase underlie pubertal failure and neurological
deficits in Gordon Holmes syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014
Oct;99(10):E2067-75. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1836. Epub 2014 Jul 17.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Cerebellar Disorders
Dementia
Genetic Disorders
Movement Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Communicating with someone with dysarthria
Dementia
Genetics
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Movement - uncoordinated
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page