Abiraterone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Abiraterone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611046.html
Abiraterone
pronounced as (a'' bir a' ter one)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Abiraterone is used in combination with prednisone to treat a certain type of prostate cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. Abiraterone is in a class of medications called androgen biosynthesis inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of certain hormones in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Abiraterone comes as a tablet to take by mouth on an empty stomach with water, 1 hour before or 2 hours after eating any food. It is usually taken once daily. Take abiraterone at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take abiraterone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with water; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Continue to take abiraterone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking abiraterone or prednisone without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking abiraterone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to abiraterone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in abiraterone tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal product may interact with abiraterone: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking abiraterone. Do not start this medication while taking abiraterone without discussing it with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have an infection, a low level of potassium in your blood, or are experiencing unusual stress, have had a recent heart attack, or if you have or have ever had adrenal or pituitary gland problems, heart failure, an irregular heartbeat, including QT prolongation (an irregular heart rhythm that can lead to fainting, loss of consciousness, seizures, or sudden death), high blood pressure, diabetes, increased amounts of cholesterol (a fat-like substance) and other fatty substances in the blood, osteoporosis (condition in which the bones become weak and fragile and can break easily), or heart or liver disease.
you should know that abiraterone is only for use in men. Women should not take this medication, especially if they are or may become pregnant or are breastfeeding. If taken by a pregnant woman, abiraterone may harm the fetus. Women who are, could become, or may be pregnant should not touch abiraterone tablets without protective gloves. If a pregnant woman takes or touches abiraterone tablets, she should call her doctor immediately.
men with a female partner taking abiraterone must use effective contraception during treatment and for 3 weeks after the final dose. Talk to your doctor about the types of birth control that are right for you.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking abiraterone.
you should know that abiraterone can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Your doctor may tell you to monitor your blood sugar. Call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment if you have symptoms of hypoglycemia, including headache, dizziness, weakness, tiredness, sweating, hunger, rapid or irregular heartbeat, confusion, irritability, or feeling jittery
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss one dose, take your regular dose the next day. If you miss more than one dose, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Abiraterone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
joint swelling or pain
groin pain
hot flashes (a sudden wave of mild or intense body heat)
diarrhea
constipation
heartburn
cough
sore throat
stuffy or runny nose
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
dizziness
feeling faint or lightheaded
headache
confusion
fast or irregular heartbeats
muscle weakness or aches
leg pain
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
shortness of breath
rash; hives; itching; difficulty breathing or swallowing; or swelling of the face, lips, tongue or throat
unusual bruising or bleeding
,
yellowing of the skin or eyes, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, extreme tiredness, lack of energy, dark urine, or pain in the upper right part of the stomach
flu-like symptoms such as fever
blood in urine
difficult, painful, or frequent urination
falling
bone fracture
Abiraterone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
fast or irregular heartbeat
lightheadedness, dizziness, or fainting
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
swelling of the feet, ankles, or lower legs
unexplained weight gain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to abiraterone.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zytiga
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page