CLN4 disease: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
CLN4 disease
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cln4-disease/
CLN4 disease
Description
CLN4 disease is a condition that primarily affects the nervous system, causing problems with movement and intellectual function that worsen over time. The signs and symptoms of CLN4 disease typically appear around age 30, but they can develop anytime between adolescence and late adulthood.
People with CLN4 disease often develop seizures and uncontrollable muscle jerks (myoclonic epilepsy), a decline in intellectual function (dementia), problems with coordination and balance (ataxia), tremors or other involuntary movements (motor tics), and speech difficulties (dysarthria). The signs and symptoms of CLN4 disease worsen over time, and affected individuals usually survive about 15 years after the disorder begins.
CLN4 disease is one of a group of disorders known as neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs), which may also be collectively referred to as Batten disease. (The adult forms of NCLs, which includes CLN4 disease, are sometimes known as Kufs disease.) All the NCLs affect the nervous system and typically cause worsening problems with vision, movement, and thinking ability. The different NCLs are distinguished by their genetic cause. Each disease type is given the designation "CLN," meaning ceroid lipofuscinosis, neuronal, and then a number to indicate its subtype.
Frequency
CLN4 disease is a rare disorder, but its prevalence is unknown. Collectively, all forms of NCL affect an estimated 1 in 100,000 individuals worldwide.
Causes
Mutations in the
DNAJC5
gene cause CLN4 disease. The
DNAJC5
gene provides instructions for making a protein called cysteine string protein alpha (CSPα). This protein is found in the brain, where it plays a role in the
transmission of nerve impulses
, helping nerve cells communicate with each other. Specifically, CSPα is involved in recycling certain proteins that are involved in nerve impulse transmission by refolding misshapen proteins so that they can be used in additional transmissions.
DNAJC5
gene mutations lead to the production of an altered CSPα protein. The altered protein cannot perform its function, which reduces protein recycling, causing a shortage (deficiency) of functional proteins needed for impulse transmission. Without normal communication between nerve cells, neurological functions are impaired, contributing to the features of CLN4 disease.
CLN4 disease, like other NCLs, is characterized by the accumulation of proteins and other substances in lysosomes, which are compartments in the cell that digest and recycle materials. These accumulations occur in cells throughout the body; however, nerve cells seem to be particularly vulnerable to their effects. The accumulations can cause cell damage leading to cell death. The progressive death of nerve cells in the brain and other tissues contributes to the decline of neurological function in CLN4 disease. However, it is unclear how mutations in the
DNAJC5
gene are involved in the buildup of substances in lysosomes.
Learn more about the gene associated with CLN4 disease
DNAJC5
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
Some cases of this condition result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in an affected individual’s parent or in early embryonic development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
Adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Ceroid lipofuscinosis, neuronal, 4B, autosomal dominant
CLN4B
Parry disease
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Ceroid lipofuscinosis, neuronal, 4 (Kufs type)
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 4 (KUFS TYPE); CLN4
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Cadieux-Dion M, Andermann E, Lachance-Touchette P, Ansorge O, Meloche C,
Barnabe A, Kuzniecky RI, Andermann F, Faught E, Leonberg S, Damiano JA, Berkovic
SF, Rouleau GA, Cossette P. Recurrent mutations in DNAJC5 cause autosomal
dominant Kufs disease. Clin Genet. 2013 Jun;83(6):571-5. doi: 10.1111/cge.12020.
Epub 2012 Nov 7.
Citation on PubMed
Henderson MX, Wirak GS, Zhang YQ, Dai F, Ginsberg SD, Dolzhanskaya N,
Staropoli JF, Nijssen PC, Lam TT, Roth AF, Davis NG, Dawson G, Velinov M, Chandra
SS. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis with DNAJC5/CSPalpha mutation has PPT1 pathology
and exhibit aberrant protein palmitoylation. Acta Neuropathol. 2016
Apr;131(4):621-37. doi: 10.1007/s00401-015-1512-2. Epub 2015 Dec 10.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Kollmann K, Uusi-Rauva K, Scifo E, Tyynela J, Jalanko A, Braulke T. Cell
biology and function of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis-related proteins. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2013 Nov;1832(11):1866-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.01.019. Epub
2013 Feb 9.
Citation on PubMed
Schulz A, Kohlschutter A, Mink J, Simonati A, Williams R. NCL diseases -
clinical perspectives. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Nov;1832(11):1801-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.04.008. Epub 2013 Apr 17.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Smith KR, Dahl HH, Canafoglia L, Andermann E, Damiano J, Morbin M, Bruni AC,
Giaccone G, Cossette P, Saftig P, Grotzinger J, Schwake M, Andermann F, Staropoli
JF, Sims KB, Mole SE, Franceschetti S, Alexander NA, Cooper JD, Chapman HA,
Carpenter S, Berkovic SF, Bahlo M. Cathepsin F mutations cause Type B Kufs
disease, an adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Apr
1;22(7):1417-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds558. Epub 2013 Jan 7.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Velinov M, Dolzhanskaya N, Gonzalez M, Powell E, Konidari I, Hulme W,
Staropoli JF, Xin W, Wen GY, Barone R, Coppel SH, Sims K, Brown WT, Zuchner S.
Mutations in the gene DNAJC5 cause autosomal dominant Kufs disease in a
proportion of cases: study of the Parry family and 8 other families. PLoS One.
2012;7(1):e29729. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029729. Epub 2012 Jan 3.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Williams RE, Mole SE. New nomenclature and classification scheme for the
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. Neurology. 2012 Jul 10;79(2):183-91. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0b013e31825f0547.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Degenerative Nerve Diseases
Dementia
Epilepsy
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Movement - uncoordinated
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL)
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page