Fesoterodine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fesoterodine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a609021.html
Fesoterodine
pronounced as (fes oh ter' oh deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fesoterodine is used to treat overactive bladder (a condition in which the bladder muscles contract uncontrollably and cause frequent urination, urgent need to urinate, and inability to control urination). Fesoterodine is in a class of medications called antimuscarinics. It works by relaxing the bladder muscles to prevent urgent, frequent, or uncontrolled urination.
How should this medicine be used?
Fesoterodine comes as an extended release (long-acting) tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food, once a day. Take fesoterodine at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take fesoterodine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with plenty of liquid; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of fesoterodine and increase your dose if your symptoms are not controlled. Talk to your doctor about how fesoterodine works for you
Your symptoms should begin to improve during the first few weeks of your treatment with fesoterodine. However, it may take up to 12 weeks for you to feel the full benefit of fesoterodine. Tell your doctor if your symptoms do not improve after you have taken fesoterodine for several weeks.
Fesoterodine may help control your symptoms, but it will not cure your condition. Continue to take fesoterodine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking fesoterodine without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking fesoterodine, your symptoms may return.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fesoterodine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to fesoterodine, tolterodine (Detrol, Detrol LA), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in fesoterodine tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking fesoterodine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are unable to empty your bladder, and if you have or have ever had slowed or delayed emptying of your stomach, or glaucoma (increased pressure in the eye that may lead to vision loss). Your doctor may tell you not to take fesoterodine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a slow or weak urine stream, constipation, any conditions that affect your stomach or intestines, myasthenia gravis (a disease that causes severe muscle weakness), or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking fesoterodine, call your doctor.
you should know that fesoterodine may cause drowsiness and blurred vision. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking fesoterodine. Alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication.
you should know that fesoterodine may make it harder for your body to cool down when it gets very hot. Avoid exposure to extreme heat, and call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment if you have fever or other signs of heat stroke such as dizziness, upset stomach, headache, confusion, and fast pulse after you are exposed to heat.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and take your next dose at the regular time the next day. Do not take two doses of fesoterodine in the same day.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fesoterodine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth
constipation
difficulty emptying the bladder
dry eyes
dry throat
cough
back pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking fesoterodine and get emergency medical treatment:
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, or lips
hoarseness
difficulty swallowing or breathing
Fesoterodine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
blurred vision
hot. dry and red skin
dry mouth
difficulty emptying your bladder
rapid heartbeat
rapid breathing
nausea or vomiting
upper body rash
confusion
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
anxiety
restlessness
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Toviaz
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page