Latanoprostene Bunod Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Latanoprostene Bunod Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618001.html
Latanoprostene Bunod Ophthalmic
pronounced as (la tan" oh pros' teen bue' nod)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic is used to treat glaucoma (condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision) and ocular hypertension (condition which causes increased pressure in the eye). Latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic is in a class of medications called prostaglandin analogs. It lowers pressure in the eye by increasing the flow of natural eye fluids out of the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eye. It is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) once a day in the evening. Use latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor. Using latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic more than once a day may decrease the effect of this medication.
Latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic controls glaucoma and ocular hypertension but does not cure them. Continue to use latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic even if you feel well. Do not stop using latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic without talking to your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Use a mirror or have someone else put the drops in your eye.
Make sure the end of the dropper is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper against your eye, fingers, or anything else.
Hold the dropper tip down at all times to prevent drops from flowing back into the bottle and contaminating the remaining contents.
Lie down or tilt your head back.
Holding the bottle between your thumb and index finger, place the dropper as near as possible to your eyelid without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your cheek or nose.
With the index finger of your other hand, pull the lower lid of the eye down to form a pocket.
Drop the prescribed number of drops into the pocket made by the lower lid and the eye. Placing the drops on the surface of the eyeball can cause stinging.
Close your eye and press lightly against the lower lid with your finger for 2 to 3 minutes to keep the medication in the eye. Do not blink.
Replace and tighten the cap right away. Do not wipe or rinse it off.
Wipe off any excess liquid from your cheek with a clean tissue. Wash your hands again.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to latanoprostene bunod, benzalkonium chloride, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are using another topical eye drop, instill it at least 5 minutes before or after you instill latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic.
tell your doctor if you have had recent eye surgery, and if you have or have ever had diabetes, eye swelling, or a torn or missing lens.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic, call your doctor.
you should know that latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic contains benzalkonium chloride, which can be absorbed by soft contact lenses. If you wear contact lenses, remove them before instilling the medication and put them back in 15 minutes later.
if you are planning to have eye surgery or have an eye injury or any type of eye or eyelid infection while using latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic, talk to your doctor immediately about whether you should continue using this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye redness
eye pain or irritation
pain after instilling the medication
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience this symptom call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
sudden changes in vision
Latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic may change your eye color to brown or a deeper shade of brown. This color change usually occurs slowly, but it may be permanent. Latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic also may cause darkening of the eyelid and skin around your eyes and an increase in the length, thickness, color, or number of your eyelashes or fine hair on your eyelids. The eyelash changes and any darkening of the skin around the eyes usually goes away when you stop using latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic. If you use latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic in only one eye, you should know that there may be a difference in color between your eyes after using the medication. Call your doctor if you notice these changes.
Latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Unopened bottles of latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic should be stored in the refrigerator. Do not freeze. After opening, the medication may be stored at room temperature for up to 8 weeks. Store latanoprostene bunod ophthalmic away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vyzulta
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page