Imetelstat Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Imetelstat Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624035.html
Imetelstat Injection
pronounced as (im″ e tel′ stat)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Imetelstat injection is used to treat certain types of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with transfusion-dependent anemia that have not responded to or cannot receive other therapies used for MDS. Imetelstat is in a class of medications called telomerase inhibitors. It works by stopping the production of unhealthy red blood cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Imetelstat comes as a powder to be mixed with a liquid and given intravenously (into the vein) by a doctor or nurse at a healthcare clinic or hospital. It is usually given over 2 hours every 4 weeks. You will be given other medicines prior to receiving your imetelstat infusion to help keep you from having side effects. Your doctor or nurse will watch you for one hour after your infusion is complete. It is important you tell your doctor or nurse how you are feeling during and after your imetelstat infusion.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving imetelstat,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to imetelstat, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in imetelstat injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You will need to have a pregnancy test before you receive this medication. You should not become pregnant during your treatment with imetelstat and for at least 1 week after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about types of birth control that will work for you. If you become pregnant while using imetelstat, call your doctor immediately. Imetelstat may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Do not breastfeed while receiving imetelstat and for at least 1 week after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking imetelstat.
do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Imetelstat may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
joint, bone and muscle pain
runny nose, congestion, sore throat, or cough
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
unusual bleeding or bruising, bleeding that lasts a long time, nosebleeds, bleeding gums, vomiting or coughing up blood, or blood in your stool or having dark, tarry stools
fever, shortness of breath, cough, chills, or pain or burning when urinating
Imetelstat may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to imetelstat. If you miss a scheduled imetelstat infusion, call your doctor right away.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking imetelstat.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Rytelo
®
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page