Ulipristal: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ulipristal
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a610020.html
Ulipristal
pronounced as (ue' li pris tal)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ulipristal is used to prevent pregnancy after unprotected sexual intercourse (sex without any method of birth control or with a birth control method that failed or was not used properly [e.g., a condom that slipped or broke or birth control pills that were not taken as scheduled]). Ulipristal should not be used to prevent pregnancy on a regular basis. This medication is to be used as an emergency contraceptive or backup in case regular birth control fails or is used incorrectly. Ulipristal is in a class of medications called progestins. It works by preventing or delaying the release of an egg from the ovary. It also may work by changing the lining of the uterus (womb) to prevent development of a pregnancy. Ulipristal may prevent pregnancy, but it will not prevent the spread of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV, the virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]) and other sexually transmitted diseases.
How should this medicine be used?
Ulipristal comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food as soon as possible after unprotected sexual intercourse or suspected failure of a hormonal contraceptive (such as birth control pills, rings or patches). Ulipristal may be taken up to 120 hours (5 days) after unprotected sexual intercourse, but the sooner it is taken, the more likely that it will prevent pregnancy. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take ulipristal exactly as directed.
Ulipristal may be used at any time during the menstrual cycle. However, it should not be used more than once during the same menstrual cycle.
If you vomit less than 3 hours after you take ulipristal, call your doctor. You may need to take another dose of this medication.
Because you can become pregnant right after treatment with ulipristal, you should use a barrier method (condom or diaphragm with spermicide) every time you have sex until your next menstrual period. Using hormonal contraceptives within 5 days of taking ulipristal may make both medications less effective. You may begin or resume using hormonal contraceptives at least 5 days after taking ulipristal, but you must continue to also use a barrier method to prevent pregnancy until after you have your next period. If you took ulipristal because of a problem with your hormonal contraceptive, contact your doctor or follow the instructions provided for that specific birth control product.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ulipristal,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ulipristal, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ulipristal tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking ulipristal. Your doctor may need to change the doses of these medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with ulipristal: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking ulipristal. Do not start this medication while taking ulipristal without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or think you may be pregnant. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take ulipristal. Do not take ulipristal taken to end an existing pregnancy.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical conditions or an ectopic pregnancy (pregnancy outside of the uterus).
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding.
you should know that after you take ulipristal, it is normal for your next menstrual period to begin up to one week earlier or later than expected. If your next menstrual period is delayed for longer than one week after the expected date, call your doctor. You may be pregnant and your doctor will probably tell you to have a pregnancy test.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ulipristal may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
painful menstrual periods
spotting or bleeding between menstrual periods
nausea
tiredness
headache
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor immediately:
severe lower abdominal pain (3 to 5 weeks after taking ulipristal)
rash, itching, hives, or swelling of the eyes, face, tongue, throat
Ulipristal may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems after you take this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat, and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about ulipristal.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ella
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page