Brolucizumab-dbll Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Brolucizumab-dbll Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620001.html
Brolucizumab-dbll Injection
pronounced as (broe" lue siz' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Brolucizumab-dbll injection is used to treat wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD; an ongoing disease of the eye that causes loss of the ability to see straight ahead and may make it more difficult to read, drive, or perform other daily activities). Brolucizumab-dbll injection is also used to treat diabetic macular edema (DME; an eye disease caused by diabetes that can lead to vision loss). Brolucizumab-dbll is in a class of medications called vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) antagonists. It works by stopping abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage in the eye(s) that may cause vision loss.
How should this medicine be used?
Brolucizumab-dbll comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected into the eye by a doctor. If you are receiving brolucizumab-dbll injection to treat wet AMD, it is usually given in a doctor's office once every 25 to 31 days for the first 3 doses, then once every 8 to 12 weeks. If you are receiving brolucizumab-dbll injection to treat DME, it is usually given in a doctor's office once every 39 to 45 days for the first 5 doses, then once every 8 to 12 weeks.
Before you receive a brolucizumab-dbll injection, your doctor will clean your eye to prevent infection and numb your eye to reduce discomfort during the injection. You may feel pressure in your eye when the medication is injected. After your injection, your doctor will need to examine your eyes before you leave the office.
Brolucizumab-dbll controls wet AMD and DME, but does not cure it. Your doctor will watch you carefully to see how well brolucizumab-dbll works for you. Talk to your doctor about how long you should continue treatment with brolucizumab-dbll.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving brolucizumab-dbll injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to brolucizumab-dbll, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in brolucizumab-dbll injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have an infection in or around the eye. Your doctor will probably tell you that you should not receive brolucizumab-dbll injection.
tell your doctor if you have any medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should not become pregnant during your treatment with brolucizumab-dbll injection and for 1 month after your final dose. If you become pregnant while receiving brolucizumab-dbll injection, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you breast-feeding. Do not breast-feed while you are receiving brolucizumab-dbll injection and for 1 month after your final dose.
you should know that brolucizumab-dbll injection may cause vision problems shortly after you receive the injection. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until your vision is back to normal.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive brolucizumab-dbll injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Some side effects from brolucizumab-dbll injection can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
eye pain, redness, or sensitivity to light
changes in vision
seeing ''floaters'' or small specks
bleeding in or around the eye
swelling of the eye or eyelid
rash, hives, itching, or redness
Brolucizumab-dbll may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about brolucizumab-dbll injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Beovu
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page