Fexofenadine and Pseudoephedrine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fexofenadine and Pseudoephedrine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601053.html
Fexofenadine and Pseudoephedrine
pronounced as (fex oh fen' a deen) (soo doe e fed' rin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine is used to relieve runny nose; sneezing; congestion (stuffy nose, sinus pressure); red, itchy, or watery eyes; or itching of the nose, throat, or roof of the mouth due to allergies. Fexofenadine is in a class of medications called antihistamines. It works by blocking the effects of histamine, a substance in the body that causes allergy symptoms. Pseudoephedrine is in a class of medications called decongestants. It works by causing narrowing of the blood vessels in the nasal passages to relieve congestion.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine comes as an extended-release (long-acting) tablet to take by mouth. Take once or twice a day on an empty stomach with water, depending on the specific product you are taking. Do not take with fruit juices such as orange, grapefruit, or apple juice. Take fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine at around the same time(s) every day.
Take fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had
some medications should not be taken with fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.if you are taking an antacid containing aluminum or magnesium (Maalox
®
, Mylanta
®
, others), take the antacid a few hours before or after fexofenadine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had angina (chest pain or pressure), glaucoma, difficulty urinating, high blood pressure, diabetes, a heart attack, an enlarged prostate, or thyroid, heart or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
nausea
heartburn
dry mouth
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
nervousness, dizziness, difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
hives; rash; itching; hoarseness; difficulty breathing or swallowing; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
fast pounding, or irregular heartbeat
Fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
If you are taking fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine extended-release tablets, you may notice something that looks like a tablet in your stool. This is just the empty tablet shell, and this does not mean that you did not get your complete dose of medication.
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Allegra-D
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page