Betaxolol Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Betaxolol Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a686004.html
Betaxolol Ophthalmic
pronounced as (be tax' oh lol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ophthalmic betaxolol is used to treat glaucoma, a condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision. Betaxolol is in a class of medications called beta blockers. It works by decreasing the pressure in the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic betaxolol comes as a solution (liquid) and a suspension (liquid) to instill in the eyes. Ophthalmic betaxolol is usually used twice a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use betaxolol exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Betaxolol eye drops control glaucoma but do not cure it. Continue to use betaxolol eye drops even if you feel well. Do not stop using betaxolol eye drops without talking to your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the label on your bottle to see if you need to shake the eye drops before using them. Shake the bottle well if the label says that you should.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
Check the instructions that came with your medication to see how you should dispense your dose. You will need to either gently squeeze the sides of the bottle or push the bottom of the bottle to dispense one drop of medication into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
If you are to use more than one drop in the same eye, wait at least 5 minutes before instilling the next drop.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using betaxolol eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to betaxolol or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking, especially other eye medications; beta blockers such as atenolol (Tenormin), carteolol (Cartrol), labetalol (Normodyne, Trandate), metoprolol (Lopressor), nadolol (Corgard), propranolol (Inderal), sotalol (Betapace), or timolol (Blocadren); quinidine (Quinidex, Quinaglute Dura-Tabs); verapamil (Calan, Isoptin); and vitamins.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had thyroid, heart, or lung disease, congestive heart failure, or diabetes.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using betaxolol, call your doctor immediately.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using betaxolol.
if you are using another topical eye medication, instill it at least 10 minutes before you instill betaxolol.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Betaxolol eye drops may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye irritation
eye tearing
headache
dizziness
insomnia
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
difficulty breathing
change in vision
eye pain
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will order certain eye tests to check your response to betaxolol.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Betoptic
®
Betoptic
®
S
Brand names of combination products
Betoptic
®
Pilo (containing Betaxolol, Pilocarpine)
Last Revised -
10/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page