Mitomycin Intravesical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mitomycin Intravesical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625084.html
Mitomycin Intravesical
pronounced as (mye″ toe mye′ sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Mitomycin is used for the treatment of a certain type of bladder cancer. Mitomycin is in a class of medications called anticancer antibiotics. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Mitomycin intravesical comes as a solution (liquid) to be infused (injected slowly) through a catheter (small flexible plastic tube) into your bladder. Mitomycin intravesical is given by a doctor or a health care provider in a medical office, hospital, or clinic. You will receive this medication weekly for six weeks.
Mitomycin intravesical may discolor your urine to a violet to blue color. Avoid contact of your urine with skin for at least 24 hours after each dose. Sit down on a toilet to urinate. Flush the toilet several times after use. Wash your hands and genital area with water and soap each time you urinate.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving mitomycin intravesical,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have a hole or tear of your bladder. Your doctor will probably tell you not to receive mitomycin intravesical.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while receiving mitomycin intravesical, call your doctor immediately. If you are able to become pregnant, you will need to take a pregnancy test before you start treatment. You should use birth control during and for 6 months after the final dose of mitomycin. Talk to your doctor about what birth control is right for you. If your partner is capable of becoming pregnant, you should use birth control during treatment and for 3 months after the final dose of mitomycin. Talk to your doctor about what birth control would work best for you and your partner.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Do not breastfeed while you are receiving mitomycin intravesical and for 1 week after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of mitomycin intravesical, call your doctor as soon as possible to reschedule.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Mitomycin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
difficulty urinating
frequent, burning, or painful urination
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, itching, hives, difficulty breathing or swallowing
blood in your urine
Mitomycin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to mitomycin.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving mitomycin.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zusduri
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page