Cenegermin-bkbj Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cenegermin-bkbj Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619001.html
Cenegermin-bkbj Ophthalmic
pronounced as (sen eh" jer men)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ophthalmic cenegermin-bkbj is used to treat neurotrophic keratitis (a degenerative eye disease that can lead to damage of the cornea [the outermost layer of the eye]). Cenegermin-bkbj is in a class of medications called recombinant human nerve growth factors. It works to heal the cornea.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic cenegermin-bkbj comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eye. It is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) six times a day, 2 hours apart, for 8 weeks. Instill cenegermin-bkbj at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use cenegermin-bkbj exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Do not shake the medication vial.
Use a new individual pipette for each application in each eye; do not reuse the pipettes.
Dispose of the vial at the end of each day, even if there is liquid remaining. Also dispose of the vial if it is more than 12 hours since you inserted the adapter into the vial.
Before you use cenegermin-bkbj for the first time, read the manufacturer's directions for use carefully. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using cenegermin-bkbj,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cenegermin-bkbj, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in cenegermin-bkbj ophthalmic. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Talk to your doctor first before using any other medications that are placed in the eye.
if you are using another eye drop, use it at least 15 minutes before or after you instill cenegermin-bkbj eye drops. If you are using an eye ointment, gel, or other viscous (thick, sticky liquid) eye drop, use it at least 15 minutes after you instill cenegermin-bkbj eye drops.
tell your doctor if you have an eye infection or if you develop one during your treatment with cenegermin-bkbj.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using cenegermin-bkbj, call your doctor.
you should know that your vision may be blurry for a short amount of time after using cenegermin-bkbj. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until your vision returns to normal.
you should know that cenegermin-bkbj eye drops should not be instilled while wearing contact lenses. If you wear contact lenses, remove them before instilling cenegermin-bkbj eye drops and you may put them back in 15 minutes later.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cenegermin-bkbj may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye pain
redness or swelling of the eye
increased eye tearing
feeling that something is in the eye
Cenegermin-bkbj may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Place this medication in the refrigerator within 5 hours of leaving the pharmacy when you pick it up, Do not freeze. Follow the directions in the manufacturer's information to store your medication. Store your medication only as directed. Make sure you understand how to store your medication properly. Dispose of any unused medication after 14 days.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows cenegermin-bkbj, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Oxervate
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page