Sturge-Weber syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Sturge-Weber syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/sturge-weber-syndrome/
Sturge-Weber syndrome
Description
Sturge-Weber syndrome is a condition that affects the development of certain blood vessels, causing abnormalities in the brain, skin, and eyes from birth. Sturge-Weber syndrome has three major features: a red or pink birthmark called a port-wine birthmark, a brain abnormality called a leptomeningeal angioma, and increased pressure in the eye (
glaucoma
). These features can vary in severity and not all individuals with Sturge-Weber syndrome have all three features.
Most people with Sturge-Weber syndrome are born with a port-wine birthmark. This type of birthmark is caused by enlargement (dilatation) of small blood vessels (capillaries) near the surface of the skin. Port-wine birthmarks are typically initially flat and can vary in color from pale pink to deep purple. In people with Sturge-Weber syndrome, the port-wine birthmark is most often on the face, typically on the forehead, temple, or eyelid. The port-wine birthmark is usually only on one side of the face but can be on both sides. Over time, the skin within the port-wine birthmark can darken and thicken.
In Sturge-Weber syndrome, there is usually abnormal formation and growth of blood vessels within the two thin layers of tissue that cover the brain and spinal cord. This abnormality, which is called leptomeningeal angioma, can affect one or both sides of the brain and impair blood flow in the brain and lead to loss of brain tissue (atrophy) and deposits of calcium (calcification) in the brain below the angioma. The decrease in blood flow caused by leptomeningeal angiomas can cause stroke-like episodes in people with Sturge-Weber syndrome. These episodes often involve temporary muscle weakness on one side of the body (hemiparesis), vision abnormalities, seizures, and
migraine
headaches. In affected individuals, these episodes usually begin by age 2. The seizures usually involve only one side of the brain (focal seizures), during which the port-wine birthmark may darken and individuals may lose consciousness. People with Sturge-Weber syndrome have varying levels of cognitive function, from normal intelligence to intellectual disability. Some individuals have learning disabilities with problems focusing similar to
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD).
In individuals with Sturge-Weber syndrome, glaucoma typically develops either in infancy or early adulthood and can cause vision impairment. In some affected infants, the pressure can become so great that the eyeballs appear enlarged and bulging (buphthalmos). Individuals with Sturge-Weber syndrome can have tangles of abnormal blood vessels (hemangiomas) in various parts of the eye. When these abnormal blood vessels develop in the network of blood vessels at the back of the eye (
choroid
), it is called a diffuse choroidal hemangioma and occurs in about one-third of individuals with Sturge-Weber syndrome. A diffuse choroidal hemangioma can cause vision loss. When present, the eye abnormalities typically occur on the same side of the head as the port-wine birthmark.
Frequency
Sturge-Weber syndrome is estimated to affect 1 in 20,000 to 50,000 individuals.
Causes
Sturge-Weber syndrome is caused by a mutation in the
GNAQ
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(q) subunit alpha (Gαq). The Gαq protein is part of a group of proteins (complex) that regulates signaling pathways to help control the development and function of blood vessels.
The
GNAQ
gene mutation that causes Sturge-Weber syndrome results in the production of a protein with impaired function. As a result, the altered Gαq protein cannot play its part in regulating signaling pathways, resulting in abnormally increased signaling. The enhanced signaling likely disrupts the regulation of blood vessel development, causing abnormal and excessive formation of vessels before birth in people with Sturge-Weber syndrome.
Learn more about the gene associated with Sturge-Weber syndrome
GNAQ
Inheritance
Sturge-Weber syndrome is not inherited. The mutation that causes this disorder is somatic, which means it occurs after conception. In Sturge-Weber syndrome, the mutation is thought to occur in a cell during early development before birth. As that cell continues to grow and divide, the cells derived from it, specifically certain cells in the brain, eyes, and skin that are involved in blood vessel formation, also have the mutation, while the body's other cells do not. This situation is called
mosaicism
. The mosaic nature of the mutations helps to explain why the abnormal blood vessel growth occurs in some parts of the body but not in others.
Other Names for This Condition
Angiomatosis aculoorbital-thalamic syndrome
Encephalofacial hemangiomatosis
Encephalofacial hemangiomatosis syndrome
Meningo-oculo-facial angiomatosis
Meningofacial angiomatosis-cerebral calcification syndrome
Neuroretinoangiomatosis
Phakomatosis, Sturge-Weber
Sturge-Weber-Dimitri syndrome
Sturge-Weber-Krabbe syndrome
SWS
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Sturge-Weber syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Sturge-Weber syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
STURGE-WEBER SYNDROME; SWS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Comi AM, Sahin M, Hammill A, Kaplan EH, Juhasz C, North P, Ball KL, Levin AV,
Cohen B, Morris J, Lo W, Roach ES; 2015 Sturge-Weber Syndrome Research Workshop.
Leveraging a Sturge-Weber Gene Discovery: An Agenda for Future Research. Pediatr
Neurol. 2016 May;58:12-24. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2015.11.009. Epub 2016
Mar 16.
Citation on PubMed
Comi AM. Sturge-Weber syndrome. Handb Clin Neurol. 2015;132:157-68. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-444-62702-5.00011-1.
Citation on PubMed
Koenraads Y, van Egmond-Ebbeling MB, de Boer JH, Imhof SM, Braun KP, Porro GL;
SWS study group. Visual outcome in Sturge-Weber syndrome: a systematic review and
Dutch multicentre cohort. Acta Ophthalmol. 2016 Nov;94(7):638-645. doi:
10.1111/aos.13074. Epub 2016 May 30.
Citation on PubMed
Shirley MD, Tang H, Gallione CJ, Baugher JD, Frelin LP, Cohen B, North PE,
Marchuk DA, Comi AM, Pevsner J. Sturge-Weber syndrome and port-wine stains caused
by somatic mutation in GNAQ. N Engl J Med. 2013 May 23;368(21):1971-9. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa1213507. Epub 2013 May 8.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Vascular Diseases
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Port-wine stain
Sturge-Weber syndrome
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page