Cisplatin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cisplatin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a684036.html
Cisplatin Injection
pronounced as (sis' pla tin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Cisplatin injection must be given in a hospital or medical facility under the supervision of a doctor who is experienced in giving chemotherapy medications for cancer.
Cisplatin may cause serious kidney problems. Kidney problems may occur more often in older people. Your doctor will order laboratory tests before and during your treatment to see if your kidneys are affected by this medication. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking aminoglycoside antibiotics such as amikacin (Amikin), gentamicin (Garamycin), or tobramycin (Tobi, Nebcin). If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: decreased urination; swelling of the face, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs; or unusual tiredness or weakness.
Cisplatin may cause serious hearing problems, especially in children. Hearing loss may be permanent in some cases. Your doctor will order tests to monitor your hearing before and during your treatment. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you have ever had radiation therapy to your head. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking aminoglycoside antibiotics such as amikacin (Amikin), gentamicin (Garamycin), or tobramycin (Tobi, Nebcin). If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: hearing loss, ringing in the ears, or dizziness.
Cisplatin may cause severe allergic reactions, especially if you have received more than one dose of cisplatin injection. If you experience an allergic reaction to cisplatin injection, it may begin within a few minutes after your infusion starts, and you may experience the following symptoms: hives; skin rash; itching; reddening of the skin; difficulty breathing or swallowing; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips; dizziness; faintness; or fast heartbeat. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of these symptoms.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before, during, and after your treatment to check your body's response to cisplatin. Your doctor may need to stop or delay your treatment if you experience certain side effects.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cisplatin is used combination with other medications to treat cancer of the testicles that has not improved or that has worsened after treatment with other medications or radiation therapy. Cisplatin is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat cancer of the ovaries (cancer that begins in the female reproductive organs where eggs are formed) that has not improved or that has worsened after treatment with other medications or radiation therapy. Cisplatin is also used alone or in combination with other medications to treat bladder cancer that can not be treated with surgery or radiation therapy alone. Cisplatin is in a class of medications known as platinum-containing compounds. It works by stopping or slowing the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Cisplatin injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected over 6 to 8 hours intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. It is usually given once every 3 to 4 weeks.
Other uses for this medicine
Cisplatin is also sometimes used to treat head and neck cancer (including cancer of the mouth, lip, cheek, tongue, palate, throat, tonsils, and sinuses), lung cancer, cancer of the cervix and esophagus, brain tumors, malignant pleural mesothlioma (cancer in the lining of the chest or abdomen), and neuroblastoma (a cancer that begins in nerve cells and occurs mainly in children). Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cisplatin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cisplatin, carboplatin (Paraplatin), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in cisplatin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving cisplatin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have kidney disease or hearing problems. Your doctor may not want you to receive cisplatin injection.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant or breast-feed while you are receiving cisplatin. If you become pregnant while receiving cisplatin, call your doctor. Cisplatin may harm the fetus.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cisplatin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
hair loss
loss in ability to taste food
hiccups
dry mouth, dark urine, decreased sweating, dry skin, and other signs of dehydration
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
swelling, pain, redness, or burning at the injection site
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
muscle cramps
difficulty walking
feeling of an electric-like shock when you bend your neck forward
seizures
sudden changes in vision, including color vision
loss of vision
eye pain
chest pain or pressure
fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
unusual bleeding or bruising
black and tarry stools
red blood in stools
bloody vomit
vomited material that looks like coffee grounds
Cisplatin may increase the risk that you will develop other cancers. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Cisplatin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
decreased urination
swelling of the face, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
unusual tiredness or weakness
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
nausea
vomiting
unusual bleeding or bruising
hearing problems
sudden changes in vision
fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet
What other information should I know?
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Platinol
®
¶
Platinol-AQ
®
¶
Other names
cis-DDP
cis-Diamminedichloroplatinum
cis-Platinum II
DDP
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
10/15/2011
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page