Fenofibrate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fenofibrate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601052.html
Fenofibrate
pronounced as (fen oh fye' brate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fenofibrate is used with a low-fat diet, exercise, and sometimes with other medications to reduce the amounts of fatty substances such as cholesterol and triglycerides in the blood and to increase the amount of HDL (high-density lipoprotein; a type of fatty substance that decreases the risk of heart disease) in the blood. Build-up of cholesterol and fats along the walls of the arteries (a process known as atherosclerosis) decreases the blood flow and, therefore, the oxygen supply to the heart, brain, and other parts of the body. This increases the risk of heart disease, angina (chest pain), strokes, and heart attacks. Although fenofibrate decreases the levels of fatty substances in the blood, it has not been shown to decrease the risk of heart attacks or strokes. Fenofibrate is in a class of medications called antilipemic agents. It works by speeding the natural processes that remove cholesterol from the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Fenofibrate comes as a capsule, a delayed-release (long-acting) capsule, and a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day. Some fenofibrate products (Fenoglide, Lipofen, and Lofibra) should be taken with a meal. Other brands (Antara, Fibricor, Tricor, Triglide, and Trilipix) may be taken with or without food. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you do not know if you should take your medication with food. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take fenofibrate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on an average dose of fenofibrate and may increase or decrease your dose depending on the results of laboratory tests that you will take to measure the amount of fatty substances in your blood. Your doctor may tell you to stop taking fenofibrate if your test results do not show improvement after 2 months.
Swallow the delayed-release tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you are taking Triglide tablets, do not use any tablets that are chipped or broken.
Fenofibrate will help decrease the amount of fatty substances in your blood only as long as you continue to take it. Continue to take fenofibrate even if you feel well. Do not stop taking fenofibrate without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fenofibrate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to any fenofibrate products, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in the fenofibrate product you are taking. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking fenofibrate. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking a bile acid resin such as cholestyramine (Questran), colesevelam (WelChol), or colestipol (Colestid), take it 1 hour after or 4-6 hours before you take fenofibrate.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney, liver, or gallbladder disease. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take fenofibrate.
tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol and if you have or have ever had diabetes or hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid gland).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking fenofibrate, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking fenofibrate.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Eat a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet. Be sure to follow all exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian. You can also visit the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) website for additional dietary information at
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/chol/chol_tlc.pdf
.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fenofibrate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
diarrhea
heartburn
pain in the back, arm, or legs
headache
joint pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
muscle pain, weakness, or tenderness; fever
blistering or peeling skin
rash; fever; trouble breathing; changes in urination; abdominal pain
hives
pain in the upper back between the shoulder blades or under the right shoulder; stomach pain, especially in the upper right part of the stomach; nausea; vomiting
redness, swelling, pain, tenderness, or warmth in one leg
shortness of breath; pain when breathing; coughing up blood
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes; difficulty swallowing or breathing; hoarseness
Fenofibrate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking fenofibrate.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain laboratory tests to check your response to fenofibrate.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Antara
®
Fenoglide
®
Lipidil
®
¶
Lipofen
®
¶
TriCor
®
Triglide
®
Trilipix
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page