Carvedilol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Carvedilol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a697042.html
Carvedilol
pronounced as (kar' ve dil ol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Carvedilol is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat heart failure (condition in which the heart cannot pump enough blood to all parts of the body) and high blood pressure. It also is used to improve survival after a heart attack. Carvedilol is often used in combination with other medications. Carvedilol is in a class of medications called beta-blockers. It works by relaxing blood vessels and slowing heart rate to improve blood flow and decrease blood pressure
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Carvedilol comes as a tablet and an extended-release (long-acting) capsule to take by mouth. The tablet is usually taken twice a day with food. The extended-release capsule is usually taken once a day in the morning with food. Try to take carvedilol at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take carvedilol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the extended-release capsules whole. Do not chew or crush the capsules, and do not divide the beads inside a capsule into more than one dose. If you are unable to swallow the capsules, you may carefully open a capsule and sprinkle all of the beads it contains over a spoonful of cool or room temperature applesauce. Swallow the entire mixture immediately without chewing.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of carvedilol and gradually increase your dose to allow your body to adjust to the medication. Talk to your doctor about how you feel and about any symptoms you experience during this time.
Carvedilol may help to control your condition but will not cure it. Continue taking carvedilol even if you feel well. Do not stop taking carvedilol without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop taking carvedilol, you may experience serious heart problems such as severe chest pain, a heart attack, or an irregular heartbeat. Your doctor will probably want to decrease your dose gradually over 1 to 2 weeks. Your doctor will watch you carefully and will probably tell you to avoid physical activity during this time.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking carvedilol,
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with carvedilol: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking carvedilol. Do not start this medication while taking carvedilol without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you have are allergic to carvedilol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in carvedilol tablets and extended- release capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, herbal products, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking carvedilol. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma or other breathing problems, a slow or irregular heartbeat, heart failure, or liver disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take carvedilol.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had problems with blood flow in your feet or legs, diabetes or any other condition that causes you to have low blood sugar, hyperthyroidism (condition in which there is too much thyroid hormone in the body), low blood pressure, Prinzmetal's angina (chest pain that comes at rest with no obvious cause), pheochromocytoma (a tumor that develops on a gland near the kidneys and may cause high blood pressure and fast heartbeat), or heart, kidney, or liver disease. Also tell your doctor if you have ever had a serious allergic reaction to a food or any other substance.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking carvedilol, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental or eye surgery, tell the doctor, dentist, or eye doctor that you are taking carvedilol.
you should know that this medication may make you feel tired, dizzy, or lightheaded, especially when you start taking carvedilol and when your dose is increased. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you. Be especially careful during the first hour after you take the medication.
you should know that carvedilol may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting, especially when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking carvedilol. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that carvedilol may increase the risk of hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) and prevent the warning signs and symptoms that would tell you that your blood sugar is low. Let your doctor know if you are unable to eat or drink normally or are vomiting while you are taking carvedilol. You should know the symptoms of low blood sugar and what to do if you have these symptoms.
you should know that if you have allergic reactions to different substances, your reactions may be worse while you are taking carvedilol, and your allergic reactions may not respond to the usual doses of injectable epinephrine.
if you wear contact lenses, your eyes may become dry during your treatment with carvedilol. Tell your doctor if this becomes bothersome.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Carvedilol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
weakness
lightheadedness
dizziness
headache
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
vision changes
joint pain
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
stuffy or runny nose
cough
dry eyes
numbness, burning, or tingling in the arms or legs
Some side effects may be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fainting
shortness of breath
weight gain
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
chest pain
slow or irregular heartbeat
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the face, lips, tongue, or throat
difficulty breathing and swallowing
Carvedilol may cause other side effects. Tell your doctor if you experience any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
slow heartbeat
dizziness
fainting
difficulty breathing
cough or wheezing
vomiting
loss of consciousness
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain laboratory tests to check your body's response to carvedilol.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Coreg
®
Coreg
®
CR
Last Revised -
08/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page