Imipenem, Cilastatin, and Relebactam Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Imipenem, Cilastatin, and Relebactam Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619046.html
Imipenem, Cilastatin, and Relebactam Injection
pronounced as (i mi pen' em) (sye la stat' in) (rel" e bak' tam)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection is used to treat adults with certain serious urinary tract infections including kidney infections, and certain serious abdominal (stomach) infections when there are few or no other treatment options. It is also used to treat certain types of pneumonia that developed in adults who are on ventilators or who were already in a hospital. Imipenem is in a class of medications called carbapenem antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria. Cilastatin is in a class of medications called dehydropeptidase inhibitors. It works by helping imipenem stay active in your body for a longer period of time. Relebactam is in a class of medications called beta-lactamase inhibitors. It works by preventing bacteria from destroying imipenem.
Antibiotics such as imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking or using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected intravenously (into a vein) over a period of 30 minutes. It is usually given every 6 hours for 4 to 14 days, or as long your doctor recommends treatment.
You may receive imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection in a hospital, or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be using imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions. Ask your healthcare provider what to do if you have any problems injecting imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, tell your doctor.
Use imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to imipenem, cilastatin, relebactam, any other medications especially carbapenems such as ertapenem (Invanz) or meropenem (Merrem), penicillins such as amoxicillin (Amoxil, in Augmentin), ampicillin, or penicillin V potassium (Penicillin VK), cephalosporins such as cefaclor, cefadroxil, or cephalexin (Keflex), or any of the ingredients in imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactiam injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving imipenem, cilastin, and relebactam injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had seizures, a stroke, brain lesions, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
headache
swelling, pain, or redness near the spot where the medication was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
seizures
confusion
muscle jerks, shakes, or spasms that you can't control
rash; hives; swelling of the eyes, face, lips or throat; difficulty swallowing or breathing
Imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Your healthcare provider will tell you how to store your medication. Store your medication only as directed. Make sure you understand how to store your medication properly.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
seizures
confusion
muscle jerks, shakes, or spasms
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to imipenem, cilastatin, and relebactam injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Recarbrio
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page