Palonosetron Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Palonosetron Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a610002.html
Palonosetron Injection
pronounced as (pal" oh noe' se tron)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Palonosetron injection is used to prevent nausea and vomiting that may occur within 24 hours after receiving cancer chemotherapy or surgery. It is also used to prevent delayed nausea and vomiting that may occur several days after receiving certain chemotherapy medications. Palonosetron injection is in a class of medications called 5-HT
3
receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of serotonin, a natural substance that may cause nausea and vomiting.
How should this medicine be used?
Palonosetron injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) by a healthcare provider in a hospital or clinic. When palonosetron is used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy, it is usually given as a single dose about 30 minutes before the start of chemotherapy. If you are receiving more than one course of chemotherapy, you may receive a dose of palonosetron before each treatment cycle. When palonosetron is used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by surgery, it is usually given as a single dose just before the surgery.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving palonosetron injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to palonosetron, alosetron (Lotronex), dolasetron (Anzemet), granisetron (Kytril, Sancuso), ondansetron (Zofran), or any other medications, or any of the ingredients in palonosetron injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the manufacturer's patient information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving palonosetron injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you more carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving palonosetron injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Palonosetron injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
constipation
pain, redness, or swelling at the injection site
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
chest pain
swelling of the face
changes in heart beat or heart rhythm
dizziness or lightheadedness
fainting
fast, slow or irregular heartbeat
agitation
confusion
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea
loss of coordination
stiff or twitching muscles
seizures
coma (loss of consciousness)
Palonosetron injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
seizures
fainting
difficulty breathing
pale or blue-colored skin
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your doctor any questions you have about your medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aloxi
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2015
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page