Vibegron: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Vibegron
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621015.html
Vibegron
pronounced as (vye beg' ron)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Vibegron is used to treat overactive bladder (a condition in which the bladder muscles contract uncontrollably and cause frequent urination, urgent need to urinate, and inability to control urination) in adults. Vibegron is also used in combination with other medications to treat overactive bladder in men who have an enlarged prostate (BPH; benign prostatic hyperplasia). Vibegron is in a class of medications called beta-3 adrenergic agonists. It works by relaxing the bladder muscles to increase bladder capacity.
How should this medicine be used?
Vibegron comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once daily with or without food. Take vibegron at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take vibegron exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablet whole with a glass of water. If you are not able to swallow the tablet whole, crush the tablet and mix it with one tablespoon (15 mL) of applesauce. Swallow the mixture immediately with a glass of water.
Vibegron controls the symptoms of overactive bladder, but does not cure the condition. Continue to take vibegron even if you feel well. Do not stop taking vibegron without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking vibegron,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to vibegron, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in vibegron tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking vibegron. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had trouble emptying your bladder or a weak urine stream, hypertension (high blood pressure), or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking vibegron, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Vibegron may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
diarrhea
nausea
fever, runny or stuffy nose, sore throat, or other signs of infection
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
difficulty emptying the bladder or weak urine stream
fever or painful, urgent, or frequent urination
swelling of the eyes, face, tongue, lips, or throat, with or without difficulty breathing
rash, itching, or hives
Vibegron may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Gemtesa
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page