Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/congenital-bile-acid-synthesis-defect-type-1/
Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1
Description
Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1 is a disorder characterized by cholestasis, a condition that impairs the production and release of a digestive fluid called bile from liver cells. Bile is used during digestion to absorb fats and fat-soluble vitamins, such as vitamins A, D, E, and K. People with congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1 cannot produce (synthesize) bile acids, which are a component of bile that stimulate bile flow and help it absorb fats and fat-soluble vitamins. As a result, an abnormal form of bile is produced.
The signs and symptoms of congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1 often develop during the first weeks of life, but they can begin anytime from infancy into adulthood. Affected infants often have a failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice) due to impaired bile flow and a buildup of partially formed bile. Excess fat in the feces (steatorrhea) is an additional feature of congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1. As the condition progresses, affected individuals can develop liver abnormalities including an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), inflammation, or chronic liver disease (cirrhosis). The spleen may also become enlarged (splenomegaly). The inability to absorb certain fat-soluble vitamins (vitamin D in particular) can result in softening and weakening of the bones (
rickets
) in some individuals.
If left untreated, congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1 often leads to cirrhosis and death in childhood.
Frequency
The prevalence of congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1 is unknown; however, it is the most common of all the congenital defects of bile acid synthesis. Together, these conditions are thought to have a prevalence of 1 to 9 per million people.
Causes
Mutations in the
HSD3B7
gene cause congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1. The
HSD3B7
gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 7 (3β-HSD7). This enzyme is found in liver cells that produce bile acids. Bile acids are produced from cholesterol in a multi-step process. The 3β-HSD7 enzyme is responsible for the second step in that process, which converts 7alpha(α)-hydroxycholesterol to 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one.
HSD3B7
gene mutations result in a 3β-HSD7 enzyme with little or no function. Without enough functional 3β-HSD7 enzyme, the conversion of 7α-hydroxycholesterol to 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one is impaired. The 7α-hydroxycholesterol instead gets converted into abnormal bile acid compounds that cannot be transported out of the liver into the intestine, where the bile acids are needed to digest fats. As a result, cholesterol and other fats build up in the liver and fat-soluble vitamins are not absorbed, which contribute to the signs and symptoms of congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1.
Learn more about the gene associated with Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1
HSD3B7
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
3beta-HSDH deficiency
3beta-hydroxy-delta-5-C27-steroid dehydrogenase deficiency
3beta-hydroxy-delta-5-C27-steroid oxidoreductase deficiency
CBAS1
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital bile acid synthesis defect 1
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Congenital bile acid synthesis defect type 1
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1; CBAS1
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Cheng JB, Jacquemin E, Gerhardt M, Nazer H, Cresteil D, Heubi JE, Setchell KD,
Russell DW. Molecular genetics of 3beta-hydroxy-Delta5-C27-steroid oxidoreductase
deficiency in 16 patients with loss of bile acid synthesis and liver disease. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Apr;88(4):1833-41. doi: 10.1210/jc.2002-021580.
Citation on PubMed
Clayton PT. Disorders of bile acid synthesis. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2011
Jun;34(3):593-604. doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9259-3. Epub 2011 Jan 13.
Citation on PubMed
Subramaniam P, Clayton PT, Portmann BC, Mieli-Vergani G, Hadzic N. Variable
clinical spectrum of the most common inborn error of bile acid
metabolism--3beta-hydroxy-Delta 5-C27-steroid dehydrogenase deficiency. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2010 Jan;50(1):61-6. doi: 10.1097/MPG.0b013e3181b47b34.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Liver Diseases
Rickets
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Bile
Cholestasis
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page