Molnupiravir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Molnupiravir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622027.html
Molnupiravir
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Molnupiravir is currently being studied for the treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Only limited clinical trial information is available at this time to support the use of molnupiravir for the treatment of COVID-19. More information is needed to know how well molnupiravir will work for the treatment of COVID-19 and the possible adverse events from it.
Molnupiravir has not undergone the standard review to be approved by the FDA for use. However, the FDA has approved an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) to allow certain adults to receive molnupiravir for treatment of COVID-19.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Molnupiravir is used to treat coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19 infection) caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus in adults who have mild to moderate symptoms and are at risk of severe disease that could result in hospitalization or death when other treatments are either not available or cannot be used. Molnupiravir is in a class of medications called antivirals. It works by stopping the virus from spreading in the body..
How should this medicine be used?
Molnupiravir comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food two times a day for 5 days. Take molnupiravir at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take molnupiravir exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Take molnupiravir until you finish the prescription, even if you start to feel better. Do not stop taking molnupiravir without talking to your doctor. If you feel worse or develop new symptoms while taking molnupiravir, or if your COVID-19 symptoms do not start to get better, call your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking molnupiravir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to molnupiravir, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in molnupiravir tablet. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding or plan to become pregnant or breastfeed while taking molnupiravir. Molnupiravir may cause harm to the unborn baby if used in pregnancy and is not recommended for use in pregnant women unless other treatment options are not available and it is decided with your doctor that the potential benefit outweighs the risk. Women should use a reliable birth control method during treatment with molnupiravir and for 4 days after completing therapy. Men should use contraception during treatment and for 3 months after. You may be asked to take a pregnancy test before starting molnupiravir. If you become pregnant while taking molnupiravir, call your doctor immediately. Breastfeeding is not recommended during treatment or for 4 days following treatment with molnupiravir.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose within 10 hours of the time it is usually taken, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if you miss a dose by more than 10 hours, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Molnupiravir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
dizziness
Molnupiravir may alter bone or cartilage growth in children and is not recommended for people less than 18 years of age. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Molnupiravir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
You should continue to isolate as directed by your doctor and follow public health practices such as wearing a mask, social distancing, and frequent hand washing.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. represents that this information about molnupiravir was formulated with a reasonable standard of care, and in conformity with professional standards in the field. Readers are cautioned that molnupiravir is not approved for treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by SARS-CoV-2, but rather, are being investigated for and are currently available under, an FDA emergency use authorization (EUA) for the treatment of COVID-19 in certain adults 18 years of age and older. The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. makes no representations or warranties, express or implied, including, but not limited to, any implied warranty of merchantability and/or fitness for a particular purpose, with respect to the information, and specifically disclaims all such warranties. Readers of the information about molnupiravir are advised that ASHP is not responsible for the continued currency of the information, for any errors or omissions, and/or for any consequences arising from the use of this information. Readers are advised that decisions regarding drug therapy are complex medical decisions requiring the independent, informed decision of an appropriate health care professional, and the information contained in this information is provided for informational purposes only. The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. does not endorse or recommend the use of any drug. This information about molnupiravir is not to be considered individual patient advice. Because of the changing nature of drug information, you are advised to consult with your physician or pharmacist about specific clinical use of any and all medications.
Brand names
Lagevrio
®
Other names
MK-4482
Last Revised -
04/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page