Vortioxetine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Vortioxetine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614003.html
Vortioxetine
pronounced as (vor'' tye ox' e teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
A small number of children, teenagers, and young adults (up to 24 years of age) who took antidepressants ('mood elevators') such as vortioxetine during clinical studies became suicidal (thinking about harming or killing oneself or planning or trying to do so). Children, teenagers, and young adults who take antidepressants to treat depression or other mental illnesses may be more likely to become suicidal than children, teenagers, and young adults who do not take antidepressants to treat these conditions. However, there are also risks when depression is not treated in children and teenagers. Talk to your child's doctor about these risks and whether your child should take an antidepressant. Vortioxetine has not been studied in children younger than 18 years of age.
You should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways when you take vortioxetine or other antidepressants even if you are an adult over 24 years of age. You may become suicidal, especially at the beginning of your treatment and any time that your dose is increased or decreased. You, your family, or your caregiver should call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: new or worsening depression; thinking about harming or killing yourself, or planning or trying to do so; extreme worry; agitation; panic attacks; difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep; aggressive behavior; irritability; acting without thinking; severe restlessness; and frenzied abnormal excitement. Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
Your healthcare provider will want to see you often while you are taking vortioxetine, especially at the beginning of your treatment. Be sure to keep all appointments for office visits with your doctor.
The doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with vortioxetine. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also obtain the Medication Guide from the FDA website:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
.
No matter what your age, before you take an antidepressant, you, your parent, or your caregiver should talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of treating your condition with an antidepressant or with other treatments. You should also talk about the risks and benefits of not treating your condition. You should know that having depression or another mental illness greatly increases the risk that you will become suicidal. This risk is higher if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had bipolar disorder (mood that changes from depressed to abnormally excited) or mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood) or has thought about or attempted suicide. Talk to your doctor about your condition, symptoms, and personal and family medical history. You and your doctor will decide what type of treatment is right for you.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Vortioxetine is used to treat depression in adults. Vortioxetine is in a class of medications called serotonin modulators. It works mainly by increasing the amount of serotonin, a natural substance in the brain that helps maintain mental balance.
How should this medicine be used?
Vortioxetine comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day. Take vortioxetine at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take vortioxetine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may adjust your dose of vortioxetine depending on how well you respond to treatment and whether you experience side effects. Be sure to talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment with vortioxetine.
It may take 2 to 4 weeks or longer before you feel the full benefit of vortioxetine. Continue to take vortioxetine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking vortioxetine without talking to your doctor. Your doctor will probably decrease your dose gradually. If you suddenly stop taking vortioxetine, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as headache, mood changes, irritability, agitation, nausea, dizziness, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet, anxiety, confusion, sweating, shaking, frenzied or abnormally excited mood, ringing in the ears, tiredness, difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep. and seizures. Tell your doctor if you experience any of these symptoms while you are decreasing your dose of vortioxetine or soon after you stop taking vortioxetine.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking vortioxetine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to vortioxetine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in vortioxetine tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, including isocarboxazid (Marplan), linezolid (Zyvox), methylene blue, phenelzine (Nardil), selegiline (Emsam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate) . Your doctor may tell you not to take vortioxetine. If you stop taking vortioxetine, you should wait at least 21 days before you start to take an MAO inhibitor.
some medications should not be taken with vortioxetine. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with vortioxetine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting vortioxetine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking vortioxetine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacists
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with vortioxetine: St. John's wort; tryptophan. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking vortioxetine. Do not start any of these medications while taking vortioxetine without discussing with your healthcare provider
tell your doctor if you have a low level of sodium in your blood, if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, and if you have or have ever had seizures, glaucoma (increased pressure in the eye that may cause loss of sight), or bleeding problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking vortioxetine, call your doctor. Vortioxetine may cause problems in newborns following delivery if it is taken during the last few months of pregnancy.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, or a medical test that involves dyes, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking vortioxetine.
you should know that vortioxetine may affect your judgment, thinking, and movements. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking vortioxetine.
you should know that vortioxetine may cause angle-closure glaucoma (a condition where the fluid is suddenly blocked and unable to flow out of the eye causing a quick, severe increase in eye pressure which may lead to a loss of vision). Talk to your doctor about having an eye examination before you start taking this medication. If you have nausea, eye pain, changes in vision, such as seeing colored rings around lights, and swelling or redness in or around the eye, call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment right away.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Vortioxetine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
gas
dry mouth
dizziness
unusual dreams
sexual problems in males; decreased sex drive, inability to get or keep an erection, or delayed or absent ejaculation
sexual problems in females; decreased sex drive, or delayed orgasm or unable to have an orgasm
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING or SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS sections, call your doctor immediately:
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat
hoarseness
difficulty breathing or swallowing
unusual bruising or bleeding
fever, sweating, confusion, fast or irregular heartbeat, severe muscle stiffness or twitching, agitation, hallucinations, loss of coordination, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
nosebleed
headache
difficulty concentrating
memory problems
confusion
weakness
unsteadiness
hallucinations
fainting
seizures
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
Vortioxetine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea
dizziness
diarrhea
stomach pain
itching
sleepiness
flushing
agitation, hallucinations, fever, sweating, confusion, fast heartbeat, shivering, severe muscle stiffness or twitching, loss of coordination, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test (especially those that involve methylene blue), tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking vortioxetine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Trintellix
®
Brintellix
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
01/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page