Budesonide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Budesonide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608007.html
Budesonide
pronounced as (bue des' oh nide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Budesonide (Entocort EC) is used to treat Crohn's disease (a condition in which the body attacks the lining of the digestive tract, causing pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fever) in adults and children 8 years of age and older. Budesonide (Tarpeyo) is used to decrease protein in the urine in patients with primary immunoglobulin A nephropathy (kidney disease that occurs in some people when too much immunoglobin A builds up in the kidney, causing inflammation). Budesonide (Uceris) is used to treat ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum). Budesonide is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by decreasing inflammation (swelling) in the digestive tract of people who have Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis. or in the kidney of people with nephropathy.
How should this medicine be used?
Budesonide comes as a capsule (Enterocort EC, Tarpeyo) and tablet (Uceris)to take by mouth. Budesonide capsules (Enterocort EC, Tarpeyo) are usually taken once a day in the morning. Budesonide (Tarpeyo) should be taken at least one hour before a meal. B Budesonide tablet (Uceris) is taken once daily in the morning with or without food. Your doctor will tell you how long to take budesonide.Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take budesonide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them. If you are unable to swallow the budesonide (Entocort EC) capsules whole, the capsules may be opened and sprinkled on a tablespoonful of apple sauce, mixed well and swallowed whole with no chewing within 30 minutes of mixing. The applesauce mixture should be followed by a full glass of water.
Budesonide may help control your symptoms, but it will not cure your condition. Your doctor will watch you carefully to see how well budesonide works for you. If your symptoms are controlled, your doctor may decrease your dose of budesonide capsules. It is important to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking budesonide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to budesonide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in budesonide capsules or tablet. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has had diabetes (high blood sugar) or glaucoma, or if you have, high blood pressure, osteoporosis (a condition in which the bones become thin and weak and break easily), stomach ulcer, cataracts, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you have a current infection or have had or have tuberculosis or exposure to someone with tuberculosis.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking budesonide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, think you may be pregnant, or plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking budesonide, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking budesonide.
tell your doctor if you have never had chicken pox or measles and you have not been vaccinated against these infections. Stay away from people who are sick, especially people who have chicken pox or measles. If you are exposed to one of these infections or if you develop symptoms of one of these infections, call your doctor right away. You may need treatment to protect you from these infections.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Budesonide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
dizziness
runny nose, sneezing, coughing
nausea
indigestion
abdominal pain
dry, itchy skin
gas
vomiting
fatigue
back pain
joint pain or aches
muscle aches, spasms or cramps
dry, itchy skin
difficulty sleeping
facial or extremity swelling
acne
weight gain
difficulty sleeping
mood changes
facial hair
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash, throat swelling, difficulty breathing
fever, cough, shortness of breath
abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting
changes in vision
bruising
bruising, swelling of the face, fatty pad or hump between your shoulders, easy bruising, stretch marks on the skin
Budesonide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication or if your symptoms get worse.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking budesonide.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Entocort
®
EC
Tarpeyo
®
Uceris
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page