Cefazolin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cefazolin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682731.html
Cefazolin Injection
pronounced as (sef a' zoe lin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cefazolin injection is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria. Cefazolin injection also may be used around the time of surgery in order to prevent the patient from getting an infection. Cefazolin injection is in a class of medications called cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as cefazolin injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking antibiotics when they are not needed may cause them not to work later when you do have an infection from bacteria.
How should this medicine be used?
Cefazolin injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid, or as a premixed product, to be injected intravenously (into a vein) usually over a period of 30 minutes. Cefazolin injection can also be given intramuscularly (into a muscle). It is given every 6, 8, or 12 hours. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection you have and how your body responds to the medication.
You may receive cefazolin injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving cefazolin injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with cefazolin injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Use cefazolin injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using cefazolin injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
Cefazolin injection is also sometimes used for certain penicillin allergic patients who have a heart condition and are having a dental or upper respiratory tract (nose, mouth, throat, voice box) procedure, in order to prevent them from developing a heart valve infection. Cefazolin injection is also sometimes used to treat certain penicillin allergic women who are in labor in order to prevent the newborn from developing an infection.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using cefazolin injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with cefazolin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting cefazolin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while receiving cefazolin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had gastrointestinal disease (GI; affecting the stomach or intestines), especially colitis (condition that causes swelling in the lining of the colon [large intestine]), or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using cefazolin injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cefazolin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
white patches in mouth
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
pain, redness, swelling, or bleeding near the place where cefazolin was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking cefazolin injection and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
rash, hives, itching, difficulty breathing or swallowing; or blistering, peeling, or shedding skin
swelling in legs and feet
decreased urination
dark urine, yellowing of skin or eyes, pain in the upper right part of stomach
fainting
a return of fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
seizures
Cefazolin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Your healthcare provider will tell you how to store your medication. Store your medication only as directed. Make sure you understand how to store your medication properly.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website (
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
) for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to cefazolin injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking cefazolin injection.
If you are diabetic and test your urine for sugar, ask your doctor or pharmacist to recommend a product for use while receiving cefazolin.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ancef
®
¶
Kefzol
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page