Burn-McKeown syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Burn-McKeown syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/burn-mckeown-syndrome/
Burn-McKeown syndrome
Description
Burn-McKeown syndrome is a disorder that is present from birth (congenital) and involves abnormalities of the nasal passages, characteristic facial features, hearing loss, heart abnormalities, and short stature.
In people with Burn-McKeown syndrome, both nasal passages are usually narrowed (bilateral choanal stenosis) or completely blocked (bilateral choanal atresia), which can cause life-threatening breathing problems in infancy without surgical repair. Typical facial features include narrow openings of the eyelids (
short palpebral fissures
); a gap (
coloboma
) in the lower eyelids; widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism); a prominent bridge of the nose; a short space between the nose and the upper lip (philtrum); a small opening of the mouth (microstomia); and large,
protruding ears
.
Some people with Burn-McKeown syndrome have congenital hearing loss in both ears which varies in severity among affected individuals. The hearing loss is described as mixed, which means that it is caused by both changes in the inner
ear
(sensorineural hearing loss) and changes in the middle ear (conductive hearing loss).
Other features that can occur in Burn-McKeown syndrome include mild short stature and congenital heart defects such as patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). The ductus arteriosus is a connection between two major arteries, the aorta and the pulmonary artery. This connection is open during fetal development and normally closes shortly after birth. However, the ductus arteriosus remains open, or patent, in babies with PDA. If untreated, this heart defect causes infants to breathe rapidly, feed poorly, and gain weight slowly; in severe cases, it can lead to heart failure. Intelligence is unaffected in Burn-McKeown syndrome.
Frequency
Burn-McKeown syndrome is a rare disorder; its prevalence is unknown. Only a small number of affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
Causes
Burn-McKeown syndrome is caused by mutations in the
TXNL4A
gene or in an area of genetic material near the
TXNL4A
gene called the promoter region, which controls the production of protein from the gene. The
TXNL4A
gene provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of a protein complex called the major spliceosome, which is the larger of two types of spliceosomes found in human cells. Spliceosomes help process messenger RNA (mRNA), which is a chemical cousin of DNA that serves as a genetic blueprint for making proteins. Spliceosomes recognize and then remove regions called introns from immature mRNA molecules to help produce mature mRNA.
The mutations affecting the
TXNL4A
gene that cause Burn-McKeown syndrome reduce the amount of protein produced from the gene. Research suggests that reduced quantities of this spliceosome subunit affect the assembly of the major spliceosome and change the production of a particular group of mRNA molecules. The details of these changes and their relationship to the specific signs and symptoms of Burn-McKeown syndrome are unknown. However, mutations in several genes involved in spliceosome formation or function have been shown to cause other conditions with abnormalities affecting the head and face (craniofacial malformations), so craniofacial development is thought to be particularly sensitive to spliceosome problems.
Learn more about the gene associated with Burn-McKeown syndrome
TXNL4A
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Bilateral choanal atresia, cardiac defects, deafness, and dysmorphic appearance
BMKS
Choanal atresia-hearing loss-cardiac defects-craniofacial dysmorphism syndrome
Oculo-oto-facial dysplasia
Oculootofacial dysplasia
OOFD
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Choanal atresia-hearing loss-cardiac defects-craniofacial dysmorphism syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Burn-McKeown syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
BURN-MCKEOWN SYNDROME; BMKS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Burn J, McKeown C, Wagget J, Bray R, Goodship J. New dysmorphic syndrome with
choanal atresia in siblings. Clin Dysmorphol. 1992 Jul;1(3):137-44.
Citation on PubMed
Hing AV, Leblond C, Sze RW, Starr JR, Monks S, Parisi MA. A novel
oculo-oto-facial dysplasia in a Native Alaskan community with autosomal recessive
inheritance. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Apr 15;140(8):804-12. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.31160.
Citation on PubMed
Lehalle D, Wieczorek D, Zechi-Ceide RM, Passos-Bueno MR, Lyonnet S, Amiel J,
Gordon CT. A review of craniofacial disorders caused by spliceosomal defects.
Clin Genet. 2015 Nov;88(5):405-15. doi: 10.1111/cge.12596. Epub 2015 May 1.
Citation on PubMed
Toriello HV, Higgins JV. A boy with choanal atresia and cardiac defect:
Burn-McKeown syndrome? Clin Dysmorphol. 1999 Apr;8(2):143-5.
Citation on PubMed
Wieczorek D, Gillessen-Kaesbach G. Oculo-oto-facial dysplasia (OOFD) versus
Burn-McKeown syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Nov 1;140(21):2381-2; author reply
2383-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31478. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Wieczorek D, Newman WG, Wieland T, Berulava T, Kaffe M, Falkenstein D, Beetz
C, Graf E, Schwarzmayr T, Douzgou S, Clayton-Smith J, Daly SB, Williams SG,
Bhaskar SS, Urquhart JE, Anderson B, O'Sullivan J, Boute O, Gundlach J, Czeschik
JC, van Essen AJ, Hazan F, Park S, Hing A, Kuechler A, Lohmann DR, Ludwig KU,
Mangold E, Steenpass L, Zeschnigk M, Lemke JR, Lourenco CM, Hehr U, Prott EC,
Waldenberger M, Bohmer AC, Horsthemke B, O'Keefe RT, Meitinger T, Burn J, Ludecke
HJ, Strom TM. Compound heterozygosity of low-frequency promoter deletions and
rare loss-of-function mutations in TXNL4A causes Burn-McKeown syndrome. Am J Hum
Genet. 2014 Dec 4;95(6):698-707. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.10.014. Epub 2014 Nov
26.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Wieczorek D, Teber OA, Lohmann D, Gillessen-Kaesbach G. Two brothers with
Burn-McKeown syndrome. Clin Dysmorphol. 2003 Jul;12(3):171-4. doi:
10.1097/01.mcd.0000072163.33788.c4.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Congenital Heart Defects
Craniofacial Abnormalities
Genetic Disorders
Hearing Disorders and Deafness
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Choanal atresia
Genetics
Hearing loss
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page