Glucarpidase: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Glucarpidase
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613009.html
Glucarpidase
pronounced as (gloo kar' pi dayz)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Glucarpidase is used to prevent harmful effects of methotrexate (Rheumatrex, Trexall) in patients with kidney disease who are receiving methotrexate to treat certain types of cancer. Glucarpidase is in a class of medications called enzymes. It works by helping to break down and remove methotrexate from the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Glucarpidase comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually given over 5 minutes as a one-time dose. Glucarpidase is given along with leucovorin (another medication used to prevent harmful effects of methotrexate) until laboratory tests show treatment is no longer needed.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking glucarpidase,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to glucarpidase, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in glucarpidase injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving glucarpidase injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are receiving leucovorin, it should be given at least 2 hours before or 2 hours after glucarpidase.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking glucarpidase, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Glucarpidase may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever
chills
flushing or feeling hot
rash
hives
itching
throat tightness or difficulty breathing
feelings of numbness, tingling, pricking, burning, or creeping on the skin
headache
Glucarpidase may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to glucarpidase.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about glucarpidase.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Voraxaze
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2013
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page