X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/x-linked-cardiac-valvular-dysplasia/
X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia
Description
X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia is a condition characterized by the abnormal development (dysplasia) of heart (cardiac) valves. The normal heart has four valves, two on the left side of the heart and two on the right side, that allow blood to move through the heart and prevent blood from flowing backward. In X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia, one or more of the four heart valves is thickened and cannot open and close completely when the heart beats and pumps blood. These malformed valves can cause abnormal blood flow and an irregular heart sound during a heartbeat (heart murmur).
The signs and symptoms of X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia vary greatly among affected individuals. Some people have no health problems, while in others blood can leak through the thickened and partially closed valves. This valve leakage (regurgitation) typically affects the mitral valve, which connects the two left chambers of the heart, or the aortic valve, which regulates blood flow from the heart into the large artery called the aorta. Valve regurgitation forces the heart to pump harder to move blood through the heart. As a result, affected individuals may develop chest pains, shortness of breath, or lightheadedness.
In X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia, the mitral or aortic valve can also be prolapsed, which means that the valve is weak or floppy. Valve prolapse further prevents the thickened valve from closing properly and can lead to valve regurgitation. Other rare complications of X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia include inflammation of the inner lining of the heart (endocarditis), abnormal blood clots, or sudden death.
X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia can be diagnosed anytime from birth (in some cases prenatally) to late adulthood but is typically diagnosed in early to mid-adulthood because valve malformation is often a slow process. This condition affects males more often and more severely than females.
Frequency
The prevalence of X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia is unknown. Approximately 3 percent of the population has a
heart valve
defect, only a small fraction of which are associated with X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia.
Causes
X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia is caused by mutations in the
FLNA
gene. This gene provides instructions for producing the protein filamin A, which helps build cells' extensive internal network of protein filaments called the
cytoskeleton
. The cytoskeleton gives structure to cells and allows them the flexibility to change shape. Filamin A primarily attaches (binds) to another protein called
actin
and helps it form the branching network of filaments that make up the cytoskeleton.
Filamin A also plays a role in the organization of the extracellular matrix, which is the lattice of proteins and other molecules outside the cell. Filamin A helps anchor cells to the extracellular matrix to ensure that cells are correctly positioned and signals can be exchanged between the cell and the extracellular matrix. Proper development of
heart valves
requires precise organization of cells within the extracellular matrix.
FLNA
gene mutations that cause X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia decrease the protein's ability to bind to actin and other proteins within the cell. As a result, the cell cytoskeleton is weakened and the extracellular matrix is disorganized. The cells' decreased ability to change shape impairs the valve's ability to open and close when the heart pumps blood. In addition, it appears that excess proteins are produced in the abnormal extracellular matrix, causing the valves to become thickened and further impairing their ability to open and close normally.
Filamin A is important in cells that make up many tissues in the body; it is unclear why the heart valves are the only tissue affected by the
FLNA
gene mutations that cause X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia.
Learn more about the gene associated with X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia
FLNA
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an X-linked pattern. A condition is considered X-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the X chromosome, one of the two
sex chromosomes
in each cell. In males, who have only one X chromosome, a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females, who have two copies of the X chromosome, one altered copy of the gene in each cell can lead to less severe features of the condition or may cause no signs or symptoms at all. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
Other Names for This Condition
Congenital valvular heart disease
CVD1
Filamin-A-associated myxomatous mitral valve disease
Filamin-A-related myxomatous mitral valve dystrophy
X-linked myxomatous valvular dystrophy
XMVD
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
FLNA-related X-linked myxomatous valvular dysplasia
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CARDIAC VALVULAR DYSPLASIA, X-LINKED; CVDPX
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Bernstein JA, Bernstein D, Hehr U, Hudgins L. Familial cardiac valvulopathy
due to filamin A mutation. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Sep;155A(9):2236-41. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.34132. Epub 2011 Aug 3.
Citation on PubMed
Duval D, Lardeux A, Le Tourneau T, Norris RA, Markwald RR, Sauzeau V, Probst
V, Le Marec H, Levine R, Schott JJ, Merot J. Valvular dystrophy associated
filamin A mutations reveal a new role of its first repeats in small-GTPase
regulation. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Feb;1843(2):234-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.10.022. Epub 2013 Nov 4.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Kyndt F, Gueffet JP, Probst V, Jaafar P, Legendre A, Le Bouffant F, Toquet C,
Roy E, McGregor L, Lynch SA, Newbury-Ecob R, Tran V, Young I, Trochu JN, Le Marec
H, Schott JJ. Mutations in the gene encoding filamin A as a cause for familial
cardiac valvular dystrophy. Circulation. 2007 Jan 2;115(1):40-9. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.622621. Epub 2006 Dec 26.
Citation on PubMed
Lardeux A, Kyndt F, Lecointe S, Marec HL, Merot J, Schott JJ, Le Tourneau T,
Probst V. Filamin-a-related myxomatous mitral valve dystrophy: genetic,
echocardiographic and functional aspects. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2011
Dec;4(6):748-56. doi: 10.1007/s12265-011-9308-9. Epub 2011 Jul 20.
Citation on PubMed
Sauls K, de Vlaming A, Harris BS, Williams K, Wessels A, Levine RA,
Slaugenhaupt SA, Goodwin RL, Pavone LM, Merot J, Schott JJ, Le Tourneau T, Dix T,
Jesinkey S, Feng Y, Walsh C, Zhou B, Baldwin S, Markwald RR, Norris RA.
Developmental basis for filamin-A-associated myxomatous mitral valve disease.
Cardiovasc Res. 2012 Oct 1;96(1):109-19. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvs238. Epub 2012 Jul
25.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Heart Valve Diseases
Mitral Valve Prolapse
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Endocarditis
Genetics
Heart Valves (Image)
Mitral valve prolapse
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page