Gemfibrozil: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Gemfibrozil
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a686002.html
Gemfibrozil
pronounced as (jem fi' broe zil)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Gemfibrozil is used with diet changes (restriction of cholesterol and fat intake) to reduce the amount of cholesterol and triglycerides (other fatty substances) in the blood in certain people with very high triglycerides who are at risk of pancreatic disease (conditions affecting the pancreas, a gland that produces fluid to break down food and hormones to control blood sugar). Gemfibrozil is also used in people with a combination of low high-density lipoprotein (HDL; 'good cholesterol') levels and high low-density lipoprotein (LDL; 'bad cholesterol') and triglyceride levels to reduce the risk of heart disease. Gemfibrozil is in a class of lipid-regulating medications called fibrates. It works by reducing the production of triglycerides in the liver.
How should this medicine be used?
Gemfibrozil comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day, 30 minutes before the morning and evening meals. Take gemfibrozil at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take gemfibrozil exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Gemfibrozil controls high triglycerides and low HDL, but does not cure them. Continue to take gemfibrozil even if you feel well. Do not stop taking gemfibrozil without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking gemfibrozil,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to gemfibrozil, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in gemfibrozil tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with gemfibrozil. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with gemfibrozil. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting gemfibrozil with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking gemfibrozil, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
if you are taking colestipol (Colestid), take this medication 2 hours before or 2 hours after gemfibrozil.
tell your doctor if you have kidney, liver, or gallbladder disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take gemfibrozil.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking gemfibrozil, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Eat a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet. Be sure to follow all exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian. You can also visit the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) website for additional dietary information at
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/chol/chol_tlc.pdf
.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Gemfibrozil may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stomach pain
heartburn
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
muscle pain, tenderness, or weakness
blurred vision
A medication called clofibrate (Atromid-S; no longer available in the U.S.), which is similar to gemfibrozil, has been known to cause cancer, gallbladder disease, and stomach pain leading to appendectomy. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Gemfibrozil may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
stomach cramps
diarrhea
joint and muscle pain
nausea
vomiting
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to gemfibrozil.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lopid
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page