Brentuximab Vedotin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Brentuximab Vedotin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611052.html
Brentuximab Vedotin Injection
pronounced as (bren tux' i mab ve doe' tin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Receiving brentuximab vedotin injection may increase the risk that you will develop progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML; a rare brain infection that cannot be treated, prevented, or cured and that usually causes death or severe disability). Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a condition that affects your immune system. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking any medications that suppress the immune system. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: decreased strength or weakness on one side of the body; difficulty walking; loss of coordination; headache; confusion; difficulty thinking clearly; memory loss; changes in mood or usual behavior; difficulty speaking; or vision changes.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain tests to check your body's response to brentuximab vedotin injection.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving brentuximab vedotin injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Brentuximab vedotin injection is used to treat certain types of Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (types of cancer that begin in a type of white blood cell that normally fights infection). Brentuximab vedotin injection is in a class of medications called antibody-drug conjugates. It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Brentuximab vedotin injection comes as a powder to be mixed with fluid and injected over 30 minutes intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or hospital. Brentuximab vedotin is usually injected once every 2 to 3 weeks, depending on what you are being treated for, for as long as your doctor recommends that you receive treatment.
Brentuximab vedotin injection may cause serious allergic reactions, which usually occur during the infusion of the medication or within 24 hours of receiving a dose. You may receive certain medications before your infusion to prevent an allergic reaction if you had a reaction with previous treatment. Your doctor will watch you carefully while you are receiving brentuximab vedotin. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately: fever, chills, rash, hives, itching, or difficulty breathing.
Your doctor may need to delay your treatment, adjust your dose, or stop your treatment if you experience certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with brentuximab vedotin injection.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving brentuximab vedotin injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
Some medications should not be taken with brentuximab vedotin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with brentuximab vedotin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting brentuximab vedotin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking brentuximab vedotin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you can become pregnant, you must take a pregnancy test before starting treatment and use effective birth control during your treatment and for 2 months after your final dose. If your partner can become pregnant, you must use effective birth control during your treatment and for 4 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use. If you or your partner become pregnant while receiving brentuximab vedotin injection, call your doctor immediately. Brentuximab vedotin injection may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are receiving brentuximab vedotin injection.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving brentuximab vedotin injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Brentuximab vedotin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
diarrhea
vomiting
nausea
mouth sores or pain
decreased appetite
weight loss
tiredness
dizziness
weakness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
anxiety
dry skin
hair loss
night sweats
joint, bone, muscle, back, arm, or leg pain
muscle spasms
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
numbness, burning, or tingling in the hands, arms, feet, or legs; or muscle weakness
peeling or blistering skin or rash
fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, confusion, shortness of breath, seizures, irregular heartbeat, dark or cloudy urine, unusual tiredness, or muscle or joint pain
new or worsening cough or shortness of breath
decreased urination; swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs; fatigue
fever; chills; cough; difficult, painful, or frequent urination; or other signs of infection
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area but may spread to the back, nausea, or vomiting
pale skin, unusual tiredness or weakness, shortness of breath, or dizziness
yellowing of the skin or eyes, lack of energy, pain or discomfort in the right upper stomach area, dark urine, light-colored bowel movements, nausea, vomiting, or itching
stomach pain, black and tarry stools, blood in stools, vomit that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds
unusual bleeding or bruising, small red or purple spots in skin, or blood in urine,
Brentuximab vedotin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
fever, chills, cough, or other signs of infection
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about brentuximab vedotin injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Adcetris
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page