Ubrogepant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ubrogepant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620016.html
Ubrogepant
pronounced as (ue broe' je pant)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ubrogepant is used to treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that may cause nausea and sensitivity to sound or light). Ubrogepant is in a class of medications called calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of a certain natural substance in the body that causes migraine headaches. Ubrogepant does not prevent migraine attacks or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Ubrogepant comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is taken at the first sign of a migraine headache. In some cases, you may take a second dose after 2 hours, if needed. Your doctor will tell you the maximum number of tablets you may take in a 24-hour period. Your doctor will also tell you the maximum number of migraine headaches you should treat with ubrogepant tablets in a 30-day period.
Take ubrogepant exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than directed by the package label or prescribed by your doctor.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more frequently after taking ubrogepant.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ubrogepant,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with ubrogepant. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting ubrogepant with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking ubrogepant, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist. Your doctor may tell you not to take a second ubrogepant tablet within 24 hours if you are taking certain medications.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with ubrogepant: Curcumin and St. John's wort. Be sure to let your healthcare provider know that you are taking these medications before you start taking ubrogepant. Do not start any of these medications while taking ubrogepant without discussing with your healthcare provider
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, circulation problems in your fingers and toes such as Raynaud's disease (fingers and toes feel numb and change skin color to white or blue when exposed to cold temperatures or stress), or kidney or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking ubrogepant, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not take a second ubrogepant tablet within 24 hours of taking the first dose if you drink grapefruit juice or eat grapefruit. Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ubrogepant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
drowsiness
dry mouth
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking ubrogepant and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
swelling of the face, throat, or around the mouth or eyes; hives; rash; itching; trouble swallowing or breathing; dizziness; or rapid heartbeat
numb, cold, painful, or discolored fingers or toes
Ubrogepant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly during your treatment with ubrogepant.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you take ubrogepant.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ubrelvy
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page