Telmisartan: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Telmisartan
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601249.html
Telmisartan
pronounced as (tel mi sar' tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. Do not take telmisartan if you are pregnant. If you become pregnant while you are taking telmisartan, stop taking telmisartan and call your doctor immediately. Telmisartan may cause death or serious injury to the fetus when taken in the last 6 months of pregnancy.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Telmisartan is used to treat high blood pressure. Telmisartan is also used to decrease the chance of heart attack, stroke, or death in people 55 years of age or older who are at high risk for cardiovascular disease. Telmisartan is in a class of medications called angiotensin II receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of certain natural substances that tighten the blood vessels, allowing the blood to flow more smoothly and the heart to pump more efficiently.
Untreated high blood pressure can damage the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. This damage may cause heart disease, a heart attack, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. Along with medication, making the following changes will also help to control your blood pressure: eating a diet low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Telmisartan comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take once a day with or without food. Take telmisartan around the same time every day.
Take telmisartan exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Telmisartan tablets come in individual blister packs that can be opened by peeling back the paper layer from the foil and pushing the tablet through the foil. Do not open a blister pack until you are ready to swallow the tablet it contains.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of telmisartan and gradually increase your dose.
Telmisartan controls high blood pressure but does not cure it. Your blood pressure may decrease during the first 2 weeks of your treatment, but it may take 4 weeks for you to notice the full benefit of telmisartan. Continue to take telmisartan even if you feel well. Do not stop taking telmisartan without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
Telmisartan is also used sometimes to treat heart failure (condition in which the heart is unable to pump enough blood to the rest of the body) and diabetic nephropathy (kidney disease in people with diabetes and high blood pressure). Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking telmisartan,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with telmisartan. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with telmisartan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting telmisartan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking telmisartan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with telmisartan: aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn); potassium supplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking telmisartan. Do not start any of these medications while taking telmisartan without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart failure; blockage of the bile duct (condition when bile can not flow from the liver to the gallbladder and small intestine, which can occur with gallstones, tumors, or injury); diabetes; or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding.
you should know that telmisartan may cause drowsiness, dizziness, lightheadedness, or fainting. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that diarrhea, vomiting, not drinking enough fluids, and sweating a lot can cause a drop in blood pressure, which may cause lightheadedness and fainting. Tell your doctor if you have any of these problems or develop them during your treatment.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not use salt substitutes containing potassium without talking to your doctor. If your doctor prescribes a low-salt or low-sodium diet, follow these directions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Telmisartan may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
back pain
sinus pain and congestion
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately:
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty breathing or swallowing
pain and cramping in the lower leg that comes and goes during walking or exercise
blistering of the skin or rash
Telmisartan may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the blister pack it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
dizziness
fainting
fast or slow heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly to determine your response to telmisartan.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Micardis
®
Brand names of combination products
Micardis HCT
®
Twynsta
®
(containing Amlodipine, Telmisartan)
¶
Widaplik
®
(containing Amlodipine, Telmisartan, Indapamide)
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page