Bosutinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bosutinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613005.html
Bosutinib
pronounced as (boe sue' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bosutinib is used to treat a certain type of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML; a type of cancer of the white blood cells), including treatment in adults who have been recently found to have this condition and in those who can no longer benefit from other medications for CML or who cannot take these medications because of side effects. Bosutinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of an abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Bosutinib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food once a day. Take bosutinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take bosutinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them. If any of the tablets are broken or crushed, do not touch them with your bare hands.
Your doctor may temporarily or permanently stop your treatment or adjust your dose of bosutinib depending on your response to treatment and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Continue to take bosutinib even if you feel well. Do not stop taking bosutinib without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking bosutinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bosutinib or any of the ingredients in bosutinib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any of the following: certain antifungals such as ketoconazole and itraconazole (Sporanox); aprepitant (Emend); certain medications used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) such as indinavir (Crixivan), nelfinavir (Viracept), ritonavir (Norvir), and saquinavir (Invirase); medications to reduce stomach acid (proton-pump inhibitors) such as esomeprazole (Nexium), lansoprazole (Prevacid), omeprazole (Prilosec), pantoprazole (Protonix), and rabeprazole (AcipHex); diltiazem (Cardizem, Cartia, Tiazac); erythromycin (E.E.S., E-Mycin, Erythrocin); nefazodone; rifabutin (Mycobutin); and rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane in Rifamate, in Rifater). Many other medications may also interact with bosutinib, so be sure to tell your doctor about all the medications you are taking, even those that do not appear on this list.
if you are taking antacids, such as aluminum hydroxide/magnesium hydroxide (Maalox), calcium carbonate (Tums) or calcium carbonate and magnesium (Rolaids) or medications to reduce stomach acid, such as cimetidine (Tagamet), famotidine (Pepcid), or ranitidine (Zantac), take them 2 hours before or 2 hours after you take bosutinib.
tell your doctor what herbal products you are taking, especially St. John's wort.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, diabetes, or kidney, liver, or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You will need to take a pregnancy test before you start treatment and you should not become pregnant while you are taking bosutinib. You should use an effective form of birth control during treatment with bosutinib and for 2 weeks after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant while taking bosutinib, call your doctor. Bosutinib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking bosutinib and for 2 weeks after your last dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking bosutinib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit, drink grapefruit juice, or take any supplement containing grapefruit extract while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose with food as soon as you remember it. However, if it has been more than 12 hours since your last dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bosutinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
loss of appetite
tiredness or weakness
change in ability to taste food
ringing in the ears
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
sudden stomach area pain
unexplained bleeding or bruising
blood in urine or stool
change in the frequency of urination
increase or decrease in the amount of urine
dizziness
fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
shortness of breath and cough
chest pain
swelling of face, hands, ankles, feet, or lower legs
sudden weight gain
yellowing of the skin and eyes
dark or tea-colored urine
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
Bosutinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to bosutinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bosulif
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page