Sumatriptan: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sumatriptan
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601116.html
Sumatriptan
pronounced as (soo ma trip' tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sumatriptan is used to treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes come with nausea or a strong reaction to sound and light). Sumatriptan is in a class of medications called selective serotonin receptor agonists. It works by narrowing blood vessels in the head, stopping pain signals from being sent to the brain, and stops the release of certain natural substances that cause pain, nausea, and other symptoms of migraines. Sumatriptan does not stop migraine attacks from coming or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Sumatriptan comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take at the first sign of a migraine headache. If your symptoms improve after you take sumatriptan but return after 2 hours or longer, you may take a second tablet. However, if your symptoms do not improve after you take sumatriptan, do not take a second tablet without calling your doctor. Your doctor will tell you the maximum number of tablets you may take in a 24-hour period. Take sumatriptan exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more often after taking sumatriptan.
If you take sumatriptan more often or for longer than the recommended period of time, your headaches may get worse or may occur more often. You should not take sumatriptan or any other headache medication for more than 10 days per month. Call your doctor if you need to take sumatriptan to treat more than 4 headaches in a 1-month period.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking sumatriptan,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
do not take sumatriptan if you have taken any of the following medications in the past 24 hours: other selective serotonin receptor agonists such as almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, or zolmitriptan; or ergot-type medications such as bromocriptine, cabergoline, dihydroergotamine, ergoloid mesylates, ergonovine, ergotamine, methylergonovine, methysergide, and pergolide.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past 2 weeks: monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) inhibitors such as isocarboxazid, phenelzine, selegiline, or tranylcypromine.some medications should not be taken with sumatriptan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting sumatriptan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking sumatriptan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) inhibitors such as isocarboxazid, phenelzine, or tranylcypromine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease; a heart attack; angina (chest pain); irregular heartbeats; stroke or 'mini-stroke'; or circulation problems such as varicose veins, blood clots in the legs, Raynaud's disease (problems with blood flow to the fingers, toes, ears, and nose), or ischemic bowel disease (bloody diarrhea and stomach pain caused by decreased blood flow to the intestines). Your doctor may tell you not to take sumatriptan.
tell your doctor if you smoke or are overweight; if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, seizures, or liver or kidney disease; if you have gone through menopause; or if any family members have or have ever had heart disease or stroke.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you plan to be sexually active while you are using this medication, talk to your doctor about effective methods of birth control. If you become pregnant while taking sumatriptan, call your doctor.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy or dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sumatriptan may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
flushing
tingling feeling
feeling warm or cold
drowsiness, tiredness, weakness, dizziness
upset stomach, diarrhea
nausea
muscle cramps
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
pain, tightness, pressure, or heaviness in the chest, throat, neck, and/or jaw
slow or difficult speech
faintness
breaking out in a cold sweat
shortness of breath
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
bloody diarrhea
vomiting
sudden or severe stomach pain
sudden weight loss
paleness or blue color of the fingers and toes
difficulty breathing or swallowing
redness, swelling, or itching of the eyes, face, lips, or throat
rash, hives
change in vision
seizures
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature, away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you take sumatriptan.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Imitrex
®
Tablets
Brand names of combination products
Treximet
®
(containing naproxen, sumatriptan)
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page