Alteplase Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Alteplase Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625001.html
Alteplase Injection
pronounced as ( al′ te plase)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Alteplase is used to dissolve blood clots that have formed in blood vessels. It is used to reduce the risk of death or heart problems in people having a heart attack and to treat patients with symptoms of a stroke or a clot in the lung(s). Alteplase is in a class of medications called thrombolytics. It works by helping the body to dissolve blood clots.
How should this medicine be used?
Alteplase comes as a powder to mix with liquid to be given intravenously (into a vein) over up to 3 hours by a healthcare provider. It is usually given as a single dose as soon as possible after symptoms begin for heart attack or clot in your lung or stroke. If more than 3 hours have passed since stroke symptoms began, you may not be able to receive alteplase.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking alteplase,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to alteplase, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in alteplase injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take when receiving alteplase. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have had a stroke, a serious head injury, or surgery on your spine or brain or if you have problems in your brain such as bleeding, a tumor, arteriovenous malformation (AVM) (abnormal connection between arteries and veins), or aneurysm (weakening of a blood vessel wall). Also tell your doctor if you have very high blood pressure that is not controlled by medication or any condition that may cause an increased risk of bleeding or bruising. Your doctor will probably not give you alteplase.
tell your doctor if you have recently had surgery or a procedure; an injury; bleeding in your brain, stomach or intestines, or urinary tract; a serious infection due to a blood clot in a vein; or an infection of the lining around the heart or inside the heart. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had bleeding in the retina of your eyes, high blood pressure or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Alteplase may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
bleeding
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
itching, rash, hives
swelling of face, eyelids, lips, mouth, tongue or throat
trouble breathing, throat or chest tightness, feeling faint
vomiting blood or blood in the urine or stool
severe headache, nausea, vomiting
change in consciousness or wakefulness
weakness or numbness in face, arm or leg (usually on one side)
loss of vision
seizures
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to alteplase.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you received alteplase.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Activase
®
Other names
tPA
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page