Resmetirom: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Resmetirom
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624021.html
Resmetirom
pronounced as (res″ me tir′ om)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Resmetirom is used for treatment of patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH; liver inflammation and damage caused by buildup of fat in the liver). Resmetirom is in a class of medications called thyroid hormone receptor (THR)-beta agonists. It works by keeping the liver from forming fat.
How should this medicine be used?
Resmetirom comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take once a day with or without food. Take resmetirom at around the same time every day.
Take resmetirom exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
It may take time before you feel the full benefit of resmetirom. Continue to take resmetirom even if you feel well. Do not stop taking resmetirom without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking resmetirom,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
Some medications should not be taken with resmetirom. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with resmetirom. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting resmetirom with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking resmetirom, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver, kidney or gallbladder disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking resmetirom, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Resmetirom may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
itching
abdominal pain
vomiting
dizziness
constipation
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
tiredness, nausea, vomiting, fever, rash, yellowing of the skin or white part of your eyes, pain in the upper right side of the stomach
nausea, vomiting, fever, or stomach pain
Resmetirom may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to resmetirom.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Rezdiffra
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page