Dorzolamide and Timolol Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dorzolamide and Timolol Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602022.html
Dorzolamide and Timolol Ophthalmic
pronounced as (dor zole' a mide) (tye' moe lole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of dorzolamide and timolol is used to treat eye conditions, including glaucoma and ocular hypertension, in which increased pressure can lead to a gradual loss of vision. Dorzolamide and timolol is used for patients whose eye condition has not responded to another medication. Dorzolamide is in a class of medications called topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. Timolol is in a class of medications called topical beta blockers. Dorzolamide and timolol lowers pressure in the eye by decreasing the production of natural fluids in the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of dorzolamide and timolol comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eye. It is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) twice a day. To help you remember to use dorzolamide and timolol, use it at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use dorzolamide and timolol exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Dorzolamide and timolol combination controls glaucoma and ocular hypertension but does not cure them. Continue to use dorzolamide and timolol even if you feel well. Do not stop using dorzolamide and timolol without talking to your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
If you are to use more than one drop in the same eye, wait at least 5 minutes before instilling the next drop.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using dorzolamide and timolol eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dorzolamide (Trusopt
®
), timolol (Timoptic
®
), sulfa drugs, or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using dorzolamide and timolol eye drops. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are using another topical eye medication, instill it at least 10 minutes before or after you instill dorzolamide and timolol.
the following nonprescription products may interact with dorzolamide and timolol eye drops: salicylate pain relievers such as aspirin, choline magnesium trisalicylate, choline salicylate (Arthropan
®
), magnesium salicylate (Doan's
®
, others), and salsalate (Argesic
®
, Disalcid
®
, Salgesic
®
). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking dorzolamide and timolol eye drops. Do not start any of these medications while taking dorzolamide and timolol eye drops without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, lung disease (including chronic bronchitis and emphysema), heart disease, diabetes, an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism), severe allergic reactions, myasthenia gravis, and kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using dorzolamide and timolol, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using dorzolamide and timolol.
you should know that dorzolamide and timolol solution contains benzalkonium chloride, which can be absorbed by soft contact lenses. If you wear contact lenses, remove them before applying dorzolamide and timolol and put them back in 15 minutes later.
if you have an eye injury, infection, or surgery while using dorzolamide and timolol, ask your doctor if you should continue using the same eye drops container.
you should know that if you have allergic reactions to different substances, your reactions may be worse while you are using dorzolamide and timolol, and your allergic reactions may not respond to the usual doses of injectable epinephrine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dorzolamide and timolol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
taste changes (bitter, sour, or unusual taste)
eye burning or stinging
itchy eyes
dry eyes
eye tearing
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
blurred vision
skin rash
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
shortness of breath
pink eye
redness or swelling of the eyelid
muscle weakness
Dorzolamide and timolol may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
dizziness
headache
shortness of breath
difficulty breathing or swallowing
chest pain
confusion
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cosopt
®
Cosopt
®
PF
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page