Aminolevulinic acid: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aminolevulinic acid
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625014.html
Aminolevulinic acid
pronounced as (a mee'' noe lev'' ue lin' ik) (as' id)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Aminolevulinic acid is used to help doctors see your tumor(s) more clearly during surgery. Aminolevulinic acid is in a class of medications called optical imaging agents. It works by making tumor tissue appear as a red color when seen with a special microscope during surgery.
How should this medicine be used?
Aminolevulinic acid comes as liquid to take by mouth. It is usually taken one time, about 3 hours (range of 2 to 4 hours) before the beginning of your surgery.
Take aminolevulinic acid exactly as directed. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Do not take more or less of it than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking aminolevulinic acid,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods, or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
you should know that some medications should not be taken 24 hours before or after receiving aminolevulinic acid. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before taking aminolevulinic acid with your doctor and pharmacist. Before taking aminolevulinic acid, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
you should know that the following nonprescription or herbal product may interact with aminolevulinic acid: St John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication. You should not take it 24 hours before you receive aminolevulinic acid and for 24 hours afterwards.
tell your doctor if you have porphyria. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take aminolevulinic acid.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
you should know to plan to avoid unnecessary exposure to sunlight and room lights for 48 hours after you receive aminolevulinic acid. Aminolevulinic acid may make your skin very sensitive to room lights and sunlight. Use only very low room lights during this time. Wear protective clothing to completely cover your body when you leave the hospital.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Aminolevulinic acid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting
fever
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
sunburn-like reaction, redness, swelling, burning or stinging
rash; hives; swelling of the lips, face, tongue, or throat; difficulty breathing
Aminolevulinic acid may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about aminolevulinic acid.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Gleolan
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page