Apremilast: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Apremilast
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614022.html
Apremilast
pronounced as (a pre' mi last)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Apremilast is used to treat
psoriatic arthritis (a condition that causes joint pain and swelling and scales on the skin).
moderate to severe plaque psoriasis (skin disease in which red, scaly patches form on some areas of the body) in adults and children 6 years of age and older (weighing at least 20 kg or 44 pounds) who may benefit from medications or phototherapy (a treatment that involves exposing the skin to ultraviolet light).
ulcers in the mouth in people with Behcet's syndrome (a disorder that causes blood vessel swelling in the body).
Apremilast is in a class of medications called phosphodiesterase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of certain natural substances in the body that cause inflammation.
How should this medicine be used?
Apremilast comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day. Take apremilast at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take apremilast exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of apremilast and gradually increase your dose once every day for the first 5 days of treatment.
Apremilast controls psoriatic arthritis or plaque psoriasis, or treats oral ulcers, but does not cure them. Continue to take apremilast even if you feel well. Do not stop taking apremilast without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking apremilast,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to apremilast, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in apremilast tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking apremilast. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression, mood problems, thoughts about harming or killing yourself, or planning or trying to do so, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking apremilast, call your doctor.
you should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways and you may become depressed or suicidal (thinking about harming or killing yourself or planning or trying to do so) while you are taking apremilast. You and your doctor will decide whether the risks of taking this medication are greater than the risks of not taking the medication. You, your family, or your caregiver should call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: new or worsening depression, talking or thinking about wanting to hurt yourself or end your life, or any other unusual changes in behavior or mood. Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
you should know that apremilast can cause weight loss. Your weight should be checked regularly by your doctor and you should also check your weight on a regular basis during treatment with apremilast. If you notice you are losing weight, call your doctor. For children receiving apremilast, their doctor will monitor their height and weight very closely. If they are not gaining weight or growing as they should, their treatment may need to be interrupted.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Apremilast may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
stomach pain
vomiting
headache
sore throat, cough, and fever
sneezing, runny nose, and nasal congestion
Apremilast may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Otezla
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page