Terconazole Vaginal Cream, Vaginal Suppositories: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Terconazole Vaginal Cream, Vaginal Suppositories
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a688022.html
Terconazole Vaginal Cream, Vaginal Suppositories
pronounced as (ter kon' a zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Terconazole is used to treat fungal and yeast infections of the vagina.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Terconazole comes as a cream and suppository to insert into the vagina. It is usually used daily at bedtime for either 3 or 7 days. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use terconazole exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To use the vaginal cream or vaginal suppositories, read the instructions provided with the medication and follow these steps:
To use the cream, fill the special applicator that comes with the cream to the level indicated. To use the suppository, unwrap it, wet it with lukewarm water, and place it on the applicator as shown in the accompanying instructions.
Lie on your back with your knees drawn upward and spread apart.
Insert the applicator high into your vagina (unless you are pregnant), and then push the plunger to release the medication. If you are pregnant, insert the applicator gently. If you feel resistance (hard to insert), do not try to insert it further; call your doctor.
Withdraw the applicator.
Pull the applicator apart and clean it with soap and warm water after each use.
Wash your hands promptly to avoid spreading the infection.
The dose should be applied when you lie down to go to bed. The drug works best if you do not get up again after applying it except to wash your hands. You may wish to wear a sanitary napkin to protect your clothing against stains. Do not use a tampon because it will absorb the drug. Do not douche unless your doctor tells you to do so.
Continue to use terconazole even if you feel well. Do not stop using terconazole without talking to your doctor. Continue using this medication during your menstrual period.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using terconazole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to terconazole or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had problems with your immune system, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV), acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), or diabetes.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using terconazole, call your doctor immediately. Terconazole may harm the fetus.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Insert the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not insert a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Terconazole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
missed menstrual periods
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
burning in vagina when cream or suppository is inserted
irritation in vagina when cream or suppository is inserted
stomach pain
fever
foul-smelling vaginal discharge
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication tightly closed, in the container it came in, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Terconazole is for external use only. Do not let cream get into your eyes or mouth, and do not swallow it. Do not swallow the suppositories.
Refrain from sexual intercourse. An ingredient in the cream may weaken certain latex products like condoms or diaphragms; do not use such products within 72 hours of using this medication. Wear clean cotton panties (or panties with cotton crotches), not panties made of nylon, rayon, or other synthetic fabrics.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the terconazole, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Terazol
®
3
Terazol
®
7
Last Revised -
02/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page