Spastic paraplegia type 5A: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Spastic paraplegia type 5A
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/spastic-paraplegia-type-5a/
Spastic paraplegia type 5A
Description
Spastic paraplegia type 5A is one of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. These disorders are characterized by muscle stiffness (spasticity) and severe weakness in the lower limbs (paraplegia). Hereditary spastic paraplegias are often divided into two types: pure and complex. The pure types involve spasticity and weakness only in the lower limbs, while the complex types involve additional problems with other areas of the body; additional features can include changes in vision, changes in intellectual functioning, brain abnormalities, and disturbances in nerve function (neuropathy). Spastic paraplegia type 5A is usually a pure hereditary spastic paraplegia, although complex type features have been reported in some individuals, usually in those who have had the condition for many years.
In addition to spasticity and weakness, people with spastic paraplegia type 5A can lose the ability to sense the position of their limbs or detect vibrations with their lower limbs. They may also have muscle wasting (amyotrophy), reduced bladder control, or high arches of the feet (
pes cavus
). The signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 5A usually appear in adolescence but can begin at any time between infancy and mid-adulthood. The condition slowly worsens over time, often leading affected individuals to require walking support or wheelchair assistance.
Frequency
Spastic paraplegia type 5A is a rare condition. Its prevalence is unknown.
Causes
Spastic paraplegia type 5A is caused by mutations in the
CYP7B1
gene. This gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called oxysterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase. In the brain, oxysterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase is involved in a pathway that converts cholesterol to hormones called neurosteroids. These neurosteroids increase
nerve cell
activity (excitability) and promote cell survival and communication between nerve cells. Oxysterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase helps maintain normal cholesterol levels in the brain and, by producing neurosteroids through altering existing hormones within the pathway, regulates the effects of neurosteroids on the brain.
CYP7B1
gene mutations that cause spastic paraplegia type 5A reduce or eliminate the activity of oxysterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase. In the brain, a decrease in enzyme activity results in an accumulation of cholesterol and alters neurosteroid production triggered by oxysterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase. Abnormal levels of neurosteroids impairs cell survival, likely leading to
nerve cell death
. The abnormal buildup of cholesterol in the brain probably also contributes to the death of nerve cells. The loss of these cells results in the deterioration of nervous system functions (neurodegeneration) and causes the movement problems, weakness, and other signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 5A.
Learn more about the gene associated with Spastic paraplegia type 5A
CYP7B1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia 5A
Spastic paraplegia 5A
SPG5A
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia
Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary spastic paraplegia 5A
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia type 5A
Hereditary spastic paraplegia
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 5A, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; SPG5A
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Arnoldi A, Crimella C, Tenderini E, Martinuzzi A, D'Angelo MG, Musumeci O,
Toscano A, Scarlato M, Fantin M, Bresolin N, Bassi MT. Clinical phenotype
variability in patients with hereditary spastic paraplegia type 5 associated with
CYP7B1 mutations. Clin Genet. 2012 Feb;81(2):150-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01624.x. Epub 2011 Jan 31.
Citation on PubMed
Criscuolo C, Filla A, Coppola G, Rinaldi C, Carbone R, Pinto S, Wang Q, de
Leva MF, Salvatore E, Banfi S, Brunetti A, Quarantelli M, Geschwind DH, Pappata
S, De Michele G. Two novel CYP7B1 mutations in Italian families with SPG5: a
clinical and genetic study. J Neurol. 2009 Aug;256(8):1252-7. doi:
10.1007/s00415-009-5109-3. Epub 2009 Apr 12.
Citation on PubMed
Gasser T, Finsterer J, Baets J, Van Broeckhoven C, Di Donato S, Fontaine B, De
Jonghe P, Lossos A, Lynch T, Mariotti C, Schols L, Spinazzola A, Szolnoki Z,
Tabrizi SJ, Tallaksen CM, Zeviani M, Burgunder JM, Harbo HF; EFNS. EFNS
guidelines on the molecular diagnosis of ataxias and spastic paraplegias. Eur J
Neurol. 2010 Feb;17(2):179-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02873.x. Epub 2009
Dec 28.
Citation on PubMed
Goizet C, Boukhris A, Durr A, Beetz C, Truchetto J, Tesson C, Tsaousidou M,
Forlani S, Guyant-Marechal L, Fontaine B, Guimaraes J, Isidor B, Chazouilleres O,
Wendum D, Grid D, Chevy F, Chinnery PF, Coutinho P, Azulay JP, Feki I, Mochel F,
Wolf C, Mhiri C, Crosby A, Brice A, Stevanin G. CYP7B1 mutations in pure and
complex forms of hereditary spastic paraplegia type 5. Brain. 2009 Jun;132(Pt
6):1589-600. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp073. Epub 2009 May 12.
Citation on PubMed
Lan MY, Yeh TH, Chang YY, Kuo HC, Sun HS, Lai SC, Lu CS. Clinical and genetic
analysis of Taiwanese patients with hereditary spastic paraplegia type 5. Eur J
Neurol. 2015 Jan;22(1):211-4. doi: 10.1111/ene.12407. Epub 2014 Mar 18.
Citation on PubMed
Tsaousidou MK, Ouahchi K, Warner TT, Yang Y, Simpson MA, Laing NG, Wilkinson
PA, Madrid RE, Patel H, Hentati F, Patton MA, Hentati A, Lamont PJ, Siddique T,
Crosby AH. Sequence alterations within CYP7B1 implicate defective cholesterol
homeostasis in motor-neuron degeneration. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;82(2):510-5.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.10.001. Epub 2008 Jan 18.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Neurologic Diseases
Neuromuscular Disorders
Paralysis
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page