Fidaxomicin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fidaxomicin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611040.html
Fidaxomicin
pronounced as (fye dax'' oh mye' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fidaxomicin is used to treat diarrhea caused by
Clostridium difficile
(
C. difficile
; a type of bacteria that may cause severe or life-threatening diarrhea) in adults and children 6 months of age and older. Fidaxomicin is in a class of medications called macrolide antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria in the intestines.
Fidaxomicin will not treat infections in any other part of the body. Antibiotics such as fidaxomicin will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Fidaxomicin comes as a tablet and as an suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food two times a day (approximately 12 hours apart) for 10 days. Take fidaxomicin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take fidaxomicin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Take the suspension bottle out of the refrigerator 15 minutes before preparing your dose. Shake the suspension well before each use to mix the medication evenly. Use an oral syringe to measure the correct amount of medication. Do not use a household spoon to measure your dose.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with fidaxomicin. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Take fidaxomicin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking fidaxomicin too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fidaxomicin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to fidaxomicin, azithromycin (Zithromax), clarithromycin (Biaxin, in Prevpac), erythromycin (E.E.S., ERY-C, Erythrocin), telithromycin (Ketek; not available in the U.S.), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in fidaxomicin tablets or suspension. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking fidaxomicin, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fidaxomicin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
constipation
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
itching
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes
shortness of breath
difficulty breathing or swallowing
weakness
fatigue
dizziness
headache
chest pain
fast, pounding heartbeat
pale skin
cold hands and feet
stomach cramps
bright red blood in vomit
vomit that looks like coffee-grounds
black, tarry stools
bright red blood in stools
fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
Fidaxomicin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the tablets at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Keep the suspension in the refrigerator, tightly closed, and dispose of any unused suspension after 12 days.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the fidaxomicin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Dificid
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page