Trilaciclib Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Trilaciclib Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621020.html
Trilaciclib Injection
pronounced as (trye" la sye' klib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Trilaciclib injection is used to decrease the risk of myelosuppression (a decrease in red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets) from certain chemotherapy medications in adults with small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Trilaciclib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of certain substances in the body to protect the cells in the bone marrow and immune system from damage during chemotherapy.
How should this medicine be used?
Trilaciclib comes as a powder to be dissolved in liquid and given into the vein by a doctor or nurse in a doctor's office or healthcare facility. It is usually given as a 30 minute infusion within 4 hours before chemotherapy.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving trilaciclib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to trilaciclib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in trilaciclib injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving trilaciclib injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You will need to take a pregnancy test before you start treatment and should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for at least 3 weeks after your final dose. If you become pregnant while receiving trilaciclib, call your doctor immediately. Trilaciclib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while receiving trilaciclib and for at least 3 weeks after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Trilaciclib injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
headache
upper right stomach pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, cough, shortness of breath, or other signs of infection
injection site pain, swelling, redness, warmth, or itching
red, hot, swollen area on the skin
facial, eye, and tongue swelling
difficulty breathing or swallowing
rash
itching
hives
Trilaciclib injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to trilaciclib injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about trilaciclib.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cosela
®
Last Revised -
04/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page