Dipyridamole: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dipyridamole
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682830.html
Dipyridamole
pronounced as (dye peer id' a mole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dipyridamole is used with other drugs to reduce the risk of blood clots after heart valve replacement. It works by preventing excessive blood clotting.
How should this medicine be used?
Dipyridamole comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken 4 times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take dipyridamole exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Continue to take dipyridamole even if you feel well. Do not stop taking dipyridamole without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Dipyridamole is also used with aspirin to reduce the risk of death after a heart attack and to prevent another heart attack. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking dipyridamole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dipyridamole or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking dipyridamole. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had low blood pressure.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking dipyridamole, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking dipyridamole if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take dipyridamole because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking dipyridamole.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dipyridamole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
stomach pain
headache
rash
diarrhea
vomiting
flushing (feeling of warmth)
itching
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
unusual bleeding or bruising
yellowing of the skin or eyes
chest pain
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Permole
®
¶
Persantine
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page