X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/x-linked-infantile-spinal-muscular-atrophy/
X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy
Description
X-linked infantile
spinal muscular atrophy
is a condition that affects only boys and is characterized by severe muscle weakness and absent reflexes (areflexia). Affected children often have multiple joint deformities (contractures) from birth that cause joint stiffness (arthrogryposis) and impair movement. In severe cases, affected infants are born with broken bones. The muscle weakness worsens over time; affected children reach some early motor developmental milestones, such as sitting unassisted, but these skills are often lost (developmental regression).
Additional features of X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy include an unusually small chin (
micrognathia
), abnormal curvature of the spine (
scoliosis or kyphosis
), and undescended testes (cryptorchidism).
Weakness of the chest muscles used for breathing often leads to life-threatening breathing problems. Children with X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy usually do not survive past early childhood due to respiratory failure, although, in rare cases, affected individuals can survive into adolescence.
Frequency
X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy is thought to be a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown.
Causes
Mutations in the
UBA1
gene cause X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy. The
UBA1
gene provides instructions for making the ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1. This enzyme is necessary for a process that targets damaged or unneeded proteins to be broken down (degraded) within cells. Protein degradation helps to maintain the proper balance of protein production and breakdown (protein homeostasis) that cells need to function and survive.
UBA1
gene mutations lead to a decrease in enzyme production or the production of an enzyme with reduced or abnormal function. As a result, damaged or unneeded proteins build up inside cells instead of being degraded, which may damage cells and contribute to cell death. This buildup also disrupts protein homeostasis. Old proteins must be removed before cells can make new proteins. If these damaged or unneeded proteins are not degraded, they can impair normal cell functions by stopping the production of new proteins. An imbalance in protein production and breakdown can ultimately lead to cell death. Specialized nerve cells that control muscle movement (motor neurons) are particularly susceptible to disruptions in cell function, likely due to their large size. Loss of these cells causes many of the signs and symptoms of X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy.
Learn more about the gene associated with X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy
UBA1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
X-linked recessive pattern
. The gene associated with this condition is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two
sex chromosomes
. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
Other Names for This Condition
AMCX1
Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, distal, X-linked
Arthrogryposis, X-lined, type I
Distal X-linked AMC
Infantile X-linked SMA
SMAX2
Spinal muscular atrophy, infantile X-linked
Spinal muscular atrophy, X-linked 2
Spinal muscular atrophy, X-linked lethal infantile
X-linked arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
X-linked arthrogryposis type I
X-linked lethal infantile SMA
XL-SMA
XLSMA
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Infantile-onset X-linked spinal muscular atrophy
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Infantile-onset X-linked spinal muscular atrophy
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
SPINAL MUSCULAR ATROPHY, X-LINKED 2; SMAX2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Balak CD, Hunter JM, Ahearn ME, Wiley D, D'urso G, Baumbach-Reardon L.
Functional characterizations of rare UBA1 variants in X-linked Spinal
Muscular Atrophy. F1000Res. 2017 Sep 4;6:1636. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.11878.1. eCollection 2017.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Dlamini N, Josifova DJ, Paine SM, Wraige E, Pitt M, Murphy AJ, King A, Buk S,
Smith F, Abbs S, Sewry C, Jacques TS, Jungbluth H. Clinical and neuropathological
features of X-linked spinal muscular atrophy (SMAX2) associated with a novel
mutation in the UBA1 gene. Neuromuscul Disord. 2013 May;23(5):391-8. doi:
10.1016/j.nmd.2013.02.001. Epub 2013 Mar 18.
Citation on PubMed
Jedrzejowska M, Jakubowska-Pietkiewicz E, Kostera-Pruszczyk A. X-linked spinal
muscular atrophy (SMAX2) caused by de novo c.1731C>T substitution in the UBA1
gene. Neuromuscul Disord. 2015 Aug;25(8):661-6. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2015.05.001.
Epub 2015 May 8.
Citation on PubMed
Ramser J, Ahearn ME, Lenski C, Yariz KO, Hellebrand H, von Rhein M, Clark RD,
Schmutzler RK, Lichtner P, Hoffman EP, Meindl A, Baumbach-Reardon L. Rare
missense and synonymous variants in UBE1 are associated with X-linked infantile
spinal muscular atrophy. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jan;82(1):188-93. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.09.009.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Spinal Muscular Atrophy
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page