Fluvastatin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fluvastatin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a694010.html
Fluvastatin
pronounced as (floo' va sta tin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fluvastatin is used together with diet, weight loss, and exercise to reduce the risk of heart attack and stroke and to decrease the chance that heart surgery will be needed in people who have heart disease or who are at risk of developing heart disease. Fluvastatin is also used to decrease the amount of fatty substances such as low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol ('bad cholesterol') and triglycerides in the blood and to increase the amount of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol ('good cholesterol') in the blood. Fluvastatin may also be used to decrease the amount of cholesterol and other fatty substances in the blood in children and teenagers 10 to 17 years of age who have familial heterozygous hypercholesterolemia (an inherited condition in which cholesterol cannot be removed from the body normally). Fluvastatin is in a class of medications called HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins). It works by slowing the production of cholesterol in the body to decrease the amount of cholesterol that may build up on the walls of the arteries and block blood flow to the heart, brain, and other parts of the body.
Accumulation of cholesterol and fats along the walls of your arteries (a process known as atherosclerosis) decreases blood flow and, therefore, the oxygen supply to your heart, brain, and other parts of your body. Lowering your blood level of cholesterol and fats with fluvastatin has been shown to prevent heart disease, angina (chest pain), strokes, and heart attacks.
How should this medicine be used?
Fluvastatin comes as a capsule and an extended-release (long-acting) tablet to take by mouth. The capsule is usually taken with or without food once a day at bedtime or twice a day. The extended-release tablet is usually taken once a day with or without food. Take fluvastatin at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take fluvastatin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the extended-release tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of fluvastatin and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 4 weeks.
Continue to take fluvastatin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking fluvastatin without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fluvastatin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to fluvastatin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in fluvastatin capsules or extended release tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients..
some medications should not be taken with fluvastatin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting fluvastatin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking fluvastatin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have liver disease. Your doctor will order laboratory tests to see how well your liver is working even if you do not think you have liver disease.Your doctor will probably tell you not to take fluvastatin if you have liver disease or if the tests show that you may be developing liver disease.
tell your doctor if you drink more than 2 alcoholic beverages per day, if you are 65 years of age or older, and if you have ever had liver disease or have or ever had muscle aches or weakness, diabetes, low blood pressure, seizures, or thyroid or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking fluvastatin, stop taking fluvastatin and call your doctor. Your doctor will discuss risks and benefits of fluvastatin therapy during pregnancy.
do not breast-feed while you are taking this medication.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking fluvastatin. If you are hospitalized due to infection or serious injury, tell the doctor who treats you that you are taking fluvastatin.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking fluvastatin. Alcohol can increase the risk of serious side effects.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Eat a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet. Be sure to follow all exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian. You can also visit the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) website for additional dietary information at
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/chol/chol_tlc.pdf
.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it has been more than 12 hours since your last dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fluvastatin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
heartburn
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
sinus pain
cough
memory loss or forgetfulness
confusion
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical help :
muscle pain, tenderness, or weakness
lack of energy
fever
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
dark colored urine
nausea
extreme tiredness
unusual bleeding or bruising
loss of appetite
flu-like symptoms
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
Fluvastatin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order laboratory tests during your treatment, especially if you develop symptoms of liver damage.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking fluvastatin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lescol
®
Lescol
®
XL
Last Revised -
02/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page