Ribavirin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ribavirin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a605018.html
Ribavirin
pronounced as (rye ba vye' rin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Ribavirin will not treat hepatitis C (a virus that infects the liver and may cause severe liver damage or liver cancer) unless it is taken with another medication. Your doctor will prescribe another medication to take with ribavirin if you have hepatitis C. Take both medications exactly as directed.
Ribavirin may cause anemia (condition in which there is a decrease in the number of red blood cells) that can worsen any heart problems you have and can cause you to have a heart attack that can be life-threatening. Tell your doctor if you have ever had a heart attack and if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, breathing problems, any condition that affects your blood such as sickle cell anemia (inherited condition in which the red blood cells are abnormally shaped and cannot bring oxygen to all parts of the body) or thalassemia (Mediterranean anemia; a condition in which the red blood cells do not contain enough of the substance needed to carry oxygen), bleeding in the stomach or intestines, or heart disease. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: excessive tiredness, pale skin, headache, dizziness, confusion, fast heartbeat, weakness, shortness of breath, or chest pain.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order blood tests before you start taking ribavirin and often during your treatment.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with ribavirin and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking ribavirin.
For female patients:
Do not take ribavirin if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should not start taking ribavirin until a pregnancy test has shown that you are not pregnant. You must use two forms of birth control and be tested for pregnancy every month during your treatment and for 6 months afterward. Call your doctor immediately if you become pregnant during this time. Ribavirin may cause harm or death to the fetus.
For male patients:
Do not take ribavirin if your partner is pregnant or plans to become pregnant. If you have a partner who can become pregnant, you should not start taking ribavirin until a pregnancy test shows that she is not pregnant. You must use two forms of birth control, including a condom with spermicide during your treatment and for 6 months afterward. Your partner must be tested for pregnancy every month during this time. Call your doctor immediately if your partner becomes pregnant. Ribavirin may cause harm or death to the fetus.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ribavirin is used with an interferon medication such as peginterferon alfa-2a [Pegasys] or peginterferon alpha-2b [PEG-Intron]) to treat hepatitis C in people who have not been treated with an interferon before. Ribavirin is in a class of antiviral medications called nucleoside analogues. It works by stopping the virus that causes hepatitis C from spreading inside the body. It is not known if treatment that includes ribavirin and another medication cures hepatitis C infection, prevents liver damage that may be caused by hepatitis C, or prevents the spread of hepatitis C to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Ribavirin comes as a tablet, a capsule and an oral solution (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food twice a day, in the morning and the evening, for 24 to 48 weeks or longer. Take ribavirin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take ribavirin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Shake the liquid well before each use to mix the medication evenly. Be sure to wash the measuring spoon or cup after use each time you measure the liquid.
Your doctor may decrease your dose or tell you to stop taking ribavirin if you develop side effects of the medication or if certain laboratory tests show that your condition has not improved. Call your doctor if you are bothered by side effects of ribavirin. Do not decrease your dose or stop taking ribavirin unless your doctor tells you that you should.
Other uses for this medicine
Ribavirin is also sometimes used to treat viral hemorrhagic fevers (viruses that can cause bleeding inside and outside of the body, problems with many organs, and death). In the event of biological warfare, ribavirin may be used to treat viral hemorrhagic fever that has been spread deliberately. Ribavirin is also sometimes used to treat severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS; a virus that may cause breathing problems, pneumonia, and death). Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this drug for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ribavirin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ribavirin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ribavirin tablets, capsules, or oral solution. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking didanosine (Videx). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take ribavirin if you are taking this medication.
some medications should not be taken with ribavirin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with ribavirin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting ribavirin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking ribavirin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.t.
tell your doctor if you have kidney disease, liver failure, or autoimmune hepatitis (swelling of the liver that occurs when the immune system attacks the liver). Your doctor may tell you not to take ribavirin.
tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, if you use or have ever used street drugs, if you have ever thought about killing yourself or planned or tried to do so, and if you have ever had a liver transplant or other organ transplant. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a mental illness such as depression, anxiety, or psychosis (loss of contact with reality); cancer; HIV or AIDS; diabetes; sarcoidosis (a condition in which abnormal tissue grows in parts of the body such as the lungs); Gilbert's syndrome (a mild liver condition that may cause yellowing of the skin or eyes); gout (a type of arthritis caused by crystals deposited in the joints); any type of liver disease other than hepatitis C;or thyroid, pancreas, eye, or lung disease.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding.
you should know that ribavirin may make you drowsy, dizzy, or confused. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
do not drink alcoholic beverages while you are taking ribavirin. Alcohol can make your liver disease worse.
you should know that your mouth may be very dry when you take this medication, which can lead to problems with your teeth and gums. Be sure to brush your teeth twice a day and have regular dental exams. If vomiting occurs, rinse your mouth out thoroughly.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Be sure to drink plenty of fluids while you are taking ribavirin.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you remember the missed dose that same day, take the medication right away. However, if you do not remember the missed dose until the next day, call your doctor to find out what to do. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ribavirin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
cough
upset stomach
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
heartburn
loss of appetite
weight loss
changes in ability to taste food
dry mouth
difficulty concentrating
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
memory loss
rash
dry, irritated, or itchy skin
sweating
painful or irregular menstruation (period)
muscle or bone pain
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
hives
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty swallowing or breathing
pain in the stomach or lower back
bloody diarrhea
bright red blood in stools
black, tarry stools
stomach bloating
confusion
dark-colored urine
yellowing of the skin or eyes
unusual bleeding or bruising
vision changes
fever, chills, and other signs of infection
depression
thinking about hurting or killing yourself
mood changes
excessive worry
irritability
starting to use street drugs or alcohol again if you used these substances in the past
intolerance to cold
Ribavirin may slow growth and weight gain in children. Talk to your child's doctor about the risks of giving this medication to your child.
Ribavirin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store ribavirin tablets and capsules at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Store ribavirin oral solution in the refrigerator or at room temperature.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Copegus
®
Moderiba
®
Rebetol
®
Ribasphere
®
Virazole
®
Other names
tribavirin
RTCA
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page