Talazoparib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Talazoparib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618070.html
Talazoparib
pronounced as (tal" a zoe' pa rib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Talazoparib is used alone to treat certain types of breast cancer that has spread within the breast or to other areas of the body. Talazoparib is also used with enzalutamide (Xtandi) to treat certain types of prostate cancer that has spread to other parts of the body in men and who have not been helped by certain medical and surgical treatments that decrease testosterone levels. Talazoparib is in a class of medications called poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. It works by stopping or slowing the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Talazoparib comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day. Take talazoparib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take talazoparib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not dissolve or open them.
If you vomit after taking talazoparib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may decrease your dose of talazoparib, or permanently or temporarily stop your treatment, if you experience certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with talazoparib. Continue to take talazoparib even if you feel well. Do not stop taking talazoparib without talking to your doctor.
If you are taking talazoparib with enzalutamide (Xtandi) to treat prostate cancer and your doctor has prescribed another medication such as degarelix (Firmagon), goserelin (Zoladex), histrelin (Supprelin LA, Vantas), leuprolide (Eligard, Lupron, in Lupaneta Pack), or triptorelin (Trelstar, Triptodur) to treat your prostate cancer, you will need to continue receiving this medication during your treatment with talazoparib.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking talazoparib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to talazoparib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in talazoparib capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had low blood levels of sodium, potassium, phosphate, or magnesium; low blood cell counts (leukopenia, lymphopenia, neutropenia, anemia); or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are taking talazoparib. If you are female, your doctor may perform a pregnancy test before you start treatment, and you should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with talazoparib and for 7 months after your final dose. If you are male, you and your partner should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with talazoparib and for 4 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. Talazoparib may decrease fertility in men. However, you should not assume that you or your partner cannot become pregnant. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking talazoparib, call your doctor. Talazoparib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking talazoparib and for 1 month after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking talazoparib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Talazoparib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
loss of appetite
diarrhea
vomiting
stomach pain
change in sense of taste
heartburn
mouth pain or sores
hair loss
fatigue
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
weakness
feeling tired
weight loss
fever, chills, cough, or other signs of infection
shortness of breath
fast heartbeat
headache, dizziness, confusion, or pale skin
blood in urine or stool
unusual bleeding or bruising
broken bones or fractures
Some people who received talazoparib developed other forms of cancer such as leukemia (cancer that begins in the white blood cells) or myelodysplastic syndrome (condition in which blood cells do not develop normally) after they received the medication. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving this medication.
Talazoparib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to talazoparib. Your doctor will also order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with talazoparib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Talzenna
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page