Zanidatamab-hrli Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Zanidatamab-hrli Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624078.html
Zanidatamab-hrli Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Do not receive zanidatamab-hrli injection if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking zanidatamab, call your doctor immediately. Zanidatamab may harm the fetus. You may be required to have a negative pregnancy test before starting zanidatamab. You should use effective contraception during zanidatamab treatment and for 4 months after. Talk to your doctor about what contraception may be best for you.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Zanidatamab-hrli injection is used to treat certain type of biliary tract cancer that cannot be operated on, have failed to respond to other treatments or that has spread. Zanidatamab-hrli injection is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by stopping the growth of the tumor.
How should this medicine be used?
Zanitamab-hrli injection comes as a powder to be mixed with a liquid and to be given as an intravenous infusion (infusion into the vein) by a doctor or a nurse at a healthcare facility. It is usually given every 2 weeks. Your doctor will decide how long you should receive zanitamab-hrli injection. Your dose may need to be changed, delayed or held based on how you are tolerating the medicine.
Zanitamab-hrli injection can cause reactions during the infusion. Let your doctor know if you experience any of the following during your zanitamab-hrli infusion: itching, flushing, rash, fever, chills, muscle or joint pain, fast heartbeat, shortness of breath, cough, chest discomfort, dizziness or lightheadedness, or sudden anxiety. Your doctor will give you additional medicines before each dose of zanitamab-hrli to help prevent any reactions while receiving zanitamab-hrli.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving zanitamab-hrli,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to zanitamab-hrli, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in zanitamab-hrli injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any heart problems.
talk to your doctor about risks and benefits of breastfeeding while receiving zanitamab-hrli.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a scheduled infusion of zanitamab-hrli, call your doctor to set up an appointment to receive it right away. Then restart the infusion schedule so that zanitiamab=hrli is given every 2 weeks.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Zanitmaba-hrli injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
abdominal pain
nausea
vomiting
fatigue
reduced appetite
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
diarrhea
new or worsening shortness of breath, feeling more tired than usual, swelling of your ankles or feet, loss of consciousness, irregular heartbeat, sudden weight gain, dizziness or lightheadedness
Zanitiamab-hrli injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to zanitamab-hrli injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zihera
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page