Olsalazine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Olsalazine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601088.html
Olsalazine
pronounced as (ole sal' a zeen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Olsalazine is used to treat ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum) in adults when another medication (sulfasalazine) could not be tolerated. Olsalazine is in a class of medications called anti-inflammatory agents. Olsalazine reduces the bowel inflammation, diarrhea (stool frequency), rectal bleeding, and abdominal pain.
How should this medicine be used?
Olsalazine comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It usually is taken twice a day after meals or with food. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take olsalazine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking olsalazine.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking olsalazine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to olsalazine, balsalazide (Colazal); mesalamine (Apriso, Pentasa, others); sulfasalazine (Azulfidine); salicylate pain relievers such as aspirin, choline magnesium trisalicylate, diflunisal, magnesium salicylate (Doan's, others); any other medications; or any of the ingredients in olsalazine capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with olsalazine: aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking olsalazine. Do not start any of these medications while taking olsalazine without discussing with your healthcare provider
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a skin condition such as eczema (atopic dermatitis; a skin disease that causes the skin to be dry and itchy and to sometimes develop red, scaly rashes), kidney stones, kidney or liver disease, or any other medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking olsalazine, call your doctor.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to the sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Olsalazine may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that olsalazine should not be taken by people who have received the varicella virus (chicken pox) vaccine in the past six weeks because of the risk of Reye's syndrome (a serious condition in which fat builds up on the brain, liver, and other body organs).
you should know that olsalazine may cause a serious reaction. Many of the symptoms of this reaction are similar to the symptoms of ulcerative colitis, so it may be difficult to tell if you are experiencing a reaction to the medication or a flare (episode of symptoms) of your disease. Call your doctor if you experience some or all of the following symptoms: stomach pain or cramping, bloody diarrhea, fever, headache, or rash.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Olsalazine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stomach upset
nausea
bloating
loss of appetite
headache
muscle or joint pain
dizziness
difficulty falling or staying asleep
If you experience any of the following symptoms, or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, hives, itching or peeling or blistering skin
fever
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, mouth, or throat
difficulty breathing or swallowing
new or worsening cough
shortness of breath
chest pain
diarrhea
unusual bleeding or bruising
extreme tiredness
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the right upper part of the stomach
pale stools
difficult or painful urination or cloudy, discolored, or bloody urine
back pain
Olsalazine may cause your urine to become discolored, reddish-brown when it comes in contact with any surface or water (e.g., in the toilet). Call your doctor if your urine is discolored.
Olsalazine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain
rapid or shallow breathing
ringing in ears
headache
dizziness
confusion
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to olsalazine. Before you have any laboratory tests, tell the laboratory personnel that you take olsalazine, as this medication may interfere with some laboratory tests.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Dipentum
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page