Lorlatinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lorlatinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619005.html
Lorlatinib
pronounced as (lor la' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lorlatinib is used to treat a certain type of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in adults that has spread to other parts of the body. Lorlatinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps to stop or slow the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Lorlatinib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once daily. Take lorlatinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take lorlatinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you vomit after taking the medication, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them. Do not take tablets that are already broken or cracked.
Your doctor may decrease your dose or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment depending on if you experience any side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with lorlatinib.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking lorlatinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lorlatinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in lorlatinib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with lorlatinib. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with lorlatinib Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting lorlatinib with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking lorlatinib, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist
the following herbal product may interact with lorlatinib: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking lorlatinib. Do not start this medication while taking lorlatinib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, an irregular heartbeat, diabetes or high blood sugar levels, depression, seizures, high levels of cholesterol and other fatty substances in the blood, or kidney or lung disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or plan to father a child. Lorlatinib may interfere with the action of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, or injections), so you should not use these as your only method of birth control during your treatment. You must use a non-hormonal birth control such as a barrier method (device that blocks sperm from entering the uterus such as a condom or a diaphragm). Ask your doctor to help you choose a method of birth control that will work for you. If you are female, you will need to take a pregnancy test before you start treatment and should use non-hormonal birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 6 months after your final dose. If you are male, you and your female partner should use birth control during your treatment and for 3 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking lorlatinib, call your doctor immediately. Lorlatinib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breast-feed while you are taking lorlatinib and for 7 days after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may temporarily decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking lorlatinib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is within 4 hours of the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lorlatinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
weight gain
muscle, joint, or back pain
diarrhea
constipation
nausea
vomiting
tiredness
headache
vision changes
rash or itching
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
swelling in your arms, legs, hands and feet
difficulty breathing
shortness of breath, cough, or fever
numbness and tingling feeling in your joints or arms and legs
difficulty thinking or confusion
seizures
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist
changes in mood, feeling sad or anxious
problems with speech
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
unusual dreams or nightmares
headache, dizziness, blurred vision, feeling faint, chest pain, or shortness of breath
feeling more hungry or thirsty than usual, increased urination, extreme tiredness, weakness, confusion, or breath that smells fruity
Lorlatinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests and an electrocardiogram (ECG; test that measures the electrical activity in the heart) before and during your treatment to check your body's response to lorlatinib. Your doctor will also check your blood pressure before and during your treatment. Your doctor will also order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with lorlatinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lorbrena
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page