Penpulimab-kcqx Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Penpulimab-kcqx Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625068.html
Penpulimab-kcqx Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Penpulimab-kcqx injection is used for treatment of certain types of nasopharyngeal cancer (cancer in the upper part of the throat). Penpulimab-kcqx is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by helping the immune system attack the cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Penpulimab-kcqx injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be given intravenously (into the vein). It is given over 60 minutes every 2 to 3 weeks. Your doctor will tell you how long you will receive penpulimab-kcqx but you will not receive longer than 24 months (2 years). The duration depends on the condition you have and on how your body responds to the medication.
Your healthcare provider will monitor your closely while receiving your dose of penpulimab-kcqx injection. Tell your doctor if you experience any of the following: chills or shaking, itching or rash, dizziness or feeling like may pass out, flushing, shortness or breath or wheezing, fever, back pain. Your doctor may need to stop or slow down your dose of penpulimab-kcqx if any of these occur.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving penpulimab-kcqx injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving penpulimab-kcqx injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have an autoimmune disorder like Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis or Lupus; have received an organ or corneal or stem cell transplant; have ever received radiation treatment to your chest area; or have or have ever had a nervous system disorder such as myasthenia gravis or Guillian-Barre syndrome, liver disease, thyroid disease (such as hypothyroidism, Hashimoto's Thyroiditis, or Addison's disease), diabetes, or kidney disease.
penpulimab-kcqx may cause harm to the fetus if given during pregnancy. Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while receiving penpulimab-kcqx, call your doctor immediately. You may be asked to take a pregnancy test prior to starting penpulimab-kcqx. If capable of becoming pregnant, you should use effective contraception while receiving penpulimab-kcqx and for 4 months after your last dose.
you should not breastfeed while receiving penpulimab-kcqx and for 4 months after last dose.
do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive your dose of penpulimab-kcqx, call your healthcare provider right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Penpulimab-kcqx may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, constipation (difficulty passing stool) or bloating
decreased appetite
weight loss
cough, fever, nasal congestion, general ill feeling
headache
dizziness
muscle or joint aches or pains
difficulty sleeping
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
cough, shortness of breath, chest pain
diarrhea (frequent, loose stools), black or tarry stools or stools with blood or mucus in them, severe stomach pain or tenderness
yellowing of the skin or the whites of your eyes, dark urine, severe nausea or vomiting, right-sided stomach pain, bleeding or bruising more easily
fatigue, numbness of hands, weight changes, muscle weakness, brain fog, mood changes, headaches, sensitivity to light, rapid heartbeat, increased sweating, increase in hunger or thirst, hair loss, urinating more frequently, feeling cold, hoarseness
urinating less frequently or dark urine, blood in urine, swelling in arms or legs, loss of appetite
redness or itchy skin, skin blistering or peeling, painful sores or ulcers in mouth or nose or throat or genitals, swollen lymph nodes, fever or flu-like symptoms
chest pain, fast or irregular heartbeat, swelling of arms or legs, shortness of breath
confusion, sleepiness, memory problems, changes in mood, stiff neck, balance problems, numbness or tingling in arms or legs
double or blurry vision, sensitivity to light, eye pain, vision changes
severe or ongoing muscle pain, weakness or cramping
easy bruising or excessive bleeding from gums or cuts
Penpulimab-kcqx injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to penpulimab-kcqx injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Penpulimab-KCQX
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page