Hydroxyzine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Hydroxyzine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682866.html
Hydroxyzine
pronounced as (hye drox' i zeen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Hydroxyzine is used to relieve itching caused by allergic skin reactions. It is also used to relieve anxiety and tension. Hydroxyzine is also used as a sedative before and after general anesthesia for surgery. Hydroxyzine is in a class of medications called antihistamines. It works by blocking the action of histamine, a substance in the body that causes allergic symptoms. It also works by decreasing activity in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Hydroxyzine comes as capsules, tablets, and a syrup to take by mouth. Take three or four times a day or as directed by your doctor.
Take hydroxyzine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking hydroxyzine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking hydroxyzine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take hydroxyzine.
tell your doctor if anyone in your family has or has ever had a prolonged QT interval or if you have or have ever had a slow or irregular heartbeat, heart failure, a heart attack, or other types of heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. You should not take hydroxyzine if you are pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking hydroxyzine, call your doctor immediately.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding . Do not breastfeed while taking hydroxyzine.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking hydroxyzine if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take hydroxyzine because it is not as safe as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are taking this medication. Alcohol can make the side effects of hydroxyzine worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If your doctor has told you to take hydroxyzine regularly, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Hydroxyzine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth
confusion (especially in older adults)
dizziness
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
unintentional trembling or shaking movements
seizures
rash, pus-filled, blister-like sores, areas of swelling and redness on the skin, and fever
Hydroxyzine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
sedation
seizures
nausea
vomiting
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and laboratory.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Atarax
®
¶
Hypam
®
¶
Orgatrax
®
¶
Vistaril
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page