Oritavancin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Oritavancin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614042.html
Oritavancin Injection
pronounced as (or it'' a van' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Oritavancin injection is used to treat skin infections caused by certain types of bacteria. Oritavancin is in a class of medications called lipoglycopeptide antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as oritavancin will not work for colds, flu, and other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Oritavancin injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and given through a needle or catheter placed in your vein. It is usually injected slowly over 3 hours as a one-time dose by a doctor or nurse.
You may experience a reaction while you receive a dose of oritavancin. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of these symptoms while you receive oritavancin: sudden reddening of the face, neck, upper chest, or other body part; itching; rash; and hives. Your doctor may slow or stop the infusion until your symptoms improve.
You should begin to feel better after receiving treatment with oritavancin injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using oritavancin injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to oritavancin, dalbavancin (Dalvance), telavancin (Vibativ), vancomycin (Vancocin), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in oritavancin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are receiving heparin injection. Your doctor will probably stop your heparin for at least 5 days after receiving oritavancin injection.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving oritavancin injection Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have any medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Oritavancin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
dizziness
headache
redness and swelling at the infusion site
tachycardia
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
swelling of the lips, face, hands, or legs, itching, hives, rash, wheezing
signs of new skin infections such as a new painful, red, swollen area on your skin
Oritavancin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test within 5 days of receiving oritavancin, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you have received this medication.
If you still have symptoms of infection after you finishing your treatment with oritavancin injection, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Orbactiv
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page