Cyanocobalamin Nasal Gel: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cyanocobalamin Nasal Gel
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604029.html
Cyanocobalamin Nasal Gel
pronounced as (sye an oh koe bal' a min)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cyanocobalamin nasal gel is used to prevent a lack of vitamin B
12
that may be caused by any of the following: pernicious anemia (lack of a natural substance needed to absorb vitamin B
12
from the intestine); certain diseases, infections or medications that decrease the amount of vitamin B
12
absorbed from food; or a vegan diet (strict vegetarian diet that does not allow any animal products including eggs and dairy products). Lack of vitamin B
12
can cause anemia (condition in which the red blood cells do not bring enough oxygen to the organs) and permanent damage to the nerves. This anemia must be treated with vitamin B
12
injections. After the red blood cells have returned to normal, cyanocobalamin nasal gel can be used to stop anemia and other symptoms of lack of vitamin B
12
from coming back. Cyanocobalamin nasal gel is also used to supply extra vitamin B
12
to people who need unusually large amounts of this vitamin because they are pregnant or have certain diseases. Cyanocobalamin nasal gel is in a class of medications called vitamins. It enters the bloodstream through the nose, so it can be used to supply vitamin B
12
to people who cannot take in this vitamin through the intestine.
How should this medicine be used?
Cyanocobalamin comes as a gel to apply to the inside of the nose. It is usually used once a week. To help you remember to use cyanocobalamin nasal gel, use it on the same day of the week every week. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use cyanocobalamin nasal gel exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Cyanocobalamin nasal gel will supply you with enough vitamin B
12
only as long as you use it regularly. You may need to use cyanocobalamin nasal gel every week for the rest of your life. Continue to use cyanocobalamin nasal gel even if you feel well. Do not stop using cyanocobalamin nasal gel without talking to your doctor. If you stop using cyanocobalamin nasal gel, your anemia may return and your nerves may be damaged.
Hot foods and drinks may cause your nose to produce mucus that can wash away cyanocobalamin nasal gel. Do not eat or drink hot foods or drinks for 1 hour before you plan to use cyanocobalamin nasal gel or for 1 hour after you use this medication.
Your doctor or pharmacist will show you how to use cyanocobalamin nasal gel. You will also be given the manufacturer's printed information on using this medication. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions.
To use the nasal gel, follow these steps:
Blow your nose gently to clear both nostrils.
Pull the clear cover off of the top of the pump.
If you are using the pump for the first time, press down on the finger grips of the pump firmly and quickly until you see a droplet of gel at the top of the pump. Then press down on the finger grips two more times.
Place the tip of the pump about halfway into one nostril. Be sure to point the tip toward the back of your nose.
Hold the pump in place with one hand. Press your other nostril closed with the forefinger of your other hand.
Press down firmly and quickly on the finger grips to release medication into your nostril.
Remove the pump from your nose.
Massage the nostril where you applied the medication for a few seconds.
Wipe the tip of the pump with a clean cloth or an alcohol swab and replace the clear cap on the tip of the pump.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using cyanocobalamin nasal gel ,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cyanocobalamin nasal gel, tablets, or injection; hydroxycobalamin; multi-vitamins; any other medications or vitamins; or cobalt.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using cyanocobalamin nasal gel. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, if you have any type of infection, and if you have or have ever had Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (slow, painless loss of vision, first in one eye and then in the other); allergies that often cause your nose to be stuffed, itchy, or runny; or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you get a cold or a runny or stuffy nose at any time during your treatment. You may have to use another form of vitamin B
12
until your symptoms go away.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using cyanocobalamin nasal gel, call your doctor. Talk to your doctor about the amount of vitamin B
12
you should get every day when you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cyanocobalamin nasal gel may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
upset stomach
stuffed or runny nose
sore tongue
weakness
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
unusual bruising or bleeding
muscle weakness, cramps, or pain
leg pain
extreme thirst
frequent urination
confusion
burning or tingling in the arms, legs, hands or feet
sore throat, fever, chills, or other signs of infection
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
Cyanocobalamin nasal gel may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication upright in the carton it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not allow the medication to freeze.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to cyanocobalamin nasal gel.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nascobal
®
Other names
Vitamin B
12
Last Revised -
05/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page