Bexagliflozin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bexagliflozin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623027.html
Bexagliflozin
pronounced as (bex" a gli floe' zin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bexagliflozin is used along with diet and exercise to lower blood sugar levels in adults with type 2 diabetes (condition in which blood sugar is too high because the body does not produce or use insulin normally). Bexagliflozin is in a class of medications called sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors. It works by lowering blood sugar by causing the kidneys to get rid of more glucose in the urine. Bexagliflozin is not used to treat type 1 diabetes (condition in which the body does not produce insulin and, therefore, cannot control the amount of sugar in the blood).
Over time, people who have diabetes and high blood sugar can develop serious or life-threatening complications, including heart disease, stroke, kidney problems, nerve damage, and eye problems. Taking bexagliflozin, making lifestyle changes (e.g., diet, exercise, quitting smoking), and regularly checking your blood sugar may help to manage your diabetes and improve your health. This therapy may also decrease your chances of having a heart attack, stroke, or other diabetes-related complications such as kidney failure, nerve damage (numb, cold legs or feet; decreased sexual ability in men and women), eye problems, including changes or loss of vision, or gum disease. Your doctor and other healthcare providers will talk to you about the best way to manage your diabetes.
How should this medicine be used?
Bexagliflozin comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day. Take bexagliflozin at around the same time every day.
Take bexagliflozin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Bexagliflozin controls Type 2 diabetes but does not cure it. Do not stop taking bexagliflozin without talking to your doctor.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with bexagliflozin and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking bexagliflozin,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking bexagliflozin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you regularly drink alcohol or sometimes drink large amounts of alcohol in a short time (binge drink), are on a low sodium diet, or have an infection. Also, tell your doctor if you have ever had an amputation, or have ever had heart disease, peripheral vascular disease, neuropathy, foot ulcers or sores, low blood pressure, urinary tract infections, or urinary problems, pancreatic disease including pancreatitis or have had surgery on your pancreas, yeast infections in the genital area, osteoporosis, kidney or liver disease. If you are male, tell your doctor if you have never been circumcised. Tell your doctor if you are eating less due to illness, surgery, or a change in your diet; if you are following a ketogenic diet (a high fat, low carbohydrate diet); or have recently had diarrhea, vomiting, been in the sun too long, or have been sweating a lot, which may cause dehydration (loss of a large amount of body fluids).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. Do not breastfeed while you are taking bexagliflozin. If you become pregnant while taking bexagliflozin, call your doctor.
you should know that bexagliflozin may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. If you have this problem, call your doctor. This problem is more common when you first start taking bexagliflozin. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking bexagliflozin. Your doctor may tell you to stop taking bexagliflozin at least 3 days before a surgery.
ask your doctor what to do if you get sick, develop an infection or fever, experience unusual stress, or are injured. These conditions can affect your blood sugar and the amount of bexagliflozin you may need.
alcohol may cause a change in blood sugar. Ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking bexagliflozin.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bexagliflozin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
urinating a lot, including at night
being thirsty
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
frequent, urgent, burning, or painful urination; decrease in amount of urine; urine that is cloudy, red, pink, or brown; strong smelling urine; pelvic or rectal pain; or fever, back pain, nausea, or vomiting
vaginal odor, white or yellowish vaginal discharge (may be lumpy or look like cottage cheese), or vaginal itching
redness, itching, or swelling of the penis; rash on the penis; foul smelling discharge from the penis; or pain in the skin around the penis
feeling tired, weak, or uncomfortable; along with a fever and pain, tenderness, redness, and swelling of the genitals or the area between the genitals and the rectum
If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking bexagliflozin and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash; hives; itching; difficulty breathing or swallowing; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, mouth, or eyes; or hoarseness
If you experience any of the following symptoms of ketoacidosis (a serious condition that may develop if high blood sugar is not treated), stop taking bexagliflozin and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment. If possible, check for ketones in your urine if you have these symptoms, even if your blood sugar is less than 250 mg/dL:
nausea, vomiting, stomach-area pain, tiredness, or difficulty breathing
You should know that bexagliflozin can increase the risk of having a lower limb (toe, foot, or leg) amputation. Your doctor will tell you how to take care of your legs and feet properly to help avoid infections and complications that could lead to an amputation. Follow the doctor's instructions carefully and call your doctor right away if you have any pain, tenderness, sores, ulcers, or swollen, warm, reddened area in your leg or foot, fever or chills, or other signs and symptoms of infection.
Bexagliflozin can cause dehydration. It is important that you drink plenty of water while taking bexagliflozin. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about the right amount of water to drink to prevent dehydration while taking bexagliflozin.
Bexagliflozin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will probably order certain laboratory tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to bexagliflozin.
Your blood sugar levels should be checked regularly to determine your response to bexagliflozin. Your doctor will order other lab tests, including glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c), to check your response to bexagliflozin. Your doctor will also tell you how to check your response to this medication by measuring your blood sugar levels at home. Follow these instructions carefully.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking bexagliflozin. Because of the way this medication works, your urine may test positive for glucose.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Brenzavvy
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page