Pretomanid: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pretomanid
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619056.html
Pretomanid
pronounced as (pre toe' ma nid)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pretomanid is used along with bedaquiline (Sirturo) and linezolid (Zyvox) to treat multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB; a serious infection that affects the lungs that cannot be treated with other medications) in adults. Pretomanid is in a class of medications called antimycobacterials. It works by killing the bacteria that cause tuberculosis.
How should this medicine be used?
Pretomanid comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once daily with food for 26 weeks or longer. Take pretomanid at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take pretomanid exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with water.
Continue to take pretomanid until you finish the prescription and do not miss doses, even if you feel better. If you stop taking pretomanid too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics. This will make your infection harder to treat in the future. You will participate in a directly observed therapy program to make sure you to take all of your medication as directed. In this program, a healthcare worker will give you each dose of medication and will watch as you swallow the medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking pretomanid,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pretomanid, bedaquiline, linezolid, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pretomanid tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking pretomanid. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with pretomanid: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking pretomanid. Do not start this medication while taking pretomanid without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you or a family member have long QT syndrome (condition that increases the risk of developing an irregular heartbeat that may cause fainting or sudden death), or another type of irregular heart beat or heart rhythm problem. Also, tell your doctor if you have or have ever had low blood levels of calcium, magnesium or potassium in your blood, a heart attack, heart failure (HF; condition in which the heart cannot pump enough blood to other parts of the body), seizures, HIV infection, or thyroid, liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking pretomanid, call your doctor.
you should know to avoid drinking alcoholic beverages. Drinking alcohol increases the risk that you will experience serious side effects from pretomanid.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pretomanid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
acne
headache
heartburn
loss of appetite
weight loss
rash
itching
stomach pain
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
dry skin
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
loss of appetite, nausea, yellow eyes or skin, pain in the upper right area of the stomach, or dark urine
pain, numbness, or weakness in hands, feet, or other parts of the body; or problems with balance
vision changes
fast or irregular heartbeat; feeling dizzy; or fainting
pale skin or extreme tiredness
repeated nausea and vomiting; fast breathing; confusion; or feeling tired
sudden, stabbing pain in the chest, particularly when breathing in and out
Pretomanid may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to pretomanid. You will need to have an electrocardiogram (ECG; a test that measures the electrical activity of the heart) before your treatment and several times during your treatment to see how this medication affects your heart rhythm.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Last Revised -
11/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page