Nicotine Transdermal Patch: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nicotine Transdermal Patch
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601084.html
Nicotine Transdermal Patch
pronounced as (nik' oh teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nicotine skin patches are used to help people stop smoking cigarettes. They provide a source of nicotine that reduces the withdrawal symptoms experienced when smoking is stopped.
How should this medicine be used?
Nicotine patches are applied directly to the skin. They are applied once a day, usually at the same time each day. Nicotine patches come in various strengths and may be used for various lengths of time. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use nicotine skin patches exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of them or use them more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Apply the patch to a clean, dry, hairless area of skin on the upper chest, upper arm, or hip as directed by the package directions. Avoid areas of irritated, oily, scarred, or broken skin.
Remove the patch from the package, peel off the protective strip, and immediately apply the patch to your skin. With the sticky side touching the skin, press the patch in place with the palm of your hand for about 10 seconds. Be sure the patch is held firmly in place, especially around the edges. Wash your hands with water alone after applying the patch. If the patch falls off or loosens, replace it with a new one.
You should wear the patch continuously for 16 to 24 hours, depending on the specific directions inside your nicotine patch package. The patch may be worn even while showering or bathing. Remove the patch carefully and fold the patch in half with the sticky side pressed together. Dispose of it safely, out of the reach of children and pets. After removing the used patch, apply the next patch to a different skin area to prevent skin irritation. Never wear two patches at once.
A switch to a lower strength patch may be considered after the first 2 weeks on the medication. A gradual reduction to lower strength patches is recommended to reduce nicotine withdrawal symptoms. Nicotine patches may be used from 6 to 20 weeks depending on the specific instructions supplied with the patches.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using nicotine skin patches,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to adhesive tape or any drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using nicotine patches. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription product may interact with nicotine patches: acetaminophen (Tylenol). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start using nicotine patches. Do not start this medication while using nicotine patches without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a heart attack, irregular heart rate, angina (chest pain), ulcers, uncontrolled high blood pressure, overactive thyroid, pheochromocytoma, or a skin condition or disorder.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using nicotine skin patches, call your doctor immediately. Nicotine and nicotine skin patches may cause harm to the fetus.
do not smoke cigarettes or use other nicotine products while using nicotine skin patches because nicotine overdose can result.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nicotine skin patches may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
headache
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
redness or swelling at the patch site
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
severe rash or swelling
seizures
abnormal heartbeat or rhythm
difficulty breathing
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nicoderm
®
CQ Patch
Nicotrol
®
Patch
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page