Diclofenac: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Diclofenac
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a689002.html
Diclofenac
pronounced as (dye kloe' fen ak)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
People who take nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (other than aspirin) such as diclofenac may have a higher risk of having a heart attack or a stroke than people who do not take these medications. These events may happen without warning and may cause death. This risk may be higher for people who take NSAIDs for a long time. Do not take an NSAID such as diclofenac if you have recently had a heart attack, unless directed to do so by your doctor. Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had heart disease, a heart attack, or a stroke, if you smoke, and if you have or have ever had high cholesterol, high blood pressure, or diabetes. Get emergency medical help right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: chest pain, shortness of breath, weakness in one part or side of the body, or slurred speech.
If you will be undergoing a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG; a type of heart surgery), you should not take diclofenac right before or right after the surgery.
NSAIDs such as diclofenac may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in the stomach or intestine. These problems may develop at any time during treatment, may happen without warning symptoms, and may cause death. The risk may be higher for people who take NSAIDs for a long time, are older in age, have poor health, or drink large amounts of alcohol while taking diclofenac. Tell your doctor if you take any of the following medications: anticoagulants ('blood thinners') such as warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven); aspirin; other NSAIDs such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn); oral steroids such as dexamethasone, methylprednisolone (Medrol), and prednisone (Rayos); selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as citalopram (Celexa), fluoxetine (Prozac, Sarafem, Selfemra, in Symbyax), fluvoxamine (Luvox), paroxetine (Brisdelle, Paxil, Pexeva), and sertraline (Zoloft); or serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) such as desvenlafaxine (Khedezla, Pristiq), duloxetine (Cymbalta), and venlafaxine (Effexor XR). Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had ulcers, bleeding in your stomach or intestines, or other bleeding disorders. If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking diclofenac and call your doctor: stomach pain, heartburn, vomiting a substance that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds, blood in the stool, or black and tarry stools.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will monitor your symptoms carefully and will probably order certain tests to check your body's response to diclofenac. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling so that your doctor can prescribe the right amount of medication to treat your condition with the lowest risk of serious side effects.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with diclofenac and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Diclofenac capsules (Zipsor, Zorvolex) and tablets (Cataflam) are used to relieve mild to moderate pain. Diclofenac extended-release tablets (Voltaren XR), tablets (Cataflam), and delayed-release tablets (available generically) are used to relieve pain, tenderness, swelling, and stiffness caused by osteoarthritis (arthritis caused by a breakdown of the lining of the joints), and rheumatoid arthritis (arthritis caused by swelling of the lining of the joints). Diclofenac extended-release tablets and delayed-release tablets are also used to treat ankylosing spondylitis (arthritis that mainly affects the spine). Diclofenac tablets (Cataflam) are also used to treat painful menstrual periods. Diclofenac solution (Cambia) is used to treat migraine headaches in adults, but cannot be used to prevent migraines or to treat other types of headaches. Diclofenac is in a class of medications called NSAIDs. It works by stopping the body's production of a substance that causes pain, fever, and inflammation.
How should this medicine be used?
Diclofenac comes as a tablet, and liquid-filled capsule, a hard gelatin capsule, an extended-release (long-acting) tablet, a delayed-release (releases medication in the intestine) tablet, and as packets of powder for solution (to be mixed with water) and taken by mouth. Diclofenac liquid-filled capsules are usually taken 4 times a day and diclofenac hard gelatin capsules are usually taken 3 times a day on an empty stomach. Diclofenac extended-release tablets are usually taken once a day, and in rare cases are taken twice a day, if needed to control pain. Diclofenac tablets and diclofenac delayed-release tablets are usually taken 2, 3, or 4 times a day. Diclofenac solution is taken without food as a one dose treatment to relieve the pain of migraine headaches. If you were told to take diclofenac on a regular basis, take it at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take diclofenac exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Different diclofenac products release the medication differently in your body and cannot be used interchangeably. Only take the diclofenac product prescribed by your doctor and do not switch to a different diclofenac product unless your doctor says that you should.
Your doctor may adjust the dose of your medication during your treatment depending on your response to the medication. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment with diclofenac.
If you are taking the powder for solution, you will need to mix it with water before you take it. To mix the medication, first remove one packet from a row of three attached packets. Place 2 to 4 tablespoons (1 to 2 ounces; 30 to 60 mL) of water in a cup. Add the contents of the packet and mix well. Drink the entire mixture right away. Throw away the empty packet in a trash can that is out of the reach of children and pets.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking diclofenac,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to diclofenac (also available as Solaraze and Pennsaid, in Arthrotec), aspirin or other NSAIDs such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), any other medications, or any of the inactive ingredients in the diclofenac product you plan to take. Ask your pharmacist or check the medication guide for a list of the inactive ingredients. If you will be taking diclofenac capsules (Zipsor), tell your doctor if you are allergic to bovine (cow) proteins such as those found in milk, beef, or gelatin.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking diclofenac. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with diclofenac: aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve); salicylates. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking diclofenac. Do not start any of these medications while taking diclofenac without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any of the conditions mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section or asthma, especially if you also have frequent stuffed or runny nose or nasal polyps (swelling of the lining of the nose); porphyria (an abnormal increase in the amount of certain natural substances made by the liver); heart failure; swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs; or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant; or are breast-feeding. Diclofenac may harm the fetus and cause problems with delivery if it is taken around 20 weeks or later during pregnancy. Do not take diclofenac around or after 20 weeks of pregnancy, unless you are told to do so by your doctor. If you become pregnant while taking diclofenac, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking diclofenac if you are 75 years of age or older. Do not take this medication for a longer period of time or at a higher dose than recommended by your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking diclofenac.
if you have phenylketonuria (PKU; an inherited condition in which a special diet must be followed to prevent mental retardation), you should know that the powder for solution contains aspartame, a source of phenylalanine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
The powder for solution is usually taken as needed for migraine headaches. If you are taking any other diclofenac product and you forget to take a dose, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Diclofenac may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
constipation
gas or bloating
headache
dizziness
ringing in the ears
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical help. Do not take any more diclofenac until you speak to your doctor.
unexplained weight gain
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
swelling of the abdomen, feet, ankles, or lower legs
excessive tiredness
lack of energy
nausea
loss of appetite
itching
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
flu-like symptoms
fever
blisters
rash
hives
swelling of the eyes, face, tongue, lips, throat, arms, or hands
difficulty breathing or swallowing
hoarseness
pale skin
fast heartbeat
cloudy, discolored, or bloody urine
back pain
difficult or painful urination
Diclofenac may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
bloody, black, or tarry stools
vomiting a substance that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds
drowsiness
slow, shallow, or irregular breathing
loss of consciousness
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cambia
®
Cataflam
®
¶
Voltaren XR
®
¶
Zipsor
®
Zorvolex
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
03/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page