VEXAS syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
VEXAS syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/vexas-syndrome/
VEXAS syndrome
Description
VEXAS syndrome is a disorder involving episodes of fever and abnormal inflammation. VEXAS is an acronym that stands for the technical terms of key descriptors of the condition. Normally, inflammation is an immune system response to injury or foreign invaders (such as bacteria). In people with VEXAS syndrome, part of the immune system called the innate immune response is turned on (activated) abnormally, when there is no injury or foreign invader, which causes fevers and inflammation-related damage to tissues and organs. Based on this process, VEXAS syndrome is classified as an autoinflammatory disease.
VEXAS syndrome typically affects older adults, primarily males, with signs and symptoms of the condition developing in a person's fifties, sixties, or seventies. People with VEXAS syndrome often have inflammation of the joints (arthritis), skin (
dermatitis
), cartilage in the ear and nose (chondritis), or blood vessels (
vasculitis
). Inflammation can also develop in other tissues, including in the lungs and eyes. Affected individuals may also have enlarged
lymph nodes
.
Blood cell abnormalities are common in VEXAS syndrome. Most affected individuals develop a shortage of red blood cells (a condition called
anemia
), and the red blood cells that are present are abnormally large (macrocytic). People with VEXAS syndrome can also have a shortage of blood cells called platelets (a disorder known as thrombocytopenia);
platelets
are needed for normal blood clotting. Some affected individuals develop myelodyspastic syndrome, a condition in which immature blood cells fail to develop normally; this condition may progress to a form of blood cancer called
leukemia
.
Frequency
VEXAS syndrome is a rare condition. Research suggests the condition affects an estimated 1 in 13,000 people.
Causes
Variants (also called mutations) in the
UBA1
gene cause VEXAS syndrome. The
UBA1
gene provides instructions for making a protein called ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1. This enzyme is necessary for a process that targets damaged or unneeded proteins to be broken down (degraded) within cells. Protein degradation helps maintain the proper balance of protein production and breakdown (protein homeostasis) that cells need to function and survive. The
UBA1
gene variants that cause VEXAS syndrome are acquired during a person's lifetime and are present only in certain immune cells and blood-forming cells in the
bone marrow
. These changes, which are called somatic variants, are not inherited.
UBA1
gene variants that cause VEXAS syndrome result in the production of an enzyme with reduced function. As a result, damaged or unneeded proteins build up inside cells instead of being broken down, which may contribute to abnormal activation of immune cells or cell damage and death. This protein buildup also disrupts protein homeostasis. Old proteins must be removed before cells can make new proteins. If damaged or unneeded proteins are not broken down, they can stop the production of new proteins, which can contribute to the impairment of normal cell functions. When
UBA1
gene variants occur in immune cells or blood cells, they lead to abnormal inflammation, impaired blood cell development, and other features of VEXAS syndrome.
Learn more about the gene associated with VEXAS syndrome
UBA1
Inheritance
VEXAS syndrome is acquired, rather than inherited. Most cases result from new variants in the
UBA1
gene, and occur in people with no previous history of the disorder in their family. The condition is not passed down to children of affected individuals.
The
UBA1
gene is located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two
sex chromosomes
. Males have only one X chromosome, and a variant in the only copy of the
UBA1
gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene, or there would have to be a loss of one of the X chromosomes, to cause the disorder.
Other Names for This Condition
vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, autoinflammatory, somatic syndrome
VEXAS
Additional Information & Resources
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
VEXAS SYNDROME; VEXAS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Beck DB, Bodian DL, Shah V, Mirshahi UL, Kim J, Ding Y, Magaziner SJ, Strande
NT, Cantor A, Haley JS, Cook A, Hill W, Schwartz AL, Grayson PC, Ferrada MA,
Kastner DL, Carey DJ, Stewart DR. Estimated Prevalence and Clinical
Manifestations of UBA1 Variants Associated With VEXAS Syndrome in a Clinical
Population. JAMA. 2023 Jan 24;329(4):318-324. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.24836.
Citation on PubMed
Beck DB, Ferrada MA, Sikora KA, Ombrello AK, Collins JC, Pei W, Balanda N,
Ross DL, Ospina Cardona D, Wu Z, Patel B, Manthiram K, Groarke EM,
Gutierrez-Rodrigues F, Hoffmann P, Rosenzweig S, Nakabo S, Dillon LW, Hourigan
CS, Tsai WL, Gupta S, Carmona-Rivera C, Asmar AJ, Xu L, Oda H, Goodspeed W,
Barron KS, Nehrebecky M, Jones A, Laird RS, Deuitch N, Rowczenio D, Rominger E,
Wells KV, Lee CR, Wang W, Trick M, Mullikin J, Wigerblad G, Brooks S, Dell'Orso
S, Deng Z, Chae JJ, Dulau-Florea A, Malicdan MCV, Novacic D, Colbert RA, Kaplan
MJ, Gadina M, Savic S, Lachmann HJ, Abu-Asab M, Solomon BD, Retterer K, Gahl WA,
Burgess SM, Aksentijevich I, Young NS, Calvo KR, Werner A, Kastner DL, Grayson
PC. Somatic Mutations in UBA1 and Severe Adult-Onset Autoinflammatory
Disease. N Engl J Med. 2020 Dec 31;383(27):2628-2638. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2026834.
Epub 2020 Oct 27.
Citation on PubMed
Georgin-Lavialle S, Terrier B, Guedon AF, Heiblig M, Comont T, Lazaro E,
Lacombe V, Terriou L, Ardois S, Bouaziz JD, Mathian A, Le Guenno G, Aouba A, Outh
R, Meyer A, Roux-Sauvat M, Ebbo M, Zhao LP, Bigot A, Jamilloux Y, Guillotin V,
Flamarion E, Henneton P, Vial G, Jachiet V, Rossignol J, Vinzio S, Weitten T,
Vinit J, Deligny C, Humbert S, Samson M, Magy-Bertrand N, Moulinet T, Bourguiba
R, Hanslik T, Bachmeyer C, Sebert M, Kostine M, Bienvenu B, Biscay P, Liozon E,
Sailler L, Chasset F, Audemard-Verger A, Duroyon E, Sarrabay G, Borlot F, Dieval
C, Cluzeau T, Marianetti P, Lobbes H, Boursier G, Gerfaud-Valentin M, Jeannel J,
Servettaz A, Audia S, Larue M, Henriot B, Faucher B, Graveleau J, de Sainte Marie
B, Galland J, Bouillet L, Arnaud C, Ades L, Carrat F, Hirsch P, Fenaux P, Fain O,
Sujobert P, Kosmider O, Mekinian A; French VEXAS group; GFEV, GFM, CEREMAIA,
MINHEMON. Further characterization of clinical and laboratory features in VEXAS
syndrome: large-scale analysis of a multicentre case series of 116 French
patients. Br J Dermatol. 2022 Mar;186(3):564-574. doi: 10.1111/bjd.20805. Epub
2021 Nov 28.
Citation on PubMed
Koster MJ, Kourelis T, Reichard KK, Kermani TA, Beck DB, Cardona DO, Samec MJ,
Mangaonkar AA, Begna KH, Hook CC, Oliveira JL, Nasr SH, Tiong BK, Patnaik MM,
Burke MM, Michet CJ Jr, Warrington KJ. Clinical Heterogeneity of the VEXAS
Syndrome: A Case Series. Mayo Clin Proc. 2021 Oct;96(10):2653-2659. doi:
10.1016/j.mayocp.2021.06.006. Epub 2021 Sep 3.
Citation on PubMed
Muratore F, Marvisi C, Castrignano P, Nicoli D, Farnetti E, Bonanno O, Longo
R, Zaldini P, Galli E, Balanda N, Beck DB, Grayson PC, Pipitone N, Boiardi L,
Salvarani C. VEXAS Syndrome: A Case Series From a Single-Center Cohort of Italian
Patients With Vasculitis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2022 Apr;74(4):665-670. doi:
10.1002/art.41992. Epub 2022 Mar 3.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Anemia
Arthritis
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Anemia
Genetics
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page