Isolated hyperCKemia: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Isolated hyperCKemia
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/isolated-hyperckemia/
Isolated hyperCKemia
Description
Isolated hyperCKemia is a condition characterized by elevated levels of an enzyme called creatine kinase in the blood. In affected individuals, levels of this enzyme are typically 3 to 10 times higher than normal. While elevated creatine kinase often accompanies various muscle diseases, individuals with isolated hyperCKemia have no muscle weakness or other symptoms. Some people with this condition have abnormalities of muscle cells that can be seen with a microscope, such as unusual variability in the size of muscle fibers, but these changes do not affect the function of the muscle.
Frequency
The prevalence of isolated hyperCKemia is unknown. Because the condition has no symptoms, it is likely that some cases never come to medical attention.
Causes
Isolated hyperCKemia is one of a group of conditions called caveolinopathies, which are caused by mutations in the
CAV3
gene. The
CAV3
gene provides instructions for making a protein called caveolin-3, which is found in the membrane surrounding muscle cells. This protein is the main component of caveolae, which are small pouches in the muscle cell membrane. Within the caveolae, the caveolin-3 protein acts as a scaffold to organize other molecules that are important for cell signaling and maintenance of the cell structure.
CAV3
gene mutations result in a shortage of caveolin-3 protein in the muscle cell membrane and a reduction in the number of caveolae. Researchers suggest that a shortage of caveolae impairs the structural integrity of muscle cells, interferes with cell signaling, and causes the self-destruction of cells (
apoptosis
). Creatine kinase is released when muscle cells are broken down. Although no muscle weakness occurs in isolated hyperCKemia, destruction of some muscle cells may lead to the elevated blood levels of creatine kinase that characterize this condition.
In addition to isolated hyperCKemia,
CAV3
gene mutations can cause other caveolinopathies including
CAV3-related distal myopathy
,
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy
,
rippling muscle disease
, and a heart disorder called hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Several
CAV3
gene mutations have been found to cause different caveolinopathies in different individuals. It is unclear why a single
CAV3
gene mutation may cause different patterns of signs and symptoms, even within the same family.
Learn more about the gene associated with Isolated hyperCKemia
CAV3
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with isolated hyperCKemia or another caveolinopathy. Rare cases result from
new mutations in the gene
and occur in people with no history of caveolinopathies in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
Elevated serum CPK
Elevated serum creatine phosphokinase
H-CK
Idiopathic hyperCKemia
Idiopathic persistent elevation of serum creatine kinase
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Caveolinopathy
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CREATINE PHOSPHOKINASE, ELEVATED SERUM
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Aboumousa A, Hoogendijk J, Charlton R, Barresi R, Herrmann R, Voit T, Hudson
J, Roberts M, Hilton-Jones D, Eagle M, Bushby K, Straub V. Caveolinopathy--new
mutations and additional symptoms. Neuromuscul Disord. 2008 Jul;18(7):572-8. doi:
10.1016/j.nmd.2008.05.003. Epub 2008 Jun 25.
Citation on PubMed
Alias L, Gallano P, Moreno D, Pujol R, Martinez-Matos JA, Baiget M, Ferrer I,
Olive M. A novel mutation in the caveolin-3 gene causing familial isolated
hyperCKaemia. Neuromuscul Disord. 2004 May;14(5):321-4. doi:
10.1016/j.nmd.2004.01.006.
Citation on PubMed
Carbone I, Bruno C, Sotgia F, Bado M, Broda P, Masetti E, Panella A, Zara F,
Bricarelli FD, Cordone G, Lisanti MP, Minetti C. Mutation in the CAV3 gene causes
partial caveolin-3 deficiency and hyperCKemia. Neurology. 2000 Mar
28;54(6):1373-6. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.6.1373.
Citation on PubMed
Gazzerro E, Bonetto A, Minetti C. Caveolinopathies: translational implications
of caveolin-3 in skeletal and cardiac muscle disorders. Handb Clin Neurol.
2011;101:135-42. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-045031-5.00010-4.
Citation on PubMed
Gazzerro E, Sotgia F, Bruno C, Lisanti MP, Minetti C. Caveolinopathies: from
the biology of caveolin-3 to human diseases. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010
Feb;18(2):137-45. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.103. Epub 2009 Jul 8.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Woodman SE, Sotgia F, Galbiati F, Minetti C, Lisanti MP. Caveolinopathies:
mutations in caveolin-3 cause four distinct autosomal dominant muscle diseases.
Neurology. 2004 Feb 24;62(4):538-43. doi: 10.1212/wnl.62.4.538.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Muscle Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
CPK isoenzymes test
Creatine phosphokinase test
Genetics
Related Medical Tests
Creatine Kinase
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page