Lidocaine Viscous: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lidocaine Viscous
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682701.html
Lidocaine Viscous
pronounced as (lye' doe kane)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Lidocaine viscous may cause serious side effects or death in infants or children under 3 years of age if not used as recommended. Do not use lidocaine viscous to treat teething pain. Only use lidocaine viscous in infants or children under 3 years when prescribed by your doctor. Do not use more of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Store this medication tightly closed and safely out of reach of children. Discard unused medication out of reach of children and pets.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lidocaine viscous, a local anesthetic, is used to treat the pain of a sore or irritated mouth and throat often associated with cancer chemotherapy and certain medical procedures. Lidocaine viscous is not normally used for sore throats due to cold, flu, or infections such as strep throat.
How should this medicine be used?
Lidocaine viscous comes as a thick liquid and should be shaken well before using. Lidocaine viscous usually is used as needed but not more frequently than every 3 hours, with a maximum of 8 doses in 24 hours. In children under 3 years of age, do not use more frequently than every 3 hours, with a maximum of 4 doses in 12 hours. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use lidocaine exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
For a sore or irritated mouth, the dose should be placed in the mouth, swished around until the pain goes away, and spit out.
For a sore throat, the dose should be gargled and then may be swallowed. To avoid or decrease side effects, use the minimum amount of drug needed to relieve your pain.
In infants and children under 3 years of age, use a measuring device to carefully measure the correct dose. Apply the medication to the affected area using a cotton-tipped applicator.
Because lidocaine viscous decreases the feeling in your mouth and/or throat, it may affect your ability to swallow. Avoid eating for at least 1 hour after you have used this drug. You should also avoid chewing gum while using this medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using lidocaine viscous,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lidocaine, anesthetics, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in lidocaine viscous. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using lidocaine, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lidocaine viscous may cause side effects. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, stop using lidocaine viscous and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
itching
hives
shallow breathing
difficulty breathing or swallowing
drowsiness
blurred or double vision
shakiness
irregular heartbeat
vomiting
seizures
ringing in the ears
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xylocaine
®
Viscous
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page