Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/pelizaeus-merzbacher-like-disease-type-1/
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1
Description
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 is an inherited condition involving the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system). This disease is one of a group of genetic disorders called leukodystrophies. Leukodystrophies are abnormalities of the nervous system's white matter, which consists of nerve fibers covered by a fatty substance called
myelin
. Myelin insulates nerve fibers and promotes the rapid transmission of nerve impulses. In particular, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 involves hypomyelination, which means that the nervous system has a reduced ability to form myelin. The signs and symptoms of this condition are very similar to another leukodystrophy called
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease
, but the two disorders have different genetic causes.
Beginning in the first few months of life, infants with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 typically experience weak muscle tone (hypotonia), involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus), and delayed development of speech and motor skills, such as sitting or grasping objects. As children with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 get older, hypotonia changes to muscle stiffness (spasticity).
During childhood, individuals with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 develop problems with movement and balance (ataxia), difficulty with movements that involve judging distance or scale (dysmetria), tremors that occur mainly during movement (intention tremors), and head and neck tremors (titubation). People with this condition have an inability to perform quick, alternating movements (dysdiadochokinesia), such as quickly tapping different fingers. Some develop involuntary tensing of the muscles (dystonia) and jerking (choreiform) movements. Many people with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 develop skeletal issues such as an abnormal curvature of the spine (
scoliosis
) and require wheelchair assistance from childhood.
Muscle abnormalities can lead to difficulty swallowing and problems producing speech (expressive language), but affected individuals can understand speech (receptive language). Most individuals with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 have normal intelligence. Rarely, hearing loss, optic atrophy, and recurrent seizures (epilepsy) can occur.
Frequency
The prevalence of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 is unknown, but it is thought to be rare.
Causes
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 is caused by mutations in the
GJC2
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called connexin-47. This protein plays a role in forming channels called gap junctions between cells. Gap junctions made with connexin-47 facilitate communication between nervous system cells called
oligodendrocytes
or between oligodendrocytes and another type of nervous system cell called astrocytes. Communication between these cells is necessary for the formation of
myelin
.
GJC2
gene mutations that cause Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1 reduce the production of connexin-47, prevent the connexin-47 protein from reaching the cell membrane, or decrease the function of the protein in the gap junction. All of these
GJC2
gene mutations disrupt the communication between nerve cells that normally occurs at gap junctions and impair myelin formation. These changes lead to nerve damage in the brain and spinal cord that impairs nervous system function, resulting in the signs and symptoms of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1.
Learn more about the gene associated with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease type 1
GJC2
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
HLD2
Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy 2
Pelizaeus Merzbacher like disease
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease
PMLD - Pelizaeus Merzbacher like disease
PMLD1
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy 2
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
LEUKODYSTROPHY, HYPOMYELINATING, 2; HLD2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Hobson GM, Garbern JY. Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like
disease 1, and related hypomyelinating disorders. Semin Neurol. 2012
Feb;32(1):62-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1306388. Epub 2012 Mar 15.
Citation on PubMed
Ji H, Li D, Wu Y, Zhang Q, Gu Q, Xie H, Ji T, Wang H, Zhao L, Zhao H, Yang Y,
Feng H, Xiong H, Ji J, Yang Z, Kou L, Li M, Bao X, Chang X, Zhang Y, Li L, Li H,
Niu Z, Wu X, Xiao J, Jiang Y, Wang J. Hypomyelinating disorders in China: The
clinical and genetic heterogeneity in 119 patients. PLoS One. 2018 Feb
16;13(2):e0188869. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188869. eCollection 2018.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Nahhas N, Conant A, Orthmann-Murphy J, Vanderver A, Hobson G.
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-Like Disease 1. 2017 Dec 21 [updated 2019 Jan 17]. In: Adam
MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington,
Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK470716/
Citation on PubMed
Orthmann-Murphy JL, Freidin M, Fischer E, Scherer SS, Abrams CK. Two distinct
heterotypic channels mediate gap junction coupling between astrocyte and
oligodendrocyte connexins. J Neurosci. 2007 Dec 19;27(51):13949-57. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3395-07.2007.
Citation on PubMed
Osaka H, Hamanoue H, Yamamoto R, Nezu A, Sasaki M, Saitsu H, Kurosawa K,
Shimbo H, Matsumoto N, Inoue K. Disrupted SOX10 regulation of GJC2 transcription
causes Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease. Ann Neurol. 2010 Aug;68(2):250-4. doi:
10.1002/ana.22022.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Leukodystrophies
Neurologic Diseases
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Myelin
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page