Delgocitinib Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Delgocitinib Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625094.html
Delgocitinib Topical
pronounced as (del″ goe sye′ ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Delgocitinib topical is used to treat certain types of chronic hand eczema (CHE; ongoing condition causing itching, dryness, scaling and redness of the skin of hands and wrists). Delgocitinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. How it works to help symptoms of CHE is unknown.
How should this medicine be used?
Delgocitinib topical comes as a cream to apply to the affected skin (hands and wrists). Apply a thin layer twice daily.
Use delgocitinib exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Clean and dry the affected areas before applying delgocitinib.
Avoid contact with eyes, mouth or other mucous membranes. If contact happens, rinse well with water.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using delgocitinib topical,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have an active infection or have or have had a chronic infection such as infections with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Herpes Simplex Virus, Herpes Zoster virus, Hepatitis B or C, Human Papillomavirus, Tuberculosis; have been told you have a compromised immune system (reduced ability of the body to fight infections) due to a disease or being on certain medications. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had skin cancer.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking delgocitinib, call your doctor. If you are breastfeeding while using delgocitinib, avoid contact with the nipple or surrounding areas.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using delgocitinib.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Delgocitinib may increase risk of certain skin cancers.
do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor immediately before starting, during treatment and immediately after starting delgocitinib treatment. Before starting delgocitinib, you should receive all recommended vaccines, including herpes zoster (shingles) vaccine.
similar medications, when taken by mouth or applied to the skin, have been shown to increase risk of cardiovascular events (such as heart attack or stroke), blood clots (including deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism), and malignancies. It is unknown if use of delgocitinib carriers this same risk. Talk to your doctor about risks and benefits of delgocitinib use.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra cream to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Delgocitinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain, tingling, itching and redness where the cream is applied
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
red, hot, raised areas of skin; fever
fever, sweating, chills; muscle aches; weight loss, tiredness
cough or shortness or breath; coughing up blood
diarrhea, abdominal pain
burning or pain when urinating; difficulty or frequently urinating
Delgocitinib may cause an increase in your blood cholesterol levels. Your doctor will order tests to monitor your cholesterol levels during your treatment with delgocitinib. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication
Delgocitinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to delgocitinib.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Anzupgo
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page