Asparaginase Erwinia Chrysanthemi Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Asparaginase Erwinia Chrysanthemi Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a612034.html
Asparaginase Erwinia Chrysanthemi Injection
pronounced as (as par' a jin ase) (er win' ee a) (kri san' the mee)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi is used with other chemotherapy medications to treat acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL; a type of cancer of the white blood cells). It is used in patients who have had some types of allergic reactions to medications similar to asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi such as (asparaginase [Elspar] or pegaspargase [Oncaspar]). Asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi is an enzyme that interferes with natural substances necessary for cancer cell growth. It works by killing or stopping the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi comes as a powder to be added to fluid and injected into a muscle by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. It is usually given three times a week. Your doctor will tell you how often you will receive asparginase erwinia chrysanthemi. The schedule depends on the condition you have and on how your body responds to the medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi powder. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had pancreatitis (swelling of the pancreas), blood clots, or severe bleeding, especially if these happened during treatment with asparaginase (Elspar) or pegaspargase (Oncaspar). Your doctor probably will not want you to receive asparaginase
Erwinia chrysanthemi
.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
fever
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area, but may spread to the back
extreme thirst
frequent urination
extreme hunger
weakness
blurred vision
headache
arm or leg swelling
shortness of breath
chest pain
unusual bleeding
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
dark colored urine
loss of appetite
lack of energy
seizure
Asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to asparaginase erwinia chrysanthemi.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Erwinaze
®
Last Revised -
10/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page