Landiolol Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Landiolol Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625060.html
Landiolol Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Landiolol is used to treat rapid or irregular heartbeats. Landiolol is in a class of medications called beta blockers. It works by slowing the heartbeat to restore a normal heart rhythm.
How should this medicine be used?
Landiolol comes as a powder to be mixed with fluid. It is injected into a vein as a continuous infusion by a healthcare provider in a medical facility.
Your doctor will increase or decrease your dose, depending on your response to this medication. Landiolol injection is usually given for a short period of time, usually for less than 24 hours.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving landiolol injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with landiolol. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with landiolol. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting landiolol with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while receiving landiolol, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any type of heart rhythm problem, heart failure, or other types of heart disease, high pressure in the arteries of the lungs, or kidney disease. Your doctor will probably tell you not to receive landiolol.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, angina (chest pain), pheochromocytoma (a tumor that develops on a gland near the kidneys and may cause high blood pressure and fast heart rate), conditions affecting the blood vessels in the arms and legs such as Raynaud's disease, or throid or lung disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Landiolol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness, faintness
pain, swelling, redness at the site of injection
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms tell your doctor immediately:
slow heart rate
wheezing, coughing, difficulty breathing or swallowing
chest pain
Landiolol may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to landiolol.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Rapiblyk
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page