Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/gorlin-chaudhry-moss-syndrome/
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome
Description
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome is a condition that affects many parts of the body. The signs and symptoms of this disorder are apparent from birth or infancy.
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome is characterized by the premature closure of certain bones of the skull (craniosynostosis) during development, which affects the shape of the head and face. Many people with this disorder have a premature fusion of skull bones along the
coronal suture
, the growth line that goes over the head from ear to ear. These changes can result in a head that is abnormally wide and pointed at the top (acrobrachycephaly). Affected individuals also have distinctive facial characteristics that can include a flat or sunken appearance of the middle of the face (
midface hypoplasia
), and small eyes (
microphthalmia
) with narrowed openings (narrowed palpebral fissures). Affected individuals may also have
farsightedness
(
hyperopia
) and dental problems such as small teeth (microdontia) or fewer teeth than normal (hypodontia).
Many people with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome have a lack of fatty tissue under the skin (lipodystrophy). The lack of fat, together with thin, wrinkled, loose skin and veins visible beneath the skin, makes affected individuals look older than their biological age. This appearance of premature aging is sometimes described as progeroid.
Affected individuals also have excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis) on their face and body. They have a low hairline on the forehead and their scalp hair is often coarse. People with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome also have shortened bones at the ends of the fingers and toes (short distal phalanges). Affected females have unusually small external genital folds (hypoplasia of the labia majora).
Some individuals with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome have mild developmental delay but intelligence is usually normal in this disorder, as is life expectancy.
Frequency
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome is an extremely rare condition. Approximately ten affected individuals have been described in the medical literature. All known individuals with this condition have been female.
Causes
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome can be caused by mutations in the
SLC25A24
gene. This gene provides instructions for producing a protein that transports molecules across the
inner membrane of the mitochondria
, the energy-producing centers in cells. Among these molecules is ATP, which is the cell's main energy source. Transportation of ATP within the mitochondria is essential for normal energy production, the formation and breakdown (metabolism) of various molecules, and protein production within cells.
The mutations that cause Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome are thought to alter the structure of the protein produced from the
SLC25A24
gene, which likely decreases its ability to transport molecules across the mitochondrial inner membrane. As a result, there is an increase in mitochondrial size (mitochondria swelling), breakage of mitochondria into smaller pieces, and an overall decrease in energy production. This increase in abnormal mitochondria and decrease in cellular energy can lead to cell death. While altered cellular energy production and increased cell death are likely responsible for the features of Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome, it is unclear how these changes lead to the specific signs and symptoms of the condition.
In some affected individuals, no mutation in the
SLC25A24
gene has been found. Changes in other unknown genes may cause the disorder in these cases.
Learn more about the gene associated with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome
SLC25A24
Inheritance
In individuals with an
SLC25A24
gene mutation, Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In these cases, the condition results from new (de novo) mutations in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development.
Since all known individuals with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome have been female, there are likely other unknown, sex-related factors involved in the inheritance of this condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Craniofacial dysostosis, hypertrichosis, hypoplasia of labia majora, dental and eye anomalies, patent ductus arteriosus, and normal intelligence
Craniofacial dysostosis, patent ductus arteriosus, hypertrichosis, hypoplasia of labia majora, dental and eye anomalies
GCM syndrome
GCMS
Gorlin Chaudhry Moss syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Fontaine progeroid syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
FONTAINE PROGEROID SYNDROME; FPS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Aravena T, Passalacqua C, Pizarro O, Aracena M. Two sisters resembling
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Oct;155A(10):2552-5. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.34204. Epub 2011 Sep 9.
Citation on PubMed
Ehmke N, Graul-Neumann L, Smorag L, Koenig R, Segebrecht L, Magoulas P,
Scaglia F, Kilic E, Hennig AF, Adolphs N, Saha N, Fauler B, Kalscheuer VM, Hennig
F, Altmuller J, Netzer C, Thiele H, Nurnberg P, Yigit G, Jager M, Hecht J, Kruger
U, Mielke T, Krawitz PM, Horn D, Schuelke M, Mundlos S, Bacino CA, Bonnen PE,
Wollnik B, Fischer-Zirnsak B, Kornak U. De Novo Mutations in SLC25A24 Cause a
Craniosynostosis Syndrome with Hypertrichosis, Progeroid Appearance, and
Mitochondrial Dysfunction. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Nov 2;101(5):833-843. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.016.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Rosti RO, Karaer K, Karaman B, Torun D, Guran S, Bahce M. Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss
syndrome revisited: expanding the phenotype. Am J Med Genet A. 2013
Jul;161A(7):1737-42. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35954. Epub 2013 May 17.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Craniofacial Abnormalities
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page