JAK3-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
JAK3-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/jak3-deficient-severe-combined-immunodeficiency/
JAK3-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency
Description
JAK3
-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is an inherited disorder of the immune system. Individuals with
JAK3
-deficient SCID lack the necessary immune cells to fight off certain bacteria, viruses, and fungi. They are prone to repeated and persistent infections that can be very serious or life-threatening. Often the organisms that cause infection in people with
JAK3
-deficient SCID are described as opportunistic because they ordinarily do not cause illness in healthy people. Affected infants typically develop chronic diarrhea, a fungal infection in the mouth called oral thrush, pneumonia, and skin rashes. Persistent illness also causes affected individuals to grow more slowly than other children. Without treatment, people with
JAK3
-deficient SCID usually live only into early childhood.
Frequency
JAK3
-deficient SCID accounts for an estimated 7 to 14 percent of cases of SCID. The prevalence of SCID from all genetic causes combined is approximately 1 in 50,000, although it may be higher in certain regions.
Causes
JAK3
-deficient SCID is caused by mutations in the
JAK3
gene. The protein produced from this gene helps regulate the growth and maturation of certain types of
white blood cells
(lymphocytes) called
T cells
and natural killer cells. In addition, the JAK3 protein is important for the normal maturation of another type of lymphocyte called B cells. T cells, B cells, and natural killer cells attack bacteria, viruses, and fungi, and help regulate the entire immune system.
Mutations in the
JAK3
gene prevent the production of JAK3 protein or lead to production of a nonfunctional protein. A loss of functional JAK3 protein results in the absence of T cells and natural killer cells and a normal number of poorly functioning B cells. This shortage of functional lymphocytes causes people with
JAK3
-deficient SCID to be susceptible to infections.
Learn more about the gene associated with JAK3-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency
JAK3
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Autosomal recessive T cell-negative, B cell-positive, NK cell-negative severe combined immunodeficiency
Autosomal recessive T-B+NK- SCID
JAK3 SCID
T cell-negative, B cell-positive, NK cell-negative SCID
T-B+ severe combined immunodeficiency due to JAK3 deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: T-B+ severe combined immunodeficiency due to JAK3 deficiency
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Severe combined immunodeficiency
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, T CELL-NEGATIVE, B CELL-POSITIVE, NK CELL-NEGATIVE
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Notarangelo LD, Mella P, Jones A, de Saint Basile G, Savoldi G, Cranston T,
Vihinen M, Schumacher RF. Mutations in severe combined immune deficiency (SCID)
due to JAK3 deficiency. Hum Mutat. 2001 Oct;18(4):255-63. doi: 10.1002/humu.1188.
Citation on PubMed
O'Shea JJ, Husa M, Li D, Hofmann SR, Watford W, Roberts JL, Buckley RH,
Changelian P, Candotti F. Jak3 and the pathogenesis of severe combined
immunodeficiency. Mol Immunol. 2004 Jul;41(6-7):727-37. doi:
10.1016/j.molimm.2004.04.014.
Citation on PubMed
Pesu M, Candotti F, Husa M, Hofmann SR, Notarangelo LD, O'Shea JJ. Jak3,
severe combined immunodeficiency, and a new class of immunosuppressive drugs.
Immunol Rev. 2005 Feb;203:127-42. doi: 10.1111/j.0105-2896.2005.00220.x.
Citation on PubMed
Vihinen M, Villa A, Mella P, Schumacher RF, Savoldi G, O'Shea JJ, Candotti F,
Notarangelo LD. Molecular modeling of the Jak3 kinase domains and structural
basis for severe combined immunodeficiency. Clin Immunol. 2000 Aug;96(2):108-18.
doi: 10.1006/clim.2000.4880.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Immune System and Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Immunodeficiency disorders
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page