Minocycline: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Minocycline
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682101.html
Minocycline
pronounced as (mi noe sye' kleen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Minocycline is used to treat infections caused by bacteria including pneumonia and other respiratory tract infections; certain infections of the skin, eye, lymphatic, intestinal, genital, and urinary systems; and certain other infections that are spread by ticks, lice, mites, and infected animals. It is also used along with other medications to treat acne. Minocycline is also used to treat plague and tuleramia (serious infections that may be spread on purpose as part of a bioterror attack). It can also be used in patients who cannot be treated with penicillin to treat certain types of food poisoning, and anthrax (a serious infection that may be spread on purpose as part of a bioterror attack). It can also be used to eliminate bacteria from your nose and throat that may cause meningitis (swelling of tissues around the brain) in others, even though you may not have an infection. Minocycline extended-release tablets are used to treat certain types of acne and minocycline extended release capsules are used to treat symptoms of rosacea (a skin disease that causes redness, flushing, and pimples on the face). Minocycline is in a class of medications called tetracycline antibiotics. It works to treat infections by preventing the growth and spread of bacteria. It works to treat acne by killing the bacteria that infects pores and decreasing a certain natural oily substance that causes acne.
Antibiotics such as minocycline will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Minocycline comes as a capsule, a pellet-filled capsule, a tablet, an extended-release tablet, and an extended-release capsule to take by mouth. The capsules, pellet-filled capsules, and tablets are usually taken twice a day (every 12 hours) or four times a day (every 6 hours), with or without food. To treat acne, the extended-release tablets are usually taken with or without food once a day for 12 weeks. To treat rosacea, the extended-release capsules are usually taken with or without food once a day. Drink a full glass of water with each dose. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take minocycline exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules, pellet-filled capsules, tablets, extended-release capsules, and extended-release tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Continue to take minocycline even if you feel well. Take all the medication until you are finished, unless your doctor tells you otherwise.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking minocycline,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to minocycline, tetracycline, doxycycline, demeclocycline, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in minocycline capsules, pellet-filled capsules, tablets, extended-release capsules, or extended-release tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking minocycline. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
be aware that antacids containing magnesium, aluminum, or calcium, calcium supplements, iron products, and laxatives containing magnesium interfere with minocycline, making it less effective. If you are taking antacids containing magnesium, aluminum, or calcium, calcium supplements, or laxatives containing magnesium, take them 1 or 2 hours before or after taking minocycline. If you are taking iron preparations and vitamin products that contain iron, take them 3 hours before or 2 hours after minocycline.
You should know that minocycline may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking minocycline. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, lupus (condition in which the immune system attacks many tissues and organs including the skin, joints, blood, and kidneys), intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri; high pressure in the skull that may cause headaches, blurry or double vision, vision loss, and other symptoms), vision problems, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking minocycline, call your doctor immediately. Minocycline can harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Your doctor may tell you not to breastfeed during your treatment with minocycline.
you should know that minocycline may make you lightheaded or dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Minocycline may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking minocycline.
you should know that when minocycline is used during pregnancy or in babies or children up to age 8, it can cause the teeth to become permanently stained and can cause problems with bone growth. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Minocycline may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
heartburn
diarrhea
itching of the rectum or vagina
changes in color of skin, scars, nails, teeth or gums
changes in color of tears or urine
ringing in your ears
hair loss
dry mouth
swollen tongue
sore or irritated throat
inflammation of the end of the penis
muscle pain
mood changes
numbness, tingling, or prickling sensation on skin
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
headache
blurred vision, seeing double, or loss of vision
rash
hives
peeling or blistering skin
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes
difficulty breathing or swallowing
shortness of breath
yellowing of the skin or eyes, itching, dark-colored urine, light colored bowel movements, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, extreme tiredness, nausea, or vomiting, confusion
bloody urine
joint pain, stiffness or swelling
swollen lymph nodes
unusual bleeding or bruising
decreased urination
a return of fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
watery or bloody stools , stomach cramps, or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
seizures
chest pain or irregular heartbeat
Minocycline may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat, and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
dizziness
nausea
vomiting
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to minocycline.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking minocycline.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the minocycline, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Dynacin
®
¶
Emrosi
®
Minocin
®
Solodyn
®
¶
Ximino
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page