Brigatinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Brigatinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617016.html
Brigatinib
pronounced as (bri ga' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Brigatinib is used to treat a certain type of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that has spread to other parts of the bodys. Brigatinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of an abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps slow or stop the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Brigatinib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once daily. Take brigatinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take brigatinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not chew or crush them.
If you vomit after taking brigatinib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of brigatinib and increase your dose once after 7 days of treatment.
Your doctor may need to temporarily or permanently stop your treatment or decrease your dose of brigatinib or other medications that you are taking, depending on the side effects that you experience during your treatment. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Do not stop taking brigatinib without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking brigatinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to brigatinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in brigatinib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any of the following: antifungals such as itraconazole (Onmel, Sporanox, Tolsura), ketoconazole, buprenorphine and naloxone (Suboxone), carbamazepine (Equetro, Tegretol, Teril, others), clarithromycin, cyclosporine (Gengraf, Neoral, Sandimmune), diltiazem (Cardizem, Cartia, Diltzac, others), efavirenz (Sustiva, in Atripla, Symfi), erythromycin (E.E.S., Eryc, Erythrocin), indinavir (Crixivan), nefazodone, nelfinavir (Viracept), nevirapine (Viramune), phenobarbital; phenytoin (Dilantin, Phenytek), pioglitazone (Actos, in Actoplus Met, Duetact, Oseni), rifabutin (Mycobutin), rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane, in Rifamate, in Rifater), ritonavir (Norvir, in Kaletra, Technivie, Viekira), sirolimus (Rapamune), tacrolimus (Astagraf, Envarsus, Prograf), or verapamil (Calan, Verelan, in Tarka). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects. Many other medications may also interact with brigatinib, so be sure to tell your doctor about all the medications you are taking, even those that do not appear on this list.
tell your doctor what herbal products you are taking, especially St. John's wort.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure; a slow heartbeat; diabetes or other blood sugar problems; or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or plan to father a child. Brigatinib may interfere with the action of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, or injections), so you should not use these as your only method of birth control during your treatment. You must use a non-hormonal birth control such as a barrier method (device that blocks sperm from entering the uterus such as a condom or a diaphragm). Ask your doctor to help you choose a method of birth control that will work for you. If you are female, you will need to use non-hormonal birth control during your treatment and for 4 months after your final dose. If you are male, you and your female partner should use birth control during your treatment and continue to use birth control for 3 months after your final dose. Brigatinib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with brigatinib and for up to 1 week after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking brigatinib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Avoid eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking brigatinib.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
If you miss taking brigatinib for 14 days or longer, talk to your doctor before starting to take it again. You will probably have to restart taking it at a lower dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Brigatinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
diarrhea
vomiting
constipation
tiredness
rash
headache
numbness, pain, tingling, or burning feeling in the feet or hands
back or joint pain
loss of appetite
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
chest pain
cough with or without mucus
fever
headache, dizziness, lightheadedness, or feeling faint
blurred or double vision
seeing flashes of light
light hurting your eyes
seeing ''floaters'' or small specks
extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, or weakness
upper stomach pain that may spread to the back or get worse with eating; weight loss; or nausea
slow or irregular heartbeat
muscle pain, spasms, tenderness, or weakness
Brigatinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with brigatinib. Your doctor also will order certain lab tests and check your blood pressure before and during your treatment to check your body's response to brigatinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Alunbrig
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page