Tolvaptan (low blood sodium): MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tolvaptan (low blood sodium)
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a609033.html
Tolvaptan (low blood sodium)
pronounced as (tol vap' tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Tolvaptan (Samsca) may cause the level of sodium in your blood to increase too quickly. This may cause osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS; serious nerve damage that may be caused by quick increases in sodium levels). Tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, if you have malnutrition (the body lacks the nutrients needed for good health), and if you have or have ever had liver disease or extremely low levels of sodium in your blood.
You and your doctor will take certain precautions to try to prevent ODS. You will begin your treatment with tolvaptan (Samsca) in the hospital so that your doctor can monitor you closely. If your doctor tells you to continue taking tolvaptan (Samsca) after you leave the hospital, you should not stop and re-start treatment on your own. You will need to return to the hospital when you restart the medication.
You will need to drink water whenever you are thirsty to help prevent ODS during your treatment with tolvaptan (Samsca) . Your doctor will not prescribe tolvaptan (Samsca) if you are unable to feel that you are thirsty. You should have drinking water available at all times during your treatment.
If you experience any of the following symptoms of ODS, tell your doctor immediately: difficulty speaking, difficulty swallowing, feeling that food or drinks are getting stuck in your throat, drowsiness, confusion, mood changes, body movements that are difficult to control, weakness of the arms or legs, or seizures.
You should know that tolvaptan is also available as a tablet (Jynarque) to slow the worsening of kidney function in adults with a certain type of inherited kidney disease. If you have this kidney disease, you should not take tolvaptan (Samsca). Because of the risk of liver problems with tolvaptan, Jynarque is available only through a special restricted distribution program. This monograph only gives information about tolvaptan tablets (Samsca) to treat low levels of sodium in the blood. If you are using this medication to slow the worsening of your kidney function, read the monograph entitled tolvaptan (kidney disease).
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with tolvaptan and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risk of taking tolvaptan (Samsca).
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tolvaptan (Samsca) is used to treat hyponatremia (low levels of sodium in the blood) in people who have heart failure (condition in which the heart cannot pump enough blood to all parts of the body), syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH; condition in which the body produces too much of a certain natural substance that causes the body to retain water) or other conditions. Tolvaptan is in a class of medications called vasopressin V
2
receptor antagonists. It works by increasing the amount of water released from the body as urine. Removing fluid from the body helps to increase the level of sodium in the blood.
How should this medicine be used?
Tolvaptan (Samsca) comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food for no longer than 30 days. At the beginning of your treatment, you will be given tolvaptan (Samsca) at a regularly scheduled time in the hospital. If you are told to take tolvaptan (Samsca) at home after you are discharged, you should take it at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take tolvaptan (Samsca) exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of tolvaptan (Samsca) and gradually increase your dose, not more often than once every 24 hours.
Talk to your doctor about what you should do after you stop taking tolvaptan (Samsca). You will probably need to limit the amount of fluid you drink, and your doctor will monitor you carefully during this time.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tolvaptan (Samsca),
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tolvaptan (Samsca, Jynarque) , any other medications, or any of the ingredients in tolvaptan tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with tolvaptan. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with tolvaptan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting tolvaptan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking tolvaptan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with tolvaptan: St. John's wort; potassium suppplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking tolvaptan. Do not start any of these medications while taking tolvaptan without discussing with your healthcare provider. .
tell your doctor if you have kidney disease and do not produce urine, if you have severe vomiting or diarrhea, or if you have lost a lot of fluid from your body and feel dizzy or faint. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take tolvaptan (Samsca). Your doctor will also probably not prescribe tolvaptan (Samsca) if your sodium level must be increased very quickly.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a high level of potassium in your blood.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking tolvaptan (Samsca), call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tolvaptan (Samsca) may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
thirst
dry mouth
frequent, excessive urination
constipation
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
loss of appetite
nausea
vomiting
fever
feeling unwell
unusual tiredness or weakness
itching
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark urine
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
diarrhea
inability to drink normally
dizziness
faintness
vomit that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds
bloody or black and tarry stools
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
hives
rash
Tolvaptan (Samsca) may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
excessive urination
excessive thirst
dizziness
faintness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to tolvaptan (Samsca).
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Samsca
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page