Daratumumab and Hyaluronidase-fihj Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Daratumumab and Hyaluronidase-fihj Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620040.html
Daratumumab and Hyaluronidase-fihj Injection
pronounced as (dar a toom' ue mab) (hye" al ure on' i dase)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection is used alone or in combination with other medications or treatments to treat multiple myeloma (a type of cancer of the bone marrow) in newly diagnosed people and in people who have not improved with treatment or who have improved after treatment with other medications but the condition returned. It is also approved for use with other medications in patients newly diagnosed with multiple myeloma who are eligible to undergo a stem cell transplant to prepare them for the procedure.
Daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection is also used in combination with other medications to treat a certain kind of amyloidosis (a disease in which abnormal proteins build up in tissues and organs in the body) in newly diagnosed adults. Daratumumab is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies.
Daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj works by helping the body to slow or stop the growth of cancer cells. Hyaluronidase-fihj is an endoglycosidase. It helps to keep daratumumab in the body longer so that the medication will have a greater effect.
How should this medicine be used?
Daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected subcutaneously (just under the skin) into the abdomen (stomach) over 3 to 5 minutes. The time between your injections and the length of your treatment will depend on your condition and how well your body responds to treatment.
A doctor or nurse will watch you closely while you are receiving the medication and afterwards to be sure you are not having a serious reaction to the medication. You will be given other medications to help prevent and treat reactions to daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj before and after you receive your medication. Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms: difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, chest pain, wheezing, throat tightness and irritation, cough, runny or stuffy nose, headache, itching, nausea, vomiting, fever, chills, rash, hives, eye pain, blurred vision, or dizziness or lightheadedness.
Your doctor may temporarily or permanently stop your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj. Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to daratumumab, hyaluronidase-fihj, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had shingles (a painful rash that occurs after infection with herpes zoster or chickenpox), hepatitis B (a virus that infects the liver and may cause severe liver damage), or breathing problems. If you are being treated for amyloidosis, tell your doctor if you have heart failure or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj and for at least 3 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about types of birth control that will work for you. If you become pregnant while receiving daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are receiving daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
diarrhea
vomiting
nausea
stomach pain
loss of appetite
fatigue
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
swelling of the hands, ankles, or feet
joint or back pain
muscle spasms
headache
itching, swelling, bruising, or redness of the skin at the injection site
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the HOW section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, cough, sore throat, or signs of infection
unusual bruising or bleeding
pale skin, fatigue, or shortness of breath
yellow eyes or skin; dark urine; or pain or discomfort in right upper stomach area
chest pain, feeling faint, swollen legs, fast or irregular heartbeat, or shortness of breath (especially if you are being treated for amyloidosis)
Daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj.
Daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj can affect blood matching test results during your treatment and for up to 6 months after your final dose. Before having a blood transfusion, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving or received daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj injection. Your doctor will do blood tests to match your blood type before you start treatment with daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about daratumumab and hyaluronidase-fihj.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Darzalex Faspro
®
Last Revised -
09/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page