Clotrimazole Lozenge: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clotrimazole Lozenge
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618058.html
Clotrimazole Lozenge
pronounced as (kloe trim' a zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Clotrimazole lozenges are used to treat yeast infections of the mouth in adults and children 3 years of age and older. It can also be used to prevent yeast infections of the mouth in people at risk of these infections who are receiving certain treatments. Clotrimazole is in a class of antifungal medications called imidazoles. It works by stopping the growth of fungi that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Clotrimazole comes as a lozenge to slowly dissolve in the mouth. For the treatment of yeast infections, it is usually used five times a day for 14 days. For the prevention of yeast infections, it is usually used three times a day. The length of your treatment for prevention depends on your condition. Use clotrimazole lozenges at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use clotrimazole exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To use the lozenge, place it in your mouth and allow it to slowly dissolve. Do not chew, crush, or swallow clotrimazole lozenges. It should take about 30 minutes to dissolve.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using clotrimazole lozenges,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to clotrimazole, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in clotrimazole lozenges. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using clotrimazole lozenges, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Clotrimazole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
unpleasant mouth sensations
itching
Clotrimazole may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to clotrimazole lozenges.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the clotrimazole, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mycelex
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
11/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page