Capivasertib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Capivasertib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623056.html
Capivasertib
pronounced as (kap eye″ va ser′ tib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Capivasertib is used in combination with fulvestrant (Faslodex) to treat a certain type of hormone receptor–positive (depends on hormones such as estrogen to grow) advanced breast cancer that has spread to nearby tissues or other parts of the body in adults whose cancer got worse during or after certain other treatments. Capivasertib is also used in combination with another medication and fulvestrant (Faslodex) to treat a certain type of hormone receptor–positive advanced breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body in women who have not experienced menopause (change of life; end of monthly menstrual periods) and in those who are close to or who have already experienced menopause. Capivasertib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of an abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps slow or stop the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Capivasertib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually given with or without food twice daily (about 12 hours apart) for the first 4 days of a 7-day cycle. The cycle may be repeated as recommended by your doctor. Take capivasertib at around the same times every day (usually in the morning and in the evening). Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take capivasertib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with water; do not split, chew, or crush them. Do not take tablets that are broken, cracked, or damaged in any way.
If you vomit after taking capivasertib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule the next day.
Your doctor may temporarily or permanently stop your treatment or adjust your dose of capivasertib depending on your response to treatment and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Continue to take capivasertib even if you feel well. Do not stop taking capivasertib without talking to your doctor.
If you have not yet experienced menopause (change of life; end of monthly menstrual periods) or are just starting menopause, your doctor will probably prescribe another medication such as goserelin (Zoladex) or leuprolide (Eligard, Lupron) to take along with capivasertib and fulvestrant to treat your breast cancer.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking capivasertib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to capivasertib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in capivasertib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with capivasertib: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking capivasertib. Do not start any of this medication while taking capivasertib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have a rash or other skin problem, high triglycerides (a fatty substance in the blood), or kidney or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are taking capivasertib. If you are female, you will need to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment, and you should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 1 month after your final dose. If you are male, you and your partner should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with capivasertib and for 4 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking capivasertib, call your doctor. Capivasertib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while taking capivasertib.
you should know that capivasertib may cause an increase in blood glucose. If you have diabetes or high blood sugar, check your blood sugar as often as directed by your doctor. If your blood sugar is higher than usual, call your doctor. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking capivasertib: extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, confusion, or weakness. It is very important to call your doctor as soon as you have any of these symptoms, because high blood sugar that is not treated can cause a serious condition called ketoacidosis. Ketoacidosis may become life-threatening if it is not treated at an early stage. Symptoms of ketoacidosis include dry mouth, upset stomach and vomiting, shortness of breath, breath that smells fruity, and decreased consciousness. Call your doctor if you are unable to eat or drink normally due to nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea while you are taking capivasertib. Your doctor may need to change your diet or medication to help control your blood sugar while you are taking capivasertib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is more than 4 hours after the time you were supposed to take the dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Capivasertib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
mouth sores
tiredness
decreased appetite
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, stop taking and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash; blistering, peeling, dry, or reddened skin; blistering of the lips, eyes, or mouth; fever; flu-like symptoms
diarrhea (loose, watery, or more frequent stools); stomach cramps
dry mouth, weakness, decreased urination, swelling of legs or ankles
frequent, painful, or urgent urination
Capivasertib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to capivasertib.
Your doctor will order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with capivasertib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Truqap
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page