Dolutegravir and Rilpivirine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dolutegravir and Rilpivirine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624038.html
Dolutegravir and Rilpivirine
pronounced as (doe″ loo teg′ ra vir)(ril″ pi vir′ een)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dolutegravir and rilpivirine is used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Dolutegravir is in a class of medications called HIV integrase inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in your blood and increasing the number of immune cells that help fight infections in your body. Rilpivirine is in a class of medications called non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs). It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood.
Although dolutegravir and rilpivirine does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Taking these medications and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of giving the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Dolutegravir and rilpivirine comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take with food once a day. Take dolutegravir and rilpivirine at around the same time every day.
Take dolutegravir and rilpivirine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Dolutegravir and rilpivirine controls HIV but does not cure it. Continue to take dolutegravir and rilpivirine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking dolutegravir and rilpivirine without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking dolutegravir and rilpivirine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with dolutegravir and rilpivirine. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with dolutegravir and rilpivirine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting dolutegravir and rilpivirine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking dolutegravir and rilpivirine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
if you are taking vitamins or supplements or antacids such as calcium, magnesium, or aluminum (Maalox
®
, Mylanta
®
, Tums
®
, others) or sucralfate or buffered medications, take them at least 4 hours before or 6 hours after dolutegravir and rilpivirine.
if you are taking a medication for indigestion, heartburn, or ulcers such as cimetidine (Tagamet
®
), famotidine (Pepcid
®
), nizatidine (Axid
®
), or ranitidine (Zantac
®
), take it at least 12 hours before or at least 4 hours after dolutegravir and rilpivirine.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with dolutegravir and rilpivirine: St John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking dolutegravir and rilpivirine. Do not start any of these medications while taking dolutegravir and rilpivirine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression or other mental illness, liver disease, including hepatitis B or C, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking dolutegravir and rilpivirine, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are taking dolutegravir and rilpivirine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dolutegravir and rilpivirine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
diarrhea
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking dolutegravir and rilpivirine and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, tiredness, muscle or joint pain, sores in the mouth, blistering or peeling of the skin, redness or swelling of the eyes, swelling of the mouth, lips, face or tongue, difficulty breathing
yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes, dark urine, light-colored stools, nausea or vomiting, loss of appetite, pain in the lower right side of your stomach
feeling sad or hopeless, feeling anxious or restless, having thoughts of hurting yourself or others
Dolutegravir and rilpivirine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not remove the desiccant package.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to dolutegravir and rilpivirine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Juluca
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page