Desoximetasone Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Desoximetasone Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a605026.html
Desoximetasone Topical
pronounced as (des ox i met' a sone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Desoximetasone topical is used to treat the redness, swelling, itching, and discomfort of various skin conditions, including psoriasis (a skin disease in which red, scaly patches form on some areas of the body and eczema (a skin disease that causes the skin to be dry and itchy and to sometimes develop red, scaly rashes). Desoximetasone is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by activating natural substances in the skin to reduce swelling, redness, and itching.
How should this medicine be used?
Desoximetasone comes as a cream, ointment, gel, and spray to apply to the skin. It is usually applied twice a day. Apply it at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use desoximetasone exactly as directed. Do not apply more or less of it or apply it more often than prescribed by your doctor. Do not apply it to other areas of your body or use it to treat other skin conditions unless directed to do so by your doctor.
Your skin condition should improve during the first 4 weeks of your treatment. Call your doctor if your symptoms do not improve during this time.
To use desoximetasone, apply a small amount of ointment, cream, spray, or gel to cover the affected area of skin with a thin even film and rub it in gently. Be sure to wash your hands immediately afterwards.
This medication is only for use on the skin. Do not let desoximetasone topical get into your eyes or mouth and do not swallow it. Avoid use in the genital and rectal areas and in skin creases and armpits unless directed by your doctor.
Desoximetasone spray may catch fire. Stay away from open fire, flames, and do not smoke while you are applying betamethasone foam, and for a short time afterward.
If you are applying desoximetasone to a child's diaper area, do not cover the area with tight fitting diapers or plastic pants.
This medication is only for use on the skin. Do not let desoximetasone topical get into your eyes or mouth and do not swallow it. Avoid use on the face, in the genital and rectal areas, and in skin creases and armpits unless directed by your doctor.
Do not wrap or bandage the treated area unless your doctor tells you that you should. Such use may increase side effects.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using desoximetasone topical,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to desoximetasone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in desoximetasone topical products. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention the following: other corticosteroid medications and other topical medications
tell your doctor if you have an infection or any other skin problems or have or ever had diabetes,, Cushing's syndrome (an abnormal condition that is caused by excess hormones [corticosteroids]),, or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using desoximetasone, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using desoximetasone topical.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double amount to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Desoximetasone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, itching, irritation, redness, or dryness of the skin
tiny red bumps or rash around the mouth
unwanted hair growth
acne
small white or red bumps on the skin
bruising or shiny skin
red or purple blotches or lines under the skin
thin, fragile, or dry skin
changes in skin color
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
severe rash
redness, swelling, oozing pus, or other signs of skin infection in the place where you applied desoximetasone
Children who use desoximetasone have an increased risk of side effects including slowed growth and delayed weight gain. Talk to your child's doctor about the risks of applying this medication to your child's skin.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows desoximetasone topical, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to desoximetasone.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Topicort
®
Topicort LP
®
¶
Other names
Desoxymetasone
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page