Cefepime Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cefepime Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a698021.html
Cefepime Injection
pronounced as (sef' e peem)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cefepime injection is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria including pneumonia, and skin, urinary tract, and kidney infections. Cefepime injection is used in combination with metronidazole (Flagyl) to treat abdominal (stomach area) infections. Cefepime injection is also used to treat patients who have fever and are at high risk for infection because they have a low number of white blood cells. Cefepime injection is in a class of medications called cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria.
Antibiotics such as cefepime injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Cefepime injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid, or as a premixed product, to be injected intravenously (into a vein) over a period of 30 minutes. Cefepime injection can also be given intramuscularly (into a muscle). It is usually given every 8 or 12 hours for 7 to 10 days.
You may receive cefepime injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving cefepime injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with cefepime injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Use cefepime injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using cefepime injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
Cefepime injection is also sometimes used to treat endocarditis (infection of the heart lining and valves), meningitis (infection of the membranes covering the brain and spine), and infections in the blood. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cefepime injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cefepime; carbapenem antibiotics; other cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil,cefazolin (Ancef, Kefzol), cefdinir, cefditoren (Spectracef), cefixime (Suprax), cefotaxime (Claforan), cefotetan, cefoxitin (Mefoxin), cefpodoxime, cefprozil, ceftaroline (Teflaro), ceftazidime (Fortaz, Tazicef, in Avycaz), ceftibuten (Cedax), ceftriaxone (Rocephin), cefuroxime (Zinacef), and cephalexin (Keflex); penicillin antibiotics; or any other medications. Also tell your doctor if you are allergic to any of the ingredients in cefepime injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using cefepime injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
you should know that cefepime injection may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while using cefepime injection. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had gastrointestinal disease (GI; affecting the stomach or intestines), especially colitis (condition that causes swelling in the lining of the colon [large intestine]), or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking cefepime injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cefepime injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
diarrhea
pain, redness, swelling, or bleeding near the place where cefepime was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking cefepime injection and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
watery or bloody stools, stomach cramps, or fever during treatment or for up to two or more months after stopping treatment
rash
nausea
vomiting
itching
difficulty swallowing or breathing
swelling of the throat or tongue
seizures
confusion
hallucinations
coma
a return of fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
Cefepime injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Your healthcare provider will tell you how to store your medication. Store your medication only as directed. Make sure you understand how to store your medication properly.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
muscle shakes and spasms
seizures
confusion
hallucinations
coma
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to cefepime injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking cefepime injection.
If you are diabetic and test your urine for glucose, use Clinistix or TesTape (not Clinitest) to test your urine for sugar while taking this medication.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about cefepime injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Maxipime
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page