Aflibercept Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aflibercept Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a612004.html
Aflibercept Injection
pronounced as (a flib' er sept)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Aflibercept injection, aflibercept-yszy injection, and aflibercept-jbvf injection are biologic medications (medications made from living organisms). Biosimilar aflibercept-yszy injection and aflibercept-jbvf injection are highly similar to aflibercept injection and work the same way as aflibercept injection in the body. Therefore, the term aflibercept injection products will be used to represent these medications in this discussion.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Aflibercept injection products are used to treat wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD; an ongoing disease of the eye that causes loss of the ability to see straight ahead and may make it more difficult to read, drive, or perform other daily activities), diabetic macular edema (an eye disease caused by diabetes that can lead to vision loss), and diabetic retinopathy (damage to the eyes caused by diabetes). Aflibercept injectionproducts are also used to treat macular edema after retinal vein occlusion (an eye disease caused by blockage of blood flow from the eye that leads to blurry vision and vision loss). Aflibercept injection is also used to treat retinopathy of prematurity (ROP; an eye disease that occurs in premature infants that can lead to vision loss and blindness). Aflibercept injection products are in a class of medications called vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and placental growth factor (PlGF) antagonists. They work by stopping abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage in the eye(s) that may cause vision loss in people with certain eye conditions.
How should this medicine be used?
Aflibercept injection products comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected into the eye by a doctor. It is usually given in a doctor's office or healthcare facility. Your doctor will give you injections on a schedule that is best for you and your condition.
Before you receive an aflibercept injection product, your doctor will clean your eye to prevent infection and numb your eye to reduce discomfort during the injection. After your injection, your doctor will need to examine your eyes before you leave the office.
Aflibercept injection products control certain eye conditions, but do not cure them. Your doctor will watch you carefully to see how well aflibercept injection products work for you. Talk to your doctor about how long you should continue treatment with an aflibercept injection product.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving aflibercept injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to aflibercept, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in aflibercept injection products. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have an infection or swelling in or around the eye. Your doctor will probably tell you that you should not receive aflibercept injection.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant right before starting your treatment and during your treatment, and for 3 to 4 months after your last injection with an aflibercept injection product. Use effective birth control before and during your treatment, and for 3 to 4 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about how long you should use birth control after your treatment with an aflibercept injection product. If you become pregnant while receiving an aflibercept injection product, call your doctor.
you should know that aflibercept injection products may cause vision problems shortly after you receive the injection. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until your vision is back to normal.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive an aflibercept injection product, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Aflibercept injection products may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
feeling that something is in your eye
teary eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
eye redness or pain
eye sensitivity to light
blurred vision
decrease or changes in vision
bleeding in or around the eye
seeing ''floaters'' or small specks
injection site pain
seeing flashes of lights
chest pain
shortness of breath
sweating
slow or difficult speech
dizziness or faintness
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
rash
itching
hives
difficulty breathing or swallowing
Aflibercept injection products may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will monitor your response to aflibercept injection products.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about aflibercept injection products.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Eylea
®
(aflibercept)
Eylea
®
HD (aflibercept)
Opuviz
®
(aflibercept-yszy)
Yesafili
®
(aflibercept-jbvf)
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page