Aminolevulinic Acid Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aminolevulinic Acid Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607062.html
Aminolevulinic Acid Topical
pronounced as (a mee'' noe lev'' ue lin' ik) (as' id)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Aminolevulinic acid is used with light therapy to treat actinic keratoses (small crusty or scaly patches of skin formed by exposure to sunlight; can turn into cancer if not treated) of the face,scalp, or upper arms. Aminolevulinic acid is in a class of medications called photosensitizing agents. Photosensitizing agents combined with light therapy is called phytodynamic therapy (PDT). The light activates the drug which then kills abnormal cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Aminolevulinic acid is applied to the skin by a doctor or nurse at a clinic. Your doctor will tell you when you should return to the doctor’s office for the light therapy treatment. You doctor may cover the treated area with a bandage and you will be asked to keep the area dry until you return for the light therapy. Follow your doctor’s instructions about receiving aminolevulinic acid and light therapy.
Your treatment may be repeated after 8 weeks or 3 months (depending on the product used) if your lesions have not responded.
You will be given special goggles to protect your eyes during light treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using aminolevulinic acid,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to aminolevulinic acid, porphyrins, soybeans, or any other medications. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using aminolevulinic acid. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with aminolevulinic acid: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using aminolevulinic acid. Do not start any of these medications while using aminolevulinic acid without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have porphyria (a condition that causes sensitivity to light) or if you have ever had skin reaction to light. Your doctor may tell you not to receive aminolevulinic acid therapy.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had bleeding problems or any other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant during treatment with aminolevulinic acid, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using aminolevulinic acid.
you should know that aminolevulinic acid will make your skin very sensitive to sunlight (likely to get sunburn). Avoid exposure of treated skin to direct sunlight or bright indoor light (e.g. tanning salons, bright halogen lighting, close task lighting, and high power lighting used in operating rooms or dental offices). Your doctor with tell you how long to avoid sunlight after exposure to light treatment. Before going outdoors in the sunlight, protect treated skin from the sun by wearing a wide-brimmed hat or other head covering that will shade the treated area or block the sun. Sunscreen will not protect you from sensitivity to sunlight. If you feel burning or stinging of the treated areas or see that they have become red or swollen, be sure that you are keeping the area protected from sunlight or bright light.
you should avoid staring directly at the light while you are receiving light treatment. Light therapy may cause eye irritation or eye injury
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you cannot return to the doctor for light treatment after aminolevulinic acid application as directed, call your doctor. Be sure to follow your doctor's directions to protect the treated area carefully.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Aminolevulinic acid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tingling, stinging, prickling, burning irritation, pain, or itching at the application site
redness, swelling, scaling, peeling, dryness, hardness, blistering, bleeding, or scabbing at the application site
discoloration of the skin at the application site
headache
swelling of the eyelids
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash; itching; hives; difficulty breathing or swallowing; swelling of the eyes, face, throat, tongue, or lips
memory problems, confusion, or disorientation
Aminolevulinic acid may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ameluz
®
Levulan
®
Kerastick
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page