Telavancin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Telavancin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a610004.html
Telavancin Injection
pronounced as (tel' a van sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Telavancin injection can cause kidney damage. Tell your doctor if you have diabetes, heart failure (condition in which the heart is unable to pump enough blood to the other parts of the body), high blood pressure, or kidney disease. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: decreased urination, swelling in your legs, feet, or ankles, confusion, or chest pain or pressure. Certain medications may interact with telavancin and cause kidney damage. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before receiving telavancin injection with your doctor and pharmacist.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before and during your treatment.
Telavancin injection has caused birth defects in animals. This medication has not been studied in pregnant women, but it is possible that it may also cause birth defects in babies whose mothers received telavancin injection during pregnancy. You should not use telavancin injection while you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant unless your doctor decides that this is the best treatment for your infection. If you can become pregnant, you will need to have a pregnancy test before beginning treatment with telavancin injection. You will also need to use an effective form of birth control during your treatment and for 2 days after your final dose. If you become pregnant while receiving telavancin injection, call your doctor immediately.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of using telavancin injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Telavancin injection is used alone or with other medications to treat serious skin infections caused by certain types of bacteria. It is also used alone or with other medications to treat certain types of pneumonia caused by bacteria when there are no other treatment options available. Telavancin injection is in a class of medications called lipoglycopeptide antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria that cause infection.
Antibiotics such as telavancin injection will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Telavancin injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually infused (injected slowly) over a period of 60 minutes once every 24 hours for 7 to 21 days. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection you have and how your body responds to the medication.
You may experience a reaction while you receive a dose of telavancin injection, usually during your infusion or soon after your infusion has completed. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of these symptoms while you receive telavancin injection: sudden reddening of the face, neck, upper chest, or other body part; difficulty swallowing or breathing; swelling of your tongue, lips, throat or face; hoarseness; itching; hives; rash; fast heartbeat; or feeling faint or dizzy.
You may receive telavancin injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be using telavancin injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to infuse the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions. Ask your healthcare provider what to do if you have any problems infusing telavancin injection.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with telavancin injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, tell your doctor.
Use telavancin injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using telavancin injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using telavancin injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to telavancin, vancomycin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in telavancin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with telavancin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting telavancin injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping or changing any medications while receiving telavancin injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist. The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with telavancin: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start receiving telavancin injection. Do not start this medication while receiving telavancin injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had a prolonged QT interval (rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death) and if you have or have ever had heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Telavancin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
metallic or soapy taste
decreased appetite
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
foamy urine
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives, rash, itching, difficulty breathing or swallowing
watery or bloody stools with our without stomach cramps or fever (up to two or more months after stopping treatment)
fast or irregular heartbeat
fainting
return of fever, chills, sore throat, or other signs of infection
Telavancin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using telavancin injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vibativ
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page