Solifenacin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Solifenacin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a605019.html
Solifenacin
pronounced as (sol i fen' a cin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Solifenacin is used to treat overactive bladder (a bladder condition that causes sudden urges to urinate that may be hard to control). Solifenacin is in a class of medications called antimuscarinics. It works by relaxing the bladder muscles.
How should this medicine be used?
Solifenacin comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take once a day with or without food. To help you remember to take solifenacin, take it at around the same time every day. Take solifenacin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them. Swallow the tablets with water or another liquid.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of solifenacin and increase your dose later in your treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking solifenacin,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking solifenacin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had narrow angle glaucoma (a serious eye condition that can cause vision loss), urinary retention (trouble fully emptying your bladder or at all), or gastric retention (slow emptying of your stomach). Your doctor may tell you not to take solifenacin.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause an irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death), any kind of blockage in the bladder or digestive system, myasthenia gravis (a nerve problem that makes muscles weak), ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the large intestine and rectum), or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking solifenacin, call your doctor.
you should know that solifenacin may make you dizzy, drowsy, or cause blurry vision. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that solifenacin may make it harder for your body to cool down when it gets very hot. Avoid exposure to extreme heat, and call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment if you have fever or other signs of heat stroke such as dizziness, upset stomach, headache, confusion, and fast pulse after you are exposed to heat.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and take your next dose at the regular time the next day. Do not take two doses of solifenacin tablets in the same day.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Solifenacin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth, skin, or eyes
constipation
stomach pain
upset stomach
vomiting
heartburn
blurred vision
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
constipation that lasts longer than 3 days
painful or frequent urination
bloody or cloudy urine
back pain
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty breathing or swallowing
rash, hives, itching
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
confusion
headache
extreme tiredness
Solifenacin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
flushing
dry mouth, eyes, or skin
blurred vision
enlarged pupils (black circle in the middle of the eye)
confusion
fever
fast heartbeat
shaking hands that you cannot control
difficulty walking
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
VESIcare
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page