Pegaptanib Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pegaptanib Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607057.html
Pegaptanib Injection
pronounced as (peg ap' ta nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pegaptanib injection is used to treat wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD; an ongoing disease of the eye that causes loss of the ability to see straight ahead and may make it more difficult to read, drive, or perform other daily activities). Pegaptanib injection is in a class of medications called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) antagonists. It works by stopping abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage in the eye(s) that may cause vision loss in people with wet AMD.
How should this medicine be used?
Pegaptanib injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected into the eye by a doctor. It is usually given in a doctor's office once every 6 weeks.
Before you receive a pegaptanib injection, your doctor will clean your eye to prevent infection and numb your eye to reduce discomfort during the injection. You may feel pressure in your eye when the medication is injected. After your injection, your doctor will need to examine your eyes before you leave the office.
Pegaptanib controls wet AMD, but does not cure it. Your doctor will watch you carefully to see how well pegaptanib works for you. Talk to your doctor about how long you should continue treatment with pegaptanib.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving pegaptanib injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pegaptanib or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have an infection in or around the eye. Your doctor may tell you that you should not receive pegaptanib injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, high blood pressure, a heart attack, or a stroke.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using pegaptanib injection, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about testing your vision at home during your treatment. Check your vision in both eyes as directed by your doctor, and call your doctor if there are any changes in your vision.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive pegaptanib, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pegaptanib injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye discharge
eye discomfort
diarrhea
nausea
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately. If you cannot reach your doctor, call a different eye doctor or get medical treatment right away:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
eye redness or pain
sensitivity to light
change or decrease in vision
blurred vision
floaters in the eye
seeing flashes of light
swelling of the eyelid
Pegaptanib injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will need to examine your eyes to see if you are developing serious side effects within 2 to 7 days after you receive each pegaptanib injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Macugen
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2012
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page