Clofarabine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clofarabine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607012.html
Clofarabine Injection
pronounced as (kloe far' a been)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Clofarabine is used to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL; a type of cancer of the white blood cells) in children and young adults 1 to 21 years old who have already received at least two other treatments. Clofarabine is in a class of medications called purine nucleoside antimetabolites. It works by killing existing cancer cells and limiting the development of new cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Clofarabine comes as a solution to be injected into a vein. Clofarabine is administered by a doctor or nurse. It is usually given once a day for 5 days in a row. This dosing cycle may be repeated once every 2 to 6 weeks, depending on your response to the medication.
It will take at least 2 hours for you to receive each dose of clofarabine. Tell your doctor or other healthcare provider right away if you feel anxious or restless while you are receiving the medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using clofarabine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to clofarabine or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using clofarabine injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. Clofarabine may harm the fetus. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with clofarabine. Talk to your doctor about types of birth control that will work for you. If you become pregnant while using clofarabine, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with clofarabine.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving clofarabine.
you should know that clofarabine may cause a skin condition called hand-foot syndrome. If you develop this condition, you may experience tingling of the hands and feet, and then reddening, dryness, and flaking of the skin on the hands and feet. If this happens, ask your doctor to recommend a lotion that you can apply to these areas. You will need to apply the lotion lightly and avoid rubbing the areas forcefully. Your doctor may also prescribe medication to relieve these symptoms.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Drink plenty of fluids every day during your treatment with clofarabine, especially if you vomit or have diarrhea.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Clofarabine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
diarrhea
constipation
loss of appetite
weight loss
swelling of the inside of the mouth and nose
painful white patches in the mouth
headache
anxiety
depression
irritability
pain in the back, joints, arms, or legs
drowsiness
dry, itchy, or irritated skin
flushing
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fast heartbeat
fast breathing
shortness of breath
dizziness
lightheadedness
fainting
decreased urination
sore throat, cough, fever, chills, and other signs of infection
pale skin
excessive tiredness
weakness
confusion
unusual bruising or bleeding
nosebleed
bleeding gums
blood in urine
small red or purple spots under the skin
yellowing of the skin or eyes
itching
red, warm, swollen, tender skin
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
Clofarabine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
This medication will be stored in the hospital.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
yellowing of the skin or eyes
vomiting
rash
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to clofarabine.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Clolar
®
Last Reviewed -
09/01/2010
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page