Linagliptin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Linagliptin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611036.html
Linagliptin
pronounced as (lin'' a glip' tin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Linagliptin is used along with diet and exercise and sometimes with other medications to lower blood sugar levels in patients with type 2 diabetes (condition in which blood sugar is too high because the body does not produce or use insulin normally). Linagliptin is in a class of medications called dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors. It works by increasing the amounts of certain natural substances that lower blood sugar when it is high. Linagliptin is not used to treat type 1 diabetes (condition in which the body does not produce insulin and, therefore, cannot control the amount of sugar in the blood) or diabetic ketoacidosis (a serious condition that may develop if high blood sugar is not treated).
Over time, people who have diabetes and high blood sugar can develop serious or life-threatening complications, including heart disease, stroke, kidney problems, nerve damage, and eye problems. Taking medication(s), making lifestyle changes (e.g., diet, exercise, quitting smoking), and regularly checking your blood sugar may help to manage your diabetes and improve your health. This therapy may also decrease your chances of having a heart attack, stroke, or other diabetes-related complications such as kidney failure, nerve damage (numb, cold legs or feet; decreased sexual ability in men and women), eye problems, including changes or loss of vision, or gum disease. Your doctor and other healthcare providers will talk to you about the best way to manage your diabetes.
How should this medicine be used?
Linagliptin comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food. Take linagliptin at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take linagliptin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Linagliptin helps to control high blood sugar but does not cure diabetes. Continue to take linagliptin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking linagliptin without talking to your doctor.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with linagliptin and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking linagliptin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to linagliptin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in linagliptin tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the manufacturer's patient information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with linagliptin: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking linagliptin. Do not start any of these medications while taking linagliptin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol or if you have or have ever had pancreatitis (inflammation of your pancreas), gallstones (stones in your gallbladder), high triglycerides (a fatty substance in the blood), heart failure, or kidney problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking linagliptin, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking linagliptin.
talk to your doctor about what you should do if you get hurt or if you develop a fever or infection. These conditions may affect your blood sugar and the amount of linagliptin you may need for treatment.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Be sure to follow all diet and exercise recommendations made by your doctor or dietician. It is important to eat a healthy diet, exercise regularly, and lose weight if necessary. This will help to control your diabetes and help linagliptin work more effectively.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
This medication may cause changes in your blood sugar. You should know the symptoms of low and high blood sugar and what to do if you have these symptoms.
Linagliptin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stuffy or runny nose
sore throat
cough
diarrhea
headache
joint pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking linagliptin and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
itching, flaking, peeling, or blistering of the skin
hives
swelling of the face, lips, tongue, or throat
difficulty breathing or swallowing
hoarseness
ongoing pain that begins in the upper left or middle of the stomach but may spread to the back
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
shortness of breath or trouble breathing, especially when lying down
swelling of the feet, ankles or legs
sudden weight gain
excessive tiredness
Linagliptin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood sugar and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) should be checked regularly to determine your response to linagliptin. Your doctor will also tell you how to check your response to linagliptin by measuring your blood sugar levels at home. Follow these instructions carefully.
You should always wear a diabetic identification bracelet to be sure you get proper treatment in an emergency.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tradjenta
®
Trijardy
®
(as a combination product containing Empagliflozin, Linagliptin, Metformin)
Brand names of combination products
Glyxambi
®
(containing Linagliptin, Empagliflozin)
Jentadueto
®
(containing Linagliptin, Metformin)
Last Revised -
01/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page