Fedratinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fedratinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619058.html
Fedratinib
pronounced as (fed ra' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Fedratinib may cause encephalopathy (a serious and potentially fatal disorder of the nervous system), including Wernicke's encephalopathy (a type of encephalopathy caused by a lack of thiamine [vitamin B1]). Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a thiamine deficiency. If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking fedratinib and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment: difficulty moving or keeping your balance, weakness of the legs or arms that keeps getting worse, confusion, drowsiness, difficulty understanding or speaking, loss of memory, vision problems (including double vision and abnormal eye movements), or changes in personality.
Your doctor may prescribe medications to reduce the risk of side effects you may have from taking fedratinib. Tell your doctor right away if you have nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or weight loss that does not get better with treatment.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests to check your body's response to fedratinib.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with fedratinib and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fedratinib is used to treat adults with certain types of myelofibrosis (MF; a cancer of the bone marrow in which the bone marrow is replaced by scar tissue and causes decreased blood cell production). Fedratinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop or slow the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Fedratinib comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day, with or without food. Taking fedratinib with a high fat meal may help to reduce nausea and vomiting. Take fedratinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take fedratinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will order blood tests before and during your treatment to see how you are affected by this medication. Your doctor may increase or decrease your dose of fedratinib during your treatment, or may tell you to stop taking fedratinib temporarily or permanently. This depends on how well the medication works for you, your lab test results, and if you experience side effects. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fedratinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to fedratinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in fedratinib capsules. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking fedratinib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription product may interact with fedratinib: omeprazole (Prilosec). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking fedratinib. Do not start this medication while taking fedratinib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you if you smoke or if you have ever smoked. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had cancer, pancreatitis (swelling of the pancreas), blood clots, a stroke, a heart attack or other heart problems, liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking fedratinib, call your doctor.
do not breastfeed during your treatment with fedratinib and for at least 1 month after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking fedratinib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fedratinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
tiredness
muscle spasms
arm, leg, or bone pain
headache
weight gain
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
unusual bleeding or bruising
fever, chills, cough, painful or frequent urination, or other signs of infection
nausea, extreme tiredness, unusual bruising or bleeding, lack of energy, loss of appetite, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, yellowing of the skin or eyes, or flu-like symptoms
shortness of breath, fast heartbeat, headache, dizziness, pale skin, confusion, or tiredness
pain in the chest, arms, back, neck, jaw, or stomach; breaking out in cold sweat; lightheadedness
slow or difficult speech; sudden weakness or numbness of the face, arm or leg; sudden headache; sudden vision problems; sudden difficulty walking
swelling, pain, tenderness, warmth or redness in one or both legs
shortness of breath, coughing up blood, fast heartbeat, fast breathing, pain when breathing deeply
Fedratinib may increase your risk of developing other cancers, such as lymphoma (cancer that begins in the cells that fight infection). Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving this medication.
Fedratinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Inrebic
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page