Magnesium Oxide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Magnesium Oxide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601074.html
Magnesium Oxide
pronounced as (mag nee' zee um) (ox' ide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Magnesium is an element your body needs to function normally. Magnesium oxide may be used for different reasons. Some people use it as an antacid to relieve heartburn, sour stomach, or acid indigestion. Magnesium oxide also may be used as a laxative for short-term, rapid emptying of the bowel (before surgery, for example). It should not be used repeatedly. Magnesium oxide also is used as a dietary supplement when the amount of magnesium in the diet is not enough. Magnesium oxide is available without a prescription.
How should this medicine be used?
Magnesium oxide comes as a tablet and capsule to take by mouth. It usually is taken one to four times daily depending on which brand is used and what condition you have. Follow the directions on the package or on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take magnesium oxide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Take any other medicine and magnesium oxide at least 2 hours apart.
If you are using magnesium oxide as a laxative, take it with a full glass (8 ounces [240 milliliters]) of cold water or fruit juice. Do not take a dose late in the day on an empty stomach.
Do not take magnesium oxide as an antacid for longer than 2 weeks unless your doctor tells you to. Do not take magnesium oxide as a laxative for more than 1 week unless your doctor tells you to.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking magnesium oxide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to magnesium oxide, other antacids or laxatives, or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking magnesium oxide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with magnesium oxide: aspirin, cimetidine (Tagamet), ranitidine (Zantac). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking magnesium oxide. Do not start any of these medications while taking magnesium oxide without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart, kidney, liver, or intestinal disease or high blood pressure.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking magnesium oxide, call your doctor immediately.
tell your doctor if you are on a low-salt, low-sugar, or other special diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you are taking magnesium oxide on a regular schedule, take the missed dose as soon you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Magnesium oxide may cause side effects. To avoid unpleasant taste, take the tablet with citrus fruit juice or carbonated citrus drink. Tell your doctor if either of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
cramping
diarrhea
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash or hives
itching
dizziness or lightheadedness
mood or mental changes
unusual tiredness
weakness
nausea
vomiting
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
If this medicine has been prescribed for you, keep all appointments with your doctor so that your response to magnesium can be checked.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mag-Ox
®
Maox
®
Uro-Mag
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page