Felodipine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Felodipine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a692016.html
Felodipine
pronounced as (fe loe' di peen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Felodipine is used to treat high blood pressure. Felodipine is in a class of medications called calcium channel blockers. It works by relaxing the blood vessels so your heart does not have to pump as hard.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Felodipine comes as an extended release tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day. To help you remember to take felodipine, take it around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take felodipine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Felodipine controls high blood pressure but does not cure it. Continue to take felodipine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking felodipine without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking felodipine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to felodipine, any other medications, or any ingredients in felodipine tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking felodipine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects. .
the following nonprescription product may interact with felodipine: cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking felodipine. Do not start this medication while taking felodipine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart, liver, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking felodipine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell your doctor or dentist that you take felodipine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking grapefruit juice or eating grapefruit while taking felodipine.
Talk to your doctor before using salt substitutes containing potassium. If your doctor prescribes a low-salt or low-sodium diet, follow these directions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Felodipine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
flushing
dizziness or lightheadedness
weakness
fast heartbeat
heartburn
constipation
enlargement of gum tissue around teeth
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
swelling of the face, eyes, lips, tongue, arms, or legs
difficulty breathing or swallowing
fainting
rash
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly to determine your response to felodipine.
Good dental hygiene decreases the chance and severity of gum swelling. Brush your teeth regularly and schedule dental cleanings every 6 months.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Plendil
®
Brand names of combination products
Lexxel
®
(containing Enalapril, Felodipine)
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
11/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page