Minoxidil: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Minoxidil
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682608.html
Minoxidil
pronounced as (mi nox' i dill)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Minoxidil may increase chest pain (angina) or cause other heart problems. If chest pain occurs or worsens while you are taking this medication, call your doctor immediately. Your doctor may prescribe other mediciations as part of your minoxidil therapy. Do not stop taking these medications unless your doctor tells you to do so.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly to determine your response to minoxidil. Your doctor may order other tests such as EKG (electrocardiogram) to monitor your heart function.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Minoxidil is used with other medications to treat high blood pressure. It is in a class of medications called vasodilators. It works by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can flow more easily through the body.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Minoxidil comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken once or twice a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take minoxidil exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Minoxidil controls high blood pressure but does not cure it. Continue to take minoxidil even if you feel well. Do not stop taking minoxidil without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking minoxidil,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to minoxidil, any other medications,or any of the ingredients in minoxidil tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking minoxidil. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have pheochromocytoma (adrenal gland tumor). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take minoxidil.
tell your doctor if you have had a recent heart attack, or if you have heart or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking minoxidil, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking minoxidil.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how it affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are taking minoxidil. Alcohol can make the side effects from minoxidil worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Your doctor may prescribe a low-salt or low-sodium diet. Follow these directions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Minoxidil may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
increase in size or darkness of fine body hair
breast tenderness
headache
nausea
vomiting
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
rash
fast heartbeat
swollen ankles or feet
unexplained weight gain
difficulty breathing
dizziness
fainting
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Your doctor may ask you to check your pulse (heart rate) daily. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to teach you how to do this. Call your doctor if your heart rate increases by more than 20 beats per minute while at rest.
Weigh yourself every day. Call your doctor if you experience rapid weight gain.
Do not let any one else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Loniten
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
01/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page