Selexipag Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Selexipag Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622007.html
Selexipag Injection
pronounced as (se lex' i pag)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Selexipag injection is used in adults who are taking selexipag tablets to treat pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH, high blood pressure in the vessels that carry blood to the lungs) but are temporarily unable to take medications by mouth. Selexipag injection is in a class of medications called selective nonprostanoid IP prostacyclin receptor agonists. It works by relaxing the blood vessels in the lungs to allow blood to flow easily.
How should this medicine be used?
Selexipag injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually injected slowly over 80 minutes by a doctor or a nurse. It is usually given twice a day for as long as you are unable to take selexipag tablets by mouth.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking selexipag injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to selexipag, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in selexipag injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking gemfibrozil (Lopid). Your doctor may tell you not to take selexipag injection if you are taking this medication.
some medications should not be taken with selexipag injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with selexipag injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before receiving selexipag injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while receiving selexipag injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD; blockage of veins in the lungs), thyroid problems, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving selexipag injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Selexipag injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
redness, pain, tenderness, swelling, discoloration, itching, or bruising of the skin where selexipag was injected
headache
pain in jaw, joints, muscles, arms, or legs
decreased appetite
nausea
diarrhea
vomiting
flushing
rash
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
shortness of breath
rapid breathing
dizziness
weakness
Selexipag injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Uptravi
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page