Dimenhydrinate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dimenhydrinate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607046.html
Dimenhydrinate
pronounced as (dye men hye' dri nate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dimenhydrinate is used to prevent and treat nausea, vomiting, and dizziness caused by motion sickness. Dimenhydrinate is in a class of medications called antihistamines. It works by preventing problems with body balance.
How should this medicine be used?
Dimenhydrinate comes as a tablet and chewable tablet to take by mouth with or without food. To prevent motion sickness, the first dose should be taken 30 minutes to 1 hour before you travel or begin motion activity. Adults and children older than age 12 may usually take dimenhydrinate every 4 to 6 hours as needed to prevent or treat motion sickness. Children under age 12 may usually be given dimenhydrinate every 6 to 8 hours as needed to prevent or treat motion sickness. Follow the directions on the package carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take dimenhydrinate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than directed by the package label.
Do not give dimenhydrinate to children younger than 2 years of age unless your doctor has told you to do so.
Other uses for this medicine
Dimenhydrinate is also sometimes used to treat Meniere's disease (condition of the inner ear which causes extreme dizziness, loss of balance, ringing in the ears, and hearing loss) and other inner ear problems. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking dimenhydrinate,
talk with your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dimenhydrinate, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in the dimenhydrinate preparation. If you are taking dimenhydrinate chewable tablets, talk to your doctor if you are allergic to tartrazine (FD&C Yellow No. 5, a color additive) or aspirin. Ask your doctor or pharmacist or check the package label for a list of the ingredients.
talk with your doctor and pharmacist about what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking dimenhydrinate. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
talk with your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma; shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, including chronic bronchitis (swelling of the air passages that lead to the lungs) or emphysema (damage to air sacs in the lungs); difficulty urinating due to enlargement of the prostate (male reproductive organ); glaucoma (an eye disease that can cause vision loss); or seizures.
talk with your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking dimenhydrinate, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking dimenhydrinate.
you should know that dimenhydrinate may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car, operate machinery, or participate in potentially dangerous activities until you know how this medication affects you.
avoid alcoholic beverages or products containing alcohol while taking dimenhydrinate. Alcohol can make the side effects from dimenhydrinate worse.
if you have phenylketonuria (PKU, an inherited condition in which a special diet must be followed to prevent damage to your brain that can cause severe intellectual disability), read the package label carefully before taking dimenhydrinate. Dimenhydrinate chewable tablets contain aspartame that forms phenylalanine.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking dimenhydrinate if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take dimenhydrinate because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually taken as needed. If your doctor has told you to take dimenhydrinate regularly, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dimenhydrinate may cause side effects. Talk to your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
excitement or hyperactivity (especially in children)
headache
new or worsening dizziness
blurred vision
ringing in the ears
dry mouth, nose, or throat
problems with coordination
fainting
dizziness
nausea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor immediately:
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
Dimenhydrinate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
large pupils (black circles in the centers of the eyes)
flushed face
drowsiness or sleepiness
excitation or hyperactivity
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
difficulty understanding reality
confusion
difficulty speaking or swallowing
unsteadiness
seizures
unresponsiveness or coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about dimenhydrinate.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Dramamine
®
Dramamine
®
Chewable
Last Revised -
01/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page