Rolapitant Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rolapitant Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618019.html
Rolapitant Injection
pronounced as roe la' pi tant
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Rolapitant injection is no longer available in the United States.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rolapitant injection is used along with other medications to prevent nausea and vomiting that may occur several days after receiving certain chemotherapy medications. Rolapitant is in a class of medications called antiemetics. It works by blocking the action of neurokinin and substance P, natural substances in the brain that cause nausea and vomiting.
How should this medicine be used?
Rolapitant injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) by a healthcare provider in a hospital or clinic. It is usually infused intravenously as a single dose over a period of 30 minutes within 2 hours before the start of chemotherapy.
Rolapitant injection may cause serious reactions during the infusion of the medication, often during the first few minutes. A doctor or nurse will monitor you carefully while you are receiving the medication. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately: hives; rash; flushing; itching; difficulty breathing or swallowing; shortness of breath; swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, tongue, or throat; chest pain; stomach pain or cramping; vomiting; dizziness; or fainting.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving rolapitant injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rolapitant; any other medications; soybean oil; legumes such as beans, peanuts, peas, or lentils; or any of the ingredients in rolapitant injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking thioridazine or pimozide (Orap). Your doctor will probably not want you to receive rolapitant injection if you are taking one or more of these medications.
some medications should not be taken with rolapitant. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with rolapitant. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting rolapitant with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking rolapitant, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving rolapitant injection, call your doctor.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rolapitant injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
hiccups
stomach pain
decreased appetite
dizziness
heartburn
mouth sores
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, chills, sore throat, or other signs of an infection
Rolapitant injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Varubi
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page