Bupivacaine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bupivacaine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625026.html
Bupivacaine Injection
pronounced as ( bue piv′ a kane)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Bupivacaine in a certain concentration may cause cardiac arrest (heart stops beating) when used as an epidural injection for surgery or delivery during pregnancy. It is not recommended for these uses in that concentration.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bupivacaine is used to manage pain during surgery or medical procedures. Bupivacaine is in a class of medications called local anesthetics. It works by blocking nerves from sending pain signals.
How should this medicine be used?
Bupivacaine comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected by a healthcare provider. It is usually given just before surgery.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving bupivacaine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glucose-6- phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (an inherited disease that affects red blood cells); methemoglobinemia (a condition that affect how the red blood cells work to carry oxygen); or lung, liver, heart or blood vessel disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
you should know that you may have a temporary loss of feeling and ability to move (usually the lower half of your body) after you receive bupivacaine injection in or around your spine.
you should know that after receiving bupivacaine injection for dental procedures, you should not try to chew solid foods until feeling returns in the mouth. It may take up to 7 hours after you receive bupivacaine for the feeling to return.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bupivacaine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain or redness at the site of injection
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
itching, redness, hives, swelling of the tongue and/or throat, difficulty breathing, fast heartbeat, fainting, excessive sweating, or fever
restlessness, anxiety, incoherent speech, lightheadedness, numbness and tingling of the mouth and lips, metallic taste, ringing in the ears, dizziness, blurred vision, tremors, twitching, depression, drowsiness, or seizures
fast or irregular heartbeat
pale, gray, or blue colored skin; headache; rapid heart rate; shortness of breath; lightheadedness; or fatigue
Bupivacaine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Marcaine
®
Sensorcaine
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page