Dolasetron: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dolasetron
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601001.html
Dolasetron
pronounced as (dol a' se tron)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dolasetron is used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy. Dolasetron is in a class of medications called serotonin 5-HT
3
receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of serotonin, a natural substance that may cause nausea and vomiting.
How should this medicine be used?
Dolasetron comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken within 1 hour before chemotherapy. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take dolasetron exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
For children unable to swallow the tablet, a specially prepared dolasetron liquid dose may be mixed in apple or apple-grape juice to take by mouth. This mixture may be kept at room temperature, but must be used within 2 hours after mixing.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking dolasetron,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dolasetron, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in dolasetron tablets. Ask your healthcare provider or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking dolasetron. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had long QT syndrome (condition that increases the risk of developing an irregular heartbeat that may cause fainting or sudden death), or another type of irregular heart beat or heart rhythm problem, or if you have or have ever had low blood levels of magnesium or potassium in your blood, a heart attack, heart failure (HF; condition in which the heart cannot pump enough blood to other parts of the body), or heart or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking dolasetron, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dolasetron may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
tiredness
heartburn
chills
less frequent urination
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical treatment:
dizziness
rapid, pounding, or irregular heart beat
hives
rash
itching
difficulty swallowing or breathing
dizziness, light-headedness, or fainting
fast, slow or irregular heartbeat
agitation
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
fever
excessive sweating
confusion
nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
loss of coordination
stiff or twitching muscles
seizures
coma (loss of consciousness)
Dolasetron may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light and excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
dizziness
fainting
rapid, pounding, or irregular heart beat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with you doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Anzemet
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page