Etravirine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Etravirine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608016.html
Etravirine
pronounced as (e'' tra vir' een)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Etravirine is used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Etravirine is in a class of medications called non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs). It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood.
Although etravirine does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Taking these medications and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of giving the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Etravirine comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take after a meal twice a day. Take etravirine at around the same times every day.
Take etravirine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with liquid, such as water; do not chew them.
If you have trouble swallowing the tablets, they may be dissolved in water. Do
not
use any other type of liquid. Add the tablets to one teaspoon (5 mL) of water or at least enough liquid to cover the medication. Stir until a milky mixture occurs. Then add one tablespoon (15 mL) of a liquid such as water or you can use a beverage such as orange juice or milk to improve the taste. Do
not
mix the tablets with a warm or hot liquid or a carbonated beverage such as a soda. Drink the mixture right away. Rinse the glass with the liquid and swallow the entire contents. Repeat process of rinsing and swallowing the rinse mixture several times to make sure that the entire dose is taken.
Etravirine helps to control HIV infection but does not cure it. Continue to take etravirine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking etravirine without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking etravirine or miss doses, your condition may become more difficult to treat.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking etravirine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking etravirine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of these medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with etravirine: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking etravirine. Do not start this medication while taking etravirine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease, including hepatitis.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking etravirine, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are taking etravirine.
you should know that your body fat may increase or move to different areas of your body such as your breasts, neck, chest, stomach, and upper back. Loss of fat from your legs, arms, and face may also happen.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections. If you have new or worsening symptoms after starting treatment with etravirine, be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Etravirine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking etravirine and call your doctor immediately:
rash
redness, bumps, or blisters on the skin or in the mouth
redness or swelling of the eyes or face
sore throat, cough, fever, chills, or other signs of infection
general ill feeling, tiredness, muscle or joint aches
nausea, vomiting, yellowing of the skin or eyes, dark-colored urine, pale-colored stools, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, loss of appetite
Etravirine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Keep the three desiccant (drying agent) pouches in the bottle of medication to keep the tablets dry. Do not eat the desiccant pouches.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to etravirine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a list of your medications and show it to your doctor and pharmacist when you get a new medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Intelence
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page