Maraviroc: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Maraviroc
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607076.html
Maraviroc
pronounced as (mah rav' er rock)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Maraviroc may cause damage to your liver. You may experience an allergic reaction to maraviroc right before you develop liver damage. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had hepatitis or other liver disease. If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking maraviroc and call your doctor immediately: itchy rash; fever; yellowing of the skin or eyes; dark-colored (tea-colored) urine; vomiting; or upper right stomach pain.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests to check your body's response to maraviroc.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with maraviroc and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking maraviroc.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Maraviroc is used to treat a certain type of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Maraviroc is in a class of medications called HIV entry and fusion inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood.
Although maraviroc does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Taking these medications and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of giving the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Maraviroc comes as a tablet and a solution (liquid) to take by mouth. Take with or without food twice a day. Take maraviroc at around the same times every day.
Take maraviroc exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow maraviroc tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Use one of the oral syringes that came with the medication for measuring the solution. Use the small (3-mL) oral syringe if your dose is 2.5 mL or less and use the large (10-mL) oral syringe if your dose is greater than 2.5 mL. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how to measure your dose with the syringe.
If you are giving the solution to a child, place the tip of the oral syringe into the child's mouth against the inside of the cheek. Slowly push the plunger all the way down to give all of the medication in the oral syringe. Make sure that the child has enough time to swallow the solution.
Continue to take maraviroc even if you feel well. Do not stop taking maraviroc without talking to your doctor. If you miss doses, take less than the prescribed dose, or stop taking maraviroc, your condition may become more difficult to treat.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking maraviroc,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking maraviroc. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription herbal product may interact with maraviroc: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking maraviroc. Do not start this medication while taking maraviroc without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had low blood pressure, chest pain, a heart attack, any type of infection that does not go away or that comes and goes such as tuberculosis (TB; a type of lung infection) or cytomegalovirus (CMV; a viral infection that may cause symptoms in patients with weak immune systems), or heart or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking maraviroc, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are taking maraviroc.
you should know that your body fat may increase or move to different areas of your body, such as your breasts and upper back, while you are taking maraviroc.
you should know that maraviroc may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, or fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. To help avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up. Do not drive a car or operate heavy machinery if you are dizzy while taking maraviroc.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections. If you have new or worsening symptoms after starting treatment with maraviroc, be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it, and then take the next dose at the scheduled time. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Maraviroc may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
cough, runny nose, or other cold symptoms
dizziness
diarrhea
constipation
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
sore throat, fever, chills, or other signs of infection
chest pain, pressure, or discomfort; pain in one or both arms, back, neck, jaw, or stomach; shortness of breath; sweating
rash; fever; flu-like symptoms; muscle or joint pain; blisters or sores in the mouth; swollen, red, peeling, or blistering skin; redness or swelling of the eyes; swelling of the mouth, face, or lips; difficulty breathing.
Maraviroc may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Discard any unused oral solution 60 days after first opening the bottle.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
dizziness, lightheadedness, or fainting when getting up too quickly from a lying position
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Selzentry
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page