Temozolomide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Temozolomide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613002.html
Temozolomide Injection
pronounced as (te moe zoe' loe mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Temozolomide is used to treat certain types of brain tumors. Temozolomide is in a class of medications called alkylating agents. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells in your body.
How should this medicine be used?
Temozolomide injection comes as a powder to be added to fluid and injected over 90 minutes intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse. It is usually injected once a day. For some types of brain tumors, temozolomide is given daily for 42 to 49 days. Then, after a 28-day break, it may be given once a day for 5 days in a row, followed by a 23-day break before repeating the next dosage cycle. For treatment of other types of brain tumors, temozolomide is given once a day for 5 days in a row, followed by a 23-day break before repeating the next dosage cycle. The length of treatment depends on the how well your body responds to it and the type of cancer that you have.
Your doctor may need to delay your treatment or adjust your dose depending on your response to treatment and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment with temozolomide.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving temozolomide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to temozolomide, dacarbazine (DTIC-Dome) any other medications, or any of the ingredients in temozolomide injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease.
you should know that temozolomide may interfere with sperm production in men. However, you should not assume that you cannot get someone else pregnant. Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are receiving temozolomide. Use a reliable method of birth control to prevent pregnancy. If you become pregnant while receiving temozolomide, call your doctor. Temozolomide may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. You should not breastfeed while you are receiving temozolomide.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Temozolomide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
loss of appetite
sores in the mouth and throat
headache
pale skin
lack of energy
loss of balance or coordination
fainting
dizziness
hair loss
insomnia
memory problems
pain, itching, swelling, or redness in the place where the medication was injected
changes in vision
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
unusual bleeding or bruising
red or black, tarry stools
pink, red, or dark brown urine
coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds
fever, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, or other signs of infection
unusual tiredness or weakness
rash
unable to move one side of the body
shortness of breath
seizures
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
decreased urination
Temozolomide may increase the risk that you will develop other cancers. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking temozolomide.
Temozolomide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
unusual bleeding or bruising
red or black, tarry stools
pink, red, or dark brown urine
coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds
fever, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, or other signs of infection
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order laboratory tests before, during, and after your treatment to check your body's response and to temozolomide to see if your blood cells are affected by this drug.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Temodar
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2013
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page