Idoxuridine Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Idoxuridine Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601062.html
Idoxuridine Ophthalmic
pronounced as (eye dox yoor' i deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Idoxuridine ophthalmic is no longer available in the United States. If you are currently using idoxurdine ophthalmic, you should call your doctor to discuss switching to another treatment.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Idoxuridine slows the growth of viruses that cause certain eye infections.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Idoxuridine comes as eyedrops. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use idoxuridine exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To use the eyedrops, follow these instructions:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Use a mirror or have someone else put the drops in your eye.
Remove the protective cap. Make sure that the end of the dropper is not chipped or cracked and that the eyedrops are not cloudy.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else.
Hold the dropper tip down at all times to prevent drops from flowing back into the bottle and contaminating the remaining contents.
Lie down or tilt your head back.
Holding the bottle between your thumb and index finger, place the dropper tip as near as possible to your eyelid without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your cheek or nose.
With the index finger of your other hand, pull the lower lid of the eye down to form a pocket.
Drop the prescribed number of drops into the pocket made by the lower lid and the eye. Placing drops on the surface of the eyeball can cause stinging.
Close your eye and press lightly against the lower lid with your finger for 2-3 minutes to keep the medication in the eye. Do not blink.
Replace and tighten the cap right away. Do not wipe or rinse it off.
Wipe off any excess liquid from your cheek with a clean tissue. Wash your hands again.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using idoxuridine eyedrops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to idoxuridine or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using idoxuridine eyedrops. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using idoxuridine, call your doctor immediately.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it and use any remaining doses for that day at evenly spaced intervals. However, if you remember a missed dose at the time the next one is due, use only the regularly scheduled dose. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Idoxuridine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye irritation or pain
redness
itching
swelling of the eye
increased sensitivity to light and glare
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the idoxuridine, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Dendrid
®
¶
Herplex
®
¶
Stoxil
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page