Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a605005.html
Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic
pronounced as (sip roe flox' a sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ciprofloxacin ophthalmic solution is used to treat bacterial infections of the eye including conjunctivitis (pinkeye; infection of the membrane that covers the outside of the eyeball and the inside of the eyelid) and corneal ulcers (infection and loss of tissue in the clear front part of the eye). Ciprofloxacin ophthalmic ointment is used to treat conjunctivitis. Ciprofloxacin is in a class of antibiotics called fluoroquinolones. It works by killing the bacteria that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic ciprofloxacin comes as a solution (liquid) and an ointment to apply to the eyes. Ciprofloxacin ophthalmic solution is usually used often, between once every 15 minutes to once every 4 hours while awake for 7 to 14 days or longer. Ciprofloxacin ophthalmic ointment is usually applied 3 times a day for 2 days and then twice a day for 5 days. Use ophthalmic ciprofloxacin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use ophthalmic ciprofloxacin exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should expect your symptoms to improve during your treatment. Call your doctor if your symptoms do not go away or get worse, or if you develop other problems with your eyes during your treatment.
Use ophthalmic ciprofloxacin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using ophthalmic ciprofloxacin too soon, your infection may not be completely cured and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
If you are to use more than one drop in the same eye, wait at least 5 minutes before instilling the next drop.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
To apply the eye ointment, follow these instructions:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Avoid touching the tip of the tube against your eye or anything else; the tube tip must be kept clean.
Holding the tube between your thumb and forefinger, place it as near to your eyelid as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
Tilt your head backward slightly.
With your index finger, pull the lower eyelid down to form a pocket.
Squeeze a 1/2-inch (1.25-centimeter) ribbon of ointment into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Blink your eye slowly; then gently close your eye for 1 to 2 minutes.
With a tissue, wipe any excess ointment from the eyelids and lashes. With another clean tissue, wipe the tip of the tube clean.
Replace and tighten the cap right away.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using ophthalmic ciprofloxacin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ciprofloxacin (Cipro, Ciloxan), other quinolone antibiotics such as cinoxacin (Cinobac) (not available in the United States), enoxacin (Penetrex) (not available in the United States), gatifloxacin (Tequin, Zymar), levofloxacin (Levaquin, Quixin, Iquix), lomefloxacin (Maxaquin), moxifloxacin (Avelox, Vigamox), nalidixic acid (NegGram) (not available in the United States), norfloxacin (Noroxin), ofloxacin (Floxin, Ocuflox), and sparfloxacin (Zagam), any other medications, or benzalkonium chloride.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using ophthalmic ciprofloxacin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using ophthalmic ciprofloxacin, call your doctor.
you should know that your vision may be blurred during your treatment with ciprofloxacin ophthalmic ointment. Avoid rubbing your eyes even if your vision is blurred. Do not drive a car or operate machinery if you are unable to see clearly.
tell your doctor if you wear contact lenses. You should not wear contact lenses while you have symptoms of bacterial conjunctivitis or while you are applying eye drops or ointment.
you should know that bacterial conjunctivitis spreads easily. Wash your hands often, especially after you touch your eyes. When your infection goes away, you should wash or replace any eye makeup, contact lenses, or other objects that touched your infected eye(s).
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking coffee or other beverages containing caffeine while you are taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Place the missed dose in your eye(s) as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ophthalmic ciprofloxacin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, red, itchy, crusty, or irritated eyes
eye pain
feeling that something is in your eye
unpleasant taste
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
hives
itching
tingling
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
difficulty breathing or swallowing
hoarseness
Ophthalmic ciprofloxacin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If you instill too many drops of the ophthalmic solution in your eye, wash your eye with plenty of warm tap water.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the ciprofloxacin ophthalmic solution or ointment, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ciloxan
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page