Familial partial lipodystrophy: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Familial partial lipodystrophy
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/familial-partial-lipodystrophy/
Familial partial lipodystrophy
Description
Familial partial lipodystrophy is a rare condition characterized by an abnormal distribution of fatty (adipose) tissue. Adipose tissue is normally found in many parts of the body, including beneath the skin and surrounding the internal organs. It stores fat as a source of energy and also provides cushioning. In people with familial partial lipodystrophy, adipose tissue is lost from the arms, legs, and hips, giving these parts of the body a very muscular appearance. The fat that cannot be stored in the limbs builds up around the face and neck, and inside the abdomen. Excess fat in these areas gives individuals an appearance described as "cushingoid," because it resembles the physical features associated with a hormonal disorder called
Cushing disease
. This abnormal fat distribution can begin anytime from childhood to adulthood.
Abnormal storage of fat in the body can lead to health problems in adulthood. Many people with familial partial lipodystrophy develop insulin resistance, a condition in which the body's tissues cannot adequately respond to
insulin
, which is a hormone that normally helps to regulate blood sugar (glucose) levels. Insulin resistance may worsen to become a more serious disease called diabetes mellitus. Some people with familial partial lipodystrophy develop acanthosis nigricans, a skin condition related to high levels of insulin in the bloodstream. Acanthosis nigricans causes the skin in body folds and creases to become thick, dark, and velvety.
Most people with familial partial lipodystrophy also have high levels of fats called triglycerides circulating in the bloodstream (hypertriglyceridemia), which can lead to inflammation of the
pancreas
(pancreatitis). Familial partial lipodystrophy can also cause an abnormal buildup of fats in the
liver
(hepatic steatosis), which can result in an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) and abnormal liver function. After puberty, some affected females develop multiple cysts on the ovaries, an increased amount of body hair (hirsutism), and an inability to conceive (infertility), which are likely related to hormonal changes.
Researchers have described at least six forms of familial partial lipodystrophy, which are distinguished by their genetic cause. The most common form of familial partial lipodystrophy is type 2, also called Dunnigan disease. In addition to the signs and symptoms described above, some people with this type of the disorder develop muscle weakness (myopathy), abnormalities of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy), a form of heart disease called coronary artery disease, and problems with the electrical system that coordinates the heartbeat (the
conduction system
).
Frequency
Familial partial lipodystrophy is a rare disease, affecting an estimated 1 in 1 million people overall. Type 2 is the most common form, with more than 500 cases reported in the medical literature. Women tend to be diagnosed with familial partial lipodystrophy more often than men, probably because a loss of fat from the hips and limbs is more easily recognized in women, and complications such as diabetes and hypertriglyceridemia occur more commonly in women.
Causes
Familial partial lipodystrophy can be caused by mutations in several genes. Type 2 results from mutations in the
LMNA
gene. The other, less common forms of the disorder are caused by mutations in different genes.
LMNA
and the other genes associated with familial partial lipodystrophy provide instructions for making proteins with a variety of functions, including important roles in fat storage. In particular, these proteins play important roles in the development and function of adipocytes, which are the fat-storing cells in adipose tissue. Mutations in any of the genes associated with familial partial lipodystrophy reduce or eliminate the function of their respective proteins, which impairs the development, structure, or function of adipocytes and makes the body unable to store and use fats properly. These abnormalities of adipose tissue alter hormone production and affect many of the body's organs. However, it is unclear why the changes cause fat to be lost in some parts of the body and stored abnormally in others.
In some people with familial partial lipodystrophy, no gene mutations have been found. Researchers are looking for additional genetic changes that can cause this disorder.
Learn more about the gene associated with Familial partial lipodystrophy
LMNA
Additional Information from NCBI Gene:
ADRA2A
AKT2
CIDEC
LIPE
PLIN1
PPARG
Inheritance
Most cases of familial partial lipodystrophy, including type 2, are inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases result from new mutations in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Rare cases of familial partial lipodystrophy appear to be inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Dunnigan-Kobberling syndrome
FPL
Kobberling-Dunnigan syndrome
Lipodystrophy, familial partial
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Familial partial lipodystrophy
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Familial partial lipodystrophy
Familial partial lipodystrophy, Dunnigan type
PPARG-related familial partial lipodystrophy
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2; FPLD2
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 3; FPLD3
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 1; FPLD1
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 6; FPLD6
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 4; FPLD4
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 5; FPLD5
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Bidault G, Vatier C, Capeau J, Vigouroux C, Bereziat V. LMNA-linked
lipodystrophies: from altered fat distribution to cellular alterations. Biochem
Soc Trans. 2011 Dec;39(6):1752-7. doi: 10.1042/BST20110675.
Citation on PubMed
Garg A, Agarwal AK. Lipodystrophies: disorders of adipose tissue biology.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jun;1791(6):507-13. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2008.12.014.
Epub 2009 Jan 7.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Garg A. Clinical review#: Lipodystrophies: genetic and acquired body fat
disorders. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Nov;96(11):3313-25. doi:
10.1210/jc.2011-1159. Epub 2011 Aug 24.
Citation on PubMed
Guenantin AC, Briand N, Bidault G, Afonso P, Bereziat V, Vatier C, Lascols O,
Caron-Debarle M, Capeau J, Vigouroux C. Nuclear envelope-related lipodystrophies.
Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2014 May;29:148-57. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2013.12.015. Epub
2013 Dec 30.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Coronary Artery Disease
Diabetes
Genetic Disorders
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Acanthosis nigricans
Chronic pancreatitis
Coronary heart disease
Genetics
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page