Alprostadil Urogenital: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Alprostadil Urogenital
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a695022.html
Alprostadil Urogenital
pronounced as (al pros' ta dil)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Alprostadil injection and suppositories are used to treat certain types of erectile dysfunction (impotence; inability to get or keep an erection) in men. Alprostadil injection is also sometimes used in combination with other tests to diagnose erectile dysfunction. Alprostadil is in a class of medications called vasodilators. It works by relaxing the muscles and blood vessels in the penis to keep enough blood in the penis so that an erection can occur.
Alprostadil does not cure erectile dysfunction or increase sexual desire. Alprostadil does not prevent pregnancy or the spread of sexually transmitted diseases such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
How should this medicine be used?
Alprostadil comes as a powder to be mixed with the liquid provided in the package and injected into the penis and as a urethral suppository (pellet to be placed into the urinary opening of the penis). Alprostadil is used as needed before sexual activity. An erection may occur within 5 to 20 minutes after using the injection and within 5 to 10 minutes after using the pellet. The erection should last approximately 30 to 60 minutes. Alprostadil injection should not be used more than three times per week, with at least 24 hours between uses. Alprostadil pellets should not be used more than twice in a 24-hour period. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use alprostadil exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will administer the first dose of alprostadil in his or her office to determine the proper dose for you. After you begin to use alprostadil at home, your doctor may gradually increase or decrease your dose. Tell your doctor if you do not experience satisfactory erections or if your erections last for too long, but do not change your dose without talking to your doctor.
You must be trained by your doctor before using alprostadil at home. Be sure that you understand exactly how to use alprostadil. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how to use your medication.
Needle breakage has occurred during administration of alprostadil To minimize the risk of this occurring, make sure you use the proper needle as instructed by your doctor or nurse. Make sure to always insert the appropriate needle perpendicular to the long axis of the penis.
Do not reuse needles, syringes, cartridges, vials, pellets, or applicators. Dispose of used needles and syringes in a puncture-resistant container. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to dispose of the container.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using alprostadil,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to alprostadil; other prostaglandin medications such as misoprostol (Cytotec, in Arthrotec), bimatoprost (Lumigan), latanoprost (Xalatan), and travoprost (Travatan); or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have ever been advised by a healthcare professional to avoid sexual activity for medical reasons and if you have or have ever had blood cell problems such as sickle cell anemia (a disease of the red blood cells), leukemia (cancer of the white blood cells), multiple myeloma (cancer of the plasma cells), thrombocythemia (condition in which too many platelets are produced),or polycythemia (condition in which too many red blood cells are produced); conditions affecting the shape of the penis (angulation, cavernosal fibrosis, or Peyronie's disease); a penile implant (device that is surgically placed inside the penis to treat erectile dysfunction); hypotension (low blood pressure), or heart failure. Also tell your doctor if you or any of your family members has ever had a blood clot in the legs or lungs and if you have recently undergone major surgery. Your doctor may tell you not to use alprostadil.
if you are using the alprostadil pellet, tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any narrowing, scarring, or swelling of the urinary opening of the penis or the tip of the penis. Your doctor will probably tell you not to use alprostadil pellets.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a bleeding disorder; a history of fainting; or kidney, liver, or lung disease.
tell your doctor if your partner is pregnant or plans to become pregnant. Do not use alprostadil pellets before sexual activity with a pregnant woman or a woman who may become pregnant without using a condom barrier.
you should know that alprostadil may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting. Do not drive a car or operate machinery after using alprostadil until you know how this medication affects you.
talk to your doctor about the use of alcohol during your treatment with alprostadil. Alcohol may decrease the effectiveness of this medication.
you should know that a small amount of bleeding may occur in the area where the medication was given. This can increase the risk of transmitting blood-borne diseases (conditions that are spread through contaminated blood) such as HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C between you and your partner. Tell your doctor if you or your partner has a blood-borne disease.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Alprostadil may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
bleeding or bruising in the place where you administered the medication
pain or aching in the penis, testicles, legs, or perineum (area between the penis and rectum)
warmth or burning sensation in the urinary opening of the penis
redness of the penis
dizziness
rash
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency treatment:
erection lasting more than 4 hours
redness, swelling, tenderness, or unusual curving of the erect penis
breakage of the needle in the penis
nodules or hard areas on the penis
fast heartbeat
fainting
swollen veins in the legs
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store alprostadil vials and cartridges at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Read the manufacturer's instructions for information about how long alprostadil solution may be stored after mixing and where it should be kept. Alprostadil pellets should be stored in the original package in the refrigerator, but may be kept at room temperature for up to 14 days before use. Do not expose the medication to high temperatures or place it in direct sunlight since this will make it ineffective.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
When traveling, do not store alprostadil in checked luggage or leave it in the car where it may be exposed to extreme temperatures. Store alprostadil pellets in a portable ice pack or cooler.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone uses too much alprostadil, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
fainting
dizziness
blurred vision
nausea
pain in the penis that does not go away
erection lasting longer than 6 hours
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. It is important to have regular follow-up visits with your doctor (e.g., every 3 months).
Do not let anyone else use your medication, needles, or syringes. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Caverject
®
Caverject Impulse
®
Edex
®
Muse
®
Other names
Prostaglandin E
1
(PGE
1
)
Last Revised -
02/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page