Ammonium Lactate Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ammonium Lactate Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617028.html
Ammonium Lactate Topical
pronounced as (a moe' nee um lak' tate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ammonium lactate is used to treat xerosis (dry or scaly skin) and ichthyosis vulgaris (an inherited dry skin condition) in adults and children. Ammonium lactate is in a class of medications called alpha-hydroxy acids. It works by increasing skin hydration.
How should this medicine be used?
Ammonium lactate comes as a cream and a lotion to apply to the skin. It is usually applied to the affected skin area twice daily. Apply ammonium lactate at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Apply ammonium lactate exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the lotion container well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
To use ammonium lactate topical, apply a small amount of cream or lotion to cover the affected area of skin and rub it in gently.
This medication is only for use on the skin. Keep ammonium lactate topical away from your eyes, mouth, and vaginal area, and do not swallow it.
If your skin condition becomes worse with treatment, contact your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using ammonium lactate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ammonium lactate, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ammonium lactate cream or lotion. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using ammonium lactate. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using ammonium lactate, call your doctor.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to natural or artificial sunlight to the affected skin area and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Ammonium lactate can cause your affected skin area to be sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra cream or lotion to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ammonium lactate topical may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stinging (especially on cracked or broken skin)
skin redness, burning, or itching
skin irritation (especially on the face)
skin peeling
rash
dry skin
Ammonium lactate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows ammonium lactate, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription. If you still have symptoms after you finish your cream or lotion, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lac-Hydrin
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
12/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page