Daratumumab Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Daratumumab Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616002.html
Daratumumab Injection
pronounced as (dar" a toom' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Daratumumab injection is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat multiple myeloma (a type of cancer of the bone marrow) in newly diagnosed people and in people who have not improved with treatment or who have improved after treatment with other medications but the condition returned. Daratumumab is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by helping the body to slow or stop the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Daratumumab comes as a liquid (solution) that is given intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a healthcare setting. Your doctor will decide how often you are to receive daratumumab based on other medications that may be given and your body's response to this medication.
A doctor or nurse will watch you closely while you are receiving the infusion and afterwards to be sure you are not having a serious reaction to the medication. You will be given other medications to help prevent and treat reactions to daratumumab prior to your infusion and for the first and second days after you receive your medication. Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms: cough, wheezing, throat tightness and irritation, itchy, runny, or stuffy nose, headache, itching, nausea, vomiting, fever, chills, rash, hives, dizziness, lightheadedness, difficulty breathing, chest discomfort, or shortness of breath.
Your doctor may decrease your dose of daratumumab or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with daratumumab.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving daratumumab injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to daratumumab, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in daratumumab injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the manufacturer's patient information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are receiving blood transfusions or if you have or have ever had shingles (a painful rash that occurs after infection with herpes zoster or chickenpox), breathing problems, hepatitis B (a virus that infects the liver and may cause severe liver damage), or a lung disease such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; a group of lung diseases, which includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with daratumumab and for at least 3 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about types of birth control that will work for you. If you become pregnant while receiving daratumumab injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving daratumumab injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive daratumumab, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Daratumumab injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
constipation
diarrhea
back or joint pain
pain in your arms, legs, or chest
decreased appetite
headache
swelling of the hands, ankles, or feet
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
muscle spasms
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the HOW section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment.
bruising or bleeding
fever
extreme tiredness
yellowing of the skin or eyes
Daratumumab injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to daratumumab injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving or received daratumumab injection. Daratumumab may affect the results of certain laboratory tests.
Daratumumab can affect blood matching test results for up to 6 months after your final dose. Before having a blood transfusion, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving or received daratumumab injection. Your doctor will do blood tests to match your blood type before you start treatment with daratumumab.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about daratumumab injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Darzalex
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page