Miglitol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Miglitol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601079.html
Miglitol
pronounced as (mig' li tol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Miglitol is used, alone or with other medications, to treat type 2 diabetes (condition in which the body does not use insulin normally and, therefore, cannot control the amount of sugar in the blood), particularly in people whose diabetes cannot be controlled by diet alone. It slows the breakdown and absorption of table sugar and other complex sugars in the small intestine. This process results in decreased blood sugar (hypoglycemia) levels following meals.
Over time, people who have diabetes and high blood sugar can develop serious or life-threatening complications, including heart disease, stroke, kidney problems, nerve damage, and eye problems. Taking medication(s), making lifestyle changes (e.g., diet, exercise, quitting smoking), and regularly checking your blood sugar may help to manage your diabetes and improve your health. This therapy may also decrease your chances of having a heart attack, stroke, or other diabetes-related complications such as kidney failure, nerve damage (numb, cold legs or feet; decreased sexual ability in men and women), eye problems, including changes or loss of vision, or gum disease. Your doctor and other healthcare providers will talk to you about the best way to manage your diabetes.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Miglitol comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken three times a day with the first bite of a meal. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take miglitol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking miglitol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to miglitol or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking miglitol. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription product may interact with miglitol: ranitidine (Zantac). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking miglitol. Do not start this medication while taking miglitol without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a chronic intestinal disease, inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal obstruction, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking miglitol, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Miglitol is used in combination with proper diet and exercise to control blood sugar. Skipping or delaying meals or exercising more than usual may cause your blood sugar to fall too low (hypoglycemia). Maintaining the diet and exercise program suggested by your doctor will ensure that the drug works properly.
Alcohol may cause a decrease in blood sugar. Ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking miglitol.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. Remember that miglitol should only be taken with a meal. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
When used in combination with insulin or other medications used to treat diabetes, miglitol may cause excessive lowering of blood sugar levels.
If you have any of the following symptoms, glucose products (Insta-Glucose or B-D Glucose tablets) should be used and you should call your doctor. Because miglitol blocks the breakdown of table sugar and other complex sugars, fruit juice or other products containing these sugars will not help to increase blood sugar. It is important that you and other members of your household understand this difference between miglitol and other medications used to treat diabetes.
shakiness
dizziness or lightheadedness
sweating
nervousness or irritability
sudden changes in behavior or mood
headache
numbness or tingling around the mouth
weakness
pale skin
hunger
clumsy or jerky movements
If hypoglycemia is not treated, severe symptoms may develop. Be sure that your family, friends, and other people who spend time with you know that if you have any of the following symptoms, they should get medical treatment for you immediately.
confusion
seizures
loss of consciousness
Call your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms of hyperglycemia (high blood sugar):
extreme thirst
frequent urination
extreme hunger
weakness
blurred vision
If high blood sugar is not treated, a serious, life-threatening condition called diabetic ketoacidosis could develop. Call your doctor immediately if you have any of these symptoms:
dry mouth
upset stomach and vomiting
shortness of breath
breath that smells fruity
decreased consciousness
Miglitol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
gas
diarrhea
stomach pain
skin rash
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood sugar should be checked regularly to determine your response to miglitol. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to miglitol. Your doctor will also tell you how to check your response to this medication by measuring your blood or urine sugar levels at home. Follow these instructions carefully.
You should always wear a diabetic identification bracelet to be sure you get proper treatment in an emergency.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Glyset
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page