Cerebral folate transport deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Cerebral folate transport deficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cerebral-folate-transport-deficiency/
Cerebral folate transport deficiency
Description
Cerebral folate transport deficiency is a disorder that develops from a shortage (deficiency) of the B-vitamin folate (also called vitamin B9) in the brain. Affected children have normal development during infancy, but around age 2 they begin to lose previously acquired mental and movement abilities (psychomotor regression). They develop intellectual disability, speech difficulties, and recurrent seizures (epilepsy). Movement problems such as tremors and difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia) can be severe, and some affected individuals need wheelchair assistance. Affected individuals have leukodystrophy, which is a loss of a type of brain tissue known as white matter. White matter consists of
nerve fibers
covered by a fatty substance called myelin that promotes the rapid transmission of nerve impulses. Leukodystrophy contributes to the neurological problems that occur in cerebral folate transport deficiency. Without treatment, these neurological problems worsen over time.
Frequency
The prevalence of cerebral folate transport deficiency is unknown. Fewer than 20 affected individuals have been described in the scientific literature.
Causes
Mutations in the
FOLR1
gene cause cerebral folate transport deficiency. The
FOLR1
gene provides instructions for making a protein called folate receptor alpha. This protein is found within the
cell membrane
where it attaches (binds) to folate, allowing the vitamin to be brought into the cell. Folate receptor alpha is produced in largest amounts in the brain, specifically in an area of the brain called the choroid plexus. This region releases cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which surrounds and protects the brain and spinal cord. Folate receptor alpha is thought to play a major role in bringing folate from the bloodstream into brain cells. It transports folate across the choroid plexus and into the CSF, ultimately reaching the brain. In the brain, folate is needed for making
myelin
and chemical messengers called
neurotransmitters
. Both of these substances play essential roles in transmitting signals in the nervous system. Additionally, folate is involved in the production and repair of DNA, regulation of gene activity (expression), and protein production.
FOLR1
gene mutations result in a lack of protein or malfunctioning protein. As a result, folate from the bloodstream cannot be transported into the CSF. Without folate, many processes in the brain are impaired, leading to the neurological problems typical of cerebral folate transport deficiency.
The signs and symptoms of cerebral folate transport deficiency do not begin until late infancy because other mechanisms can compensate for this loss. For example, another protein called folate receptor beta is responsible for folate transport before birth and in early infancy.
Learn more about the gene associated with Cerebral folate transport deficiency
FOLR1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Cerebral folate deficiency
FOLR1 deficiency
Neurodegeneration due to cerebral folate transport deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Cerebral folate transport deficiency
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Neurodegenerative syndrome due to cerebral folate transport deficiency
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
NEURODEGENERATION DUE TO CEREBRAL FOLATE TRANSPORT DEFICIENCY; NCFTD
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Cario H, Bode H, Debatin KM, Opladen T, Schwarz K. Congenital null mutations
of the FOLR1 gene: a progressive neurologic disease and its treatment. Neurology.
2009 Dec 15;73(24):2127-9. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c679df. No abstract
available.
Citation on PubMed
Grapp M, Just IA, Linnankivi T, Wolf P, Lucke T, Hausler M, Gartner J,
Steinfeld R. Molecular characterization of folate receptor 1 mutations delineates
cerebral folate transport deficiency. Brain. 2012 Jul;135(Pt 7):2022-31. doi:
10.1093/brain/aws122. Epub 2012 May 13.
Citation on PubMed
Grapp M, Wrede A, Schweizer M, Huwel S, Galla HJ, Snaidero N, Simons M,
Buckers J, Low PS, Urlaub H, Gartner J, Steinfeld R. Choroid plexus transcytosis
and exosome shuttling deliver folate into brain parenchyma. Nat Commun.
2013;4:2123. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3123.
Citation on PubMed
Hyland K, Shoffner J, Heales SJ. Cerebral folate deficiency. J Inherit Metab
Dis. 2010 Oct;33(5):563-70. doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9159-6. Epub 2010 Jul 29.
Citation on PubMed
Perez-Duenas B, Ormazabal A, Toma C, Torrico B, Cormand B, Serrano M, Sierra
C, De Grandis E, Marfa MP, Garcia-Cazorla A, Campistol J, Pascual JM, Artuch R.
Cerebral folate deficiency syndromes in childhood: clinical, analytical, and
etiologic aspects. Arch Neurol. 2011 May;68(5):615-21. doi:
10.1001/archneurol.2011.80.
Citation on PubMed
Perez-Duenas B, Toma C, Ormazabal A, Muchart J, Sanmarti F, Bombau G, Serrano
M, Garcia-Cazorla A, Cormand B, Artuch R. Progressive ataxia and myoclonic
epilepsy in a patient with a homozygous mutation in the FOLR1 gene. J Inherit
Metab Dis. 2010 Dec;33(6):795-802. doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9196-1. Epub 2010 Sep
21.
Citation on PubMed
Steinfeld R, Grapp M, Kraetzner R, Dreha-Kulaczewski S, Helms G, Dechent P,
Wevers R, Grosso S, Gartner J. Folate receptor alpha defect causes cerebral
folate transport deficiency: a treatable neurodegenerative disorder associated
with disturbed myelin metabolism. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Sep;85(3):354-63. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.08.005.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Toelle SP, Wille D, Schmitt B, Scheer I, Thony B, Plecko B. Sensory
stimulus-sensitive drop attacks and basal ganglia calcification: new findings in
a patient with FOLR1 deficiency. Epileptic Disord. 2014 Mar;16(1):88-92. doi:
10.1684/epd.2014.0629.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Developmental Disabilities
Folic Acid
Genetic Disorders
Leukodystrophies
Speech and Language Problems in Children
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Folate deficiency
Folic acid - test
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page