Tapinarof Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tapinarof Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622049.html
Tapinarof Topical
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Topical tapinarof is used to treat plaque psoriasis (a skin disease in which red, scaly patches form on some areas of the body) and atopic dermatitis (a skin condition that causes dry, itchy, andinflammed skin). Tapinarof is in a class of medications called aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonists. It is not known exactly how topical tapinarof works to treat plaque psoriasis and atopic dermatitis.
How should this medicine be used?
Tapinarof comes as a cream to apply to the skin. Apply once a day. Use tapinarof at around the same time every day.
Use tapinarof exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The cream is only for use on the skin. Be careful not to get tapinarof cream in your eyes, mouth, or vagina.
Apply a thin layer of topical tapinarof to all affected areas of your skin. Wash your hands with soap and water to remove any leftover tapinarof. Do not wash your hands if you are treating them with topical tapinarof.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using topical tapinarof,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal or topical products you are taking or plan to take while using tapinarof cream. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using topical tapinarof, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra topical tapinarof to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Topical tapinarof may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
red bumps or pimples around hair follicles
rash, irritated, itching, burning, or stinging skin
nose or throat pain
stuffy or runny nose
headache
Topical tapinarof may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vtama
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page