Darunavir and Cobicistat: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Darunavir and Cobicistat
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622003.html
Darunavir and Cobicistat
pronounced as (da roon' a veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of darunavir and cobicistat is used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Darunavir is in a class of medications called protease inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood. Cobicistat is in a class of medications called pharmacokinetic boosters. It works by increasing the amount of darunavir in the body so that it can have an increased effect.
Although darunavir does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Taking these medications and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of giving the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Darunavir and cobicistat comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take with food one time a day. Take darunavir and cobicistat at around the same time every day.
Take darunavir and cobicistat exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Darunavir and cobicistat controls HIV but does not cure it. Darunavir and cobicistat does not treat HIV infection alone. It is important that all of the medications prescribed by your doctor to treat HIV infection are taken together so that the medications will continue to work to control the infection. Continue to take darunavir and cobicistat even if you feel well. Do not stop taking darunavir and cobicistat without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking darunavir and cobicistat or skip doses, your condition may become more difficult to treat.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking darunavir and cobicistat,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with darunavir and cobicistat. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with darunavir and cobicistat. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting darunavir and cobicistat with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking darunavir and cobicistat, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following herbal product may interact with darunavir and cobicistat: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking darunavir and cobicistat. Do not start this medication while taking darunavir and cobicistat without discussing with your healthcare provider.
If you are taking didanosine, take darunavir and cobicistat 2 hours before or 1 hour after you take the medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes or high blood sugar, hemophilia (a condition in which the blood does not clot normally) or any other bleeding disorder, an infection that does not go away or that comes and goes such as cytomegalovirus (CMV; a viral infection that may cause symptoms in patients with weak immune systems), mycobacterium avium complex disease (MAC; a bacterial infection that may cause serious symptoms in people with AIDS), pneumonia, or tuberculosis (TB; a type of lung infection, hepatitis or any other liver disease, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking darunavir and cobicistat, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are taking darunavir and cobicistat.
you should know that darunavir and cobicistat may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, and injections). Talk to your doctor about methods of birth control that will work for you while you are taking darunavir and cobicistat.
you should know that you may experience hyperglycemia (increases in your blood sugar) while you are taking this medication, even if you do not already have diabetes. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking darunavir and cobicistat: extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, or weakness. It is very important to call your doctor as soon as you have any of these symptoms, because high blood sugar that is not treated can cause a serious condition called ketoacidosis. Ketoacidosis may become life-threatening if it is not treated at an early stage. Symptoms of ketoacidosis include: dry mouth, nausea and vomiting, shortness of breath, breath that smells fruity, and decreased consciousness.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections. If you have new or worsening symptoms at anytime during your treatment with darunavir and cobicistat, be sure to tell your doctor.
you should know that your body fat may increase or move to different areas of your body such as your breasts, upper back, neck, chest, and stomach area. Loss of fat from the legs, arms, and face can also happen.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Darunavir and cobicistat may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
diarrhea
nausea, vomiting
nausea
abdominal pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
vomiting, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, yellowing of skin or eyes, dark-colored urine, light-colored bowel movements
pain with urination, blood in urine, decreased urination
If you develop a severe rash with any of the following symptoms, stop taking darunavir and cobicistat and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, general ill feeling or 'flu-like' symptoms, muscle or joint aches, red or swollen eyes, blisters or peeling skin, mouth sores, swelling of your face or neck
Darunavir and cobicistat may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will/may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to darunavir and cobicistat.
Keep a supply of darunavir and cobicistat on hand. Do not wait until you run out of medication to refill your prescription.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Prezcobix
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page