Rezafungin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rezafungin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623021.html
Rezafungin Injection
pronounced as (re" za fun' jin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rezafungin is used in adults to treat yeast infections in the blood that cannot be treated successfully with other medications. Rezafungin is in a class of antifungal medications called echinocandins. It works by slowing the growth of fungi that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Rezafungin comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into the vein) by a doctor or a nurse at a healthcare facility. It is usually given once a week.
Continue to receive rezafungin as long as your doctor recommends it, even if you start to feel better. If you stop receiving rezafungin too soon or miss doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the fungus may become resistant to antibiotics.
If you miss a scheduled appointment to receive rezafungin, call to reschedule immediately. If you are able to get the missed dose within 3 days of schedule date, then you can resume your usual schedule. However, if more than 3 days have passed, then your dosing schedule will need to be revised.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving rezafungin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rezafungin, any echinocandins such as caspofungin, micafungin or anidulafungin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in rezafungin injection. Ask your pharmacist [or check the Medication Guide] for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking rezafungin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking rezafungin, call your doctor. For males, tell your doctor if you plan to get your partner pregnant. Rezafungin may cause a decrease in sperm count making it more difficult to obtain pregnancy. However, this does not mean you should not still use effective birth control to prevent pregnancy as it still may be possible to obtain pregnancy.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Rezafungin may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rezafungin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea or vomiting
abdominal pain
constipation
fever
fatigue
weakness
tremors
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
swelling of face, tongue, throat or lips
chest tightness
flushing
itching
lower abdominal pain, yellowing of skin or eyes, dark urine, abdominal swelling, or pale stool color
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will/may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to rezafungin.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Rezzayo
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page