Lorcaserin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lorcaserin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613014.html
Lorcaserin
pronounced as (lor ka' ser in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Lorcaserin is no longer available in the US. If you are currently using lorcaserin, you should stop taking it immediately and call your doctor to discuss switching to another treatment to promote and maintain weight loss. In clinical studies, more people taking lorcaserin developed cancer than those who were not taking this medication. For more information please see
http://bit.ly/3b0fpt5
.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lorcaserin is used to help adults who are obese or who are overweight and have weight-related medical problems to lose weight and keep from gaining back that weight. Lorcaserin must be used along with a reduced calorie diet and an exercise plan. Lorcaserin is in a class of medications called serotonin receptor agonists. It works by increasing feelings of fullness so that less food is eaten.
How should this medicine be used?
Lorcaserin comes as a tablet and as an extended-release (long-acting) tablet to take by mouth. The tablets are usually taken with or without food twice a day. The extended-release tablets are usually taken with or without food once a day. Take lorcaserin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take lorcaserin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the extended-release tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Lorcaserin may be habit forming. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or take it for a longer period of time than prescribed by your doctor.
If you do not lose a certain amount of weight during the first 12 weeks of your treatment, it is not likely that you will benefit from taking lorcaserin. Your doctor may tell you to stop taking lorcaserin if you do not lose enough weight during the first 12 weeks of your treatment.
Lorcaserin will help control your weight only if you continue to take it. Do not stop taking lorcaserin without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking lorcaserin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lorcaserin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in lorcaserin tablets or extended-release tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the patient information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications and vitamins you are taking or plan to take while taking lorcaserin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with lorcaserin: St. John's wort; tryptophan; supplements for weight loss. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking lorcaserin. Do not start any of these medications while taking lorcaserin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take lorcaserin. If you become pregnant while taking lorcaserin, call your doctor immediately. Lorcaserin may harm your unborn baby.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had blood cell problems such as sickle cell anemia (a disease of the red blood cells), multiple myeloma (cancer of the plasma cells), or leukemia (cancer of the white blood cells); a condition that affects the shape of the penis such as angulation, cavernosal fibrosis, or Peyronie's disease; diabetes; heart failure, slow or irregular heartbeat, or other heart problems; or liver or kidney disease.
do not breastfeed while taking lorcaserin.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking lorcaserin.
you should know that lorcaserin may cause drowsiness and difficulty paying attention or remembering information. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lorcaserin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
dry mouth
excessive tiredness
pain in the back or muscles
headache
dizziness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
anxiety
difficult, painful, or frequent urination
cough
toothache
blurred vision or other vision changes
dry eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
agitation
confusion
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that are not there)
difficulty with coordination
muscle spasms, stiffness, or twitching
restlessness
fast, slow, or irregular heartbeat
sweating
fever
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
difficulty breathing
swelling of the hands, arms, feet, or legs
difficulty paying attention or remembering information
depression
thinking about harming or killing yourself or planning or trying to do so
feeling high or unusually happy
feeling as though you are outside of your body
erection that lasts longer than 4 hours
discharge from the breast
breast enlargement in males
Lorcaserin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
headache
nausea
stomach pain
dizziness
feeling high or unusually happy
mood changes
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to lorcaserin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Lorcaserin is a controlled substance. Prescriptions may be refilled only a limited number of times; ask your pharmacist if you have any questions.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Belviq
®
Belviq
®
XR
Last Revised -
04/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page