Daclatasvir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Daclatasvir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615044.html
Daclatasvir
pronounced as (dak lat' as vir)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Daclastasvir is no longer available in the United States.
IMPORTANT WARNING:
You may already be infected with hepatitis B (a virus that infects the liver and may cause severe liver damage) but not have any symptoms of the disease. In this case, taking daclatasvir may increase the risk that your infection will become more serious or life-threatening and you will develop symptoms. Tell your doctor if you have or ever had a hepatitis B virus infection. Your doctor will order a blood test to see if you have or have ever had hepatitis B infection. Your doctor will also monitor you for signs of hepatitis B infection during and for several months after your treatment. If necessary, your doctor may give you medication to treat this infection before and during your treatment with daclatasvir. If you experience any of the following symptoms during or after your treatment, call your doctor immediately: excessive tiredness, yellowing of the skin or eyes, loss of appetite, nausea or vomiting, pale stools, stomach pain, or dark urine.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain tests before, during, and after your treatment to check your body's response to daclatasvir.
Talk to your doctor about the risk(s) of taking daclatasvir.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Daclatasvir is used along with another medication (sofosbuvir [Solvadi]) to treat a certain type of chronic hepatitis C (an ongoing viral infection that damages the liver). Daclatasvir is in a class of antiviral medications called hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5A inhibitors. It works by stopping the virus that causes hepatitis C from spreading inside the body. It is not known if daclatasvir prevents the spread of hepatitis C to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Daclatasvir comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day. Daclatasvir must be taken in combination with sofosbuvir, usually for 12 weeks. Take daclatasvir at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take daclatasvir exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Continue to take daclatasvir even if you feel well. Do not stop taking daclatasvir or sofosbuvir without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking daclatasvir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to daclatasvir, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in daclatasvir tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with daclatasvir. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with daclatasvir. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting daclatasvir with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking daclatasvir, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following herbal product may interact with daclatasvir: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking daclatasvir. Do not start this medication while taking daclatasvir without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have had a liver transplant, any type of liver disease other than hepatitis C, or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking daclatasvir, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you remember the missed dose on the day that you were supposed to take it, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it on that day. However, if you do not remember the missed dose until the next day, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take two doses on the same day.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Daclatasvir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you are also taking amiodarone and you experience any of these symptoms or those in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
near fainting or fainting
dizziness or lightheadedness
weakness or not feeling well
shortness of breath
chest pain
memory problems
confusion
Daclatasvir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Daklinza
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page