Protriptyline: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Protriptyline
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604025.html
Protriptyline
pronounced as (proe trip' ti leen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
A small number of children, teenagers, and young adults (up to 24 years of age) who took antidepressants ('mood elevators') such as protriptyline during clinical studies became suicidal (thinking about harming or killing oneself or planning or trying to do so). Children, teenagers, and young adults who take antidepressants to treat depression or other mental illnesses may be more likely to become suicidal than children, teenagers, and young adults who do not take antidepressants to treat these conditions. However, experts are not sure about how great this risk is and how much it should be considered in deciding whether a child or teenager should take an antidepressant. Children younger than 18 years of age should not normally take protriptyline, but in some cases, a doctor may decide that protriptyline is the best medication to treat a child's condition.
You should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways when you take protriptyline or other antidepressants even if you are an adult over age 24. You may become suicidal, especially at the beginning of your treatment and any time that your dose is increased or decreased. You, your family, or your caregiver should call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: new or worsening depression; thinking about harming or killing yourself, or planning or trying to do so; extreme worry; agitation; panic attacks; difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep; aggressive behavior; irritability; acting without thinking; severe restlessness; and frenzied abnormal excitement. Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor when you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
Your healthcare provider will want to see you often while you are taking protriptyline, especially at the beginning of your treatment. Be sure to keep all appointments for office visits with your doctor.
The doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with protriptyline. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You also can obtain the Medication Guide from the FDA website:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/InformationbyDrugClass/UCM096273
.
No matter what your age, before you take an antidepressant, you, your parent, or your caregiver should talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of treating your condition with an antidepressant or with other treatments. You should also talk about the risks and benefits of not treating your condition. You should know that having depression or another mental illness greatly increases the risk that you will become suicidal. This risk is higher if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had bipolar disorder (mood that changes from depressed to abnormally excited) or mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood) or has thought about or attempted suicide. Talk to your doctor about your condition, symptoms, and personal and family medical history. You and your doctor will decide what type of treatment is right for you.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Protriptyline is used to treat depression. Protriptyline is in a class of medications called tricyclic antidepressants. It works by increasing the amounts of certain natural substances in the brain that help maintain mental balance.
How should this medicine be used?
Protriptyline comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken three or four times a day. Take protriptyline at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take protriptyline exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of protriptyline and gradually increase your dose. Your doctor may decrease your dose after your condition is controlled.
Protriptyline controls depression but does not cure it. Continue to take protriptyline even if you feel well. Do not stop taking protriptyline without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop taking protriptyline, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as nausea, headache, and lack of energy.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking protriptyline,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to protriptyline or any other medications.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: cisapride (Propulsid) (not available in the U.S.) or monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors such as isocarboxazid (Marplan); phenelzine (Nardil), selegiline (Eldepryl, Emsam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate).
some medications should not be taken with protriptyline. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with protriptyline. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting protriptyline with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking protripyline, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription product may interact with protriptyline: cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking protriptyline. Do not start any of these medications while taking protriptyline without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have recently had a heart attack. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take protriptyline.
tell your doctor if you drink large amounts of alcohol; if you are undergoing electroshock therapy (procedure in which small electric shocks are administered to the brain to treat certain mental illnesses); or if you have or have ever had an enlarged prostate (a male reproductive organ), difficulty urinating, mental illness, seizures, hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid gland), or diabetes.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking protriptyline, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking protriptyline if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take protriptyline because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking protriptyline.
you should know that protriptyline may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Protriptyline may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that protriptyline may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking protriptyline. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that protriptyline may cause angle-closure glaucoma (a condition where the fluid is suddenly blocked and unable to flow out of the eye causing a quick, severe increase in eye pressure which may lead to a loss of vision). Talk to your doctor about having an eye examination before you start taking this medication. If you have nausea, eye pain, changes in vision, such as seeing colored rings around lights, and swelling or redness in or around the eye, call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment right away.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Protriptyline may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
loss of appetite
weight changes
unusual taste in the mouth
stomach pain or cramps
heartburn
dry mouth
constipation
drowsiness
dizziness
nightmares
headaches
frequent urination, especially at night
difficulty urinating
wide pupils
changes in sex drive or ability
breast enlargement in men and women
unsteadiness
ringing in ears
hair loss
flushing
sweating
black tongue
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING or SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS sections, call your doctor immediately:
slow or difficult speech
weakness or numbness of an arm or a leg
crushing chest pain
rapid, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
rash or hives
itching
swelling of the face or tongue
yellowing of the skin or eyes
jaw, neck, and back muscle spasms
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
fainting
difficulty walking
unusual bleeding or bruising
seizures
confusion
hallucination (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
believing things that are not true
fever
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
Protriptyline may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
irregular heartbeat
loss of consciousness
fainting
seizures
confusion
problems concentrating
hallucination (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
agitation
drowsiness
stiff muscles
vomiting
fever
cold body temperature
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vivactil
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page