Vemurafenib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Vemurafenib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a612009.html
Vemurafenib
pronounced as (vem'' ue raf' e nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Vemurafenib is used to treat certain types of melanoma (a type of skin cancer) that cannot be treated with surgery or that has spread to other parts of the body. It is also used to treat a certain type of Erdheim-Chester disease (ECD; a disease that causes an overproduction of a type of white blood cells). Vemurafenib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of an abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps slow or stop the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Vemurafenib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food twice a day, in the morning and evening, about 12 hours apart. Take vemurafenib at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take vemurafenib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor. Do not stop taking vemurafenib without talking to your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with a glass of water; do not chew or crush them.
If you vomit after you take vemurafenib, do not immediately take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may need to temporarily or permanently stop your treatment or decrease your dose of vemurafenib during your treatment.This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with vemurafenib.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with vemurafenib and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking vemurafenib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to vemurafenib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in vemurafenib tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking vemurafenib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with vemurafenib: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking vemurafenib. Do not start this medication while taking vemurafenib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any type of skin cancer; a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death); heart failure; a low level of calcium, magnesium, or potassium in your blood; heart, kidney, or liver disease. Also, tell your doctor if you have had or are planning to receive radiation therapy.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should not become pregnant while you are taking vemurafenib. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with vemurafenib and for 2 weeks after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant while taking vemurafenib, call your doctor. Vemurafenib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while taking vemurafenib and for 2 weeks after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking vemurafenib.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, lip balm and sunscreen (SPF 30 or higher). Vemurafenib may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is within 4 hours of your next scheduled dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Vemurafenib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
joint, muscle, arm, leg, or back pain
redness or swelling in hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
change in sense of taste
headache
hair loss
dry or itchy skin
diarrhea
constipation
cough
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
changes in skin appearance
new wart
skin sore or red bump that bleeds or does not heal
change in size or color of a mole
extreme tiredness
unusual bruising or bleeding
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
eye sensitivity to light
eye redness or pain
vision changes
unusual thickening of palms of hands
tightening of the fingers inwards towards the palm
unusual thickening of soles of feet, that may be painful
If you experience any of the following symptoms of an allergic reaction or severe skin reaction, stop taking vemurafenib and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
difficulty breathing or swallowing
rapid, irregular, or pounding heartbeats
fainting
rash or redness all over the body
hives
peeling or blistering skin
fever
Vemurafenib may increase the risk that you will develop other cancers. Talk to your doctor about this risk.
Vemurafenib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to vemurafenib. Your doctor will check your skin before starting treatment, every 2 months during your treatment, and for up to 6 months after treatment.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zelboraf
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page