Bupivacaine Liposomal Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bupivacaine Liposomal Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625027.html
Bupivacaine Liposomal Injection
pronounced as ( bue piv′ a kane)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bupivacaine liposomal injection is used to manage pain after surgery. Bupivacaine is in a class of medications called local anesthetics. It works by blocking nerves from sending pain signals.
How should this medicine be used?
Bupivacaine liposomal injection comes as a suspension (liquid) to be injected by a healthcare provider. It is usually given at the time of surgery, either just before or at the end of the procedure.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving bupivacaine liposomal,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glucose-6- phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (an inherited disease that affects red blood cells); methemoglobinemia (a condition that affect how the red blood cells work to carry oxygen); or lung, liver, heart or blood vessel disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
if you are having another surgery within 96 hours, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you recently received bupivacaine liposomal injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bupivacaine liposomal may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, constipation
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
itching, redness, hives, swelling of the tongue and/or throat, difficulty breathing, fast heartbeat, fainting, excessive sweating, or fever
restlessness, anxiety, incoherent speech, lightheadedness, numbness and tingling of the mouth and lips, metallic taste, ringing in the ears, dizziness, blurred vision, tremors, twitching, depression, drowsiness, or seizures
pale, gray, or blue colored skin; headache; rapid heart rate; shortness of breath; lightheadedness; or fatigue
Bupivacine liposomal may cause a temporary loss of feeling or ability to move a part of your body that may last up to 5 days. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Bupivacine liposomal may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Exparel
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page