Hyaline fibromatosis syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Hyaline fibromatosis syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hyaline-fibromatosis-syndrome/
Hyaline fibromatosis syndrome
Description
Hyaline fibromatosis syndrome is a disorder in which a clear (hyaline) substance abnormally accumulates in body tissues. This disorder affects many areas of the body, including the skin, joints, bones, and internal organs. The severity of the signs and symptoms of hyaline fibromatosis syndrome fall along a spectrum. In more severe cases (previously diagnosed as infantile systemic hyalinosis), signs and symptoms are present at birth or begin within the first few months of life and can be life-threatening. In milder cases (previously diagnosed as juvenile hyaline fibromatosis), signs and symptoms begin in childhood and affect fewer body systems.
One of the main features of hyaline fibromatosis syndrome is the growth of noncancerous masses of tissue (nodules) under the skin, very commonly on the scalp. In more severely affected individuals, nodules also grow in the muscles and internal organs, causing pain and complications. Some severely affected individuals develop a condition called protein-losing enteropathy due to the formation of nodules in their intestines. This condition results in severe diarrhea, failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate, and general wasting and weight loss (cachexia).
Another common feature of hyaline fibromatosis syndrome is painful skin bumps that frequently appear on the hands, neck, scalp, ears, and nose. They can also develop in joint creases and the genital region. These skin bumps are described as white or pink and pearly. They may be large or small and often increase in number over time.
In some affected individuals, especially those with more severe signs and symptoms, the skin covering joints, such as the ankles, wrists, elbows, and finger joints, is unusually dark (hyperpigmented). Hyaline fibromatosis syndrome is also characterized by overgrowth of the gums (
gingival hypertrophy
), and some affected individuals have thickened skin.
Joint stiffness and pain are common in hyaline fibromatosis syndrome, and many affected individuals develop joint deformities called contractures that limit movement. By adulthood, some people with the condition require a wheelchair for mobility. Bone abnormalities can also occur in hyaline fibromatosis syndrome.
Although individuals with hyaline fibromatosis syndrome have severe physical limitations, mental development is typically normal. People with milder signs and symptoms live into adulthood, while the most severely affected individuals often do not survive beyond early childhood due to chronic diarrhea and recurrent infections.
Frequency
Hyaline fibromatosis syndrome is a rare condition. Its prevalence is unknown.
Causes
Hyaline fibromatosis syndrome is caused by mutations in a gene called
ANTXR2
. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found at the surface of many types of cells. The ANTXR2 protein is believed to interact with components of the extracellular matrix, which is the lattice of proteins and other molecules outside the cell. This matrix strengthens and supports connective tissues, such as skin, bone, cartilage, tendons, and ligaments. The ANTXR2 protein may play a role in the structure of the extracellular matrix. The nature of the hyaline substance that builds up in hyaline fibromatosis syndrome is unknown, but it likely contains extracellular matrix proteins, among other materials.
Mutations in the
ANTXR2
gene are thought to result in production of an ANTXR2 protein that is unable to get to the surface of cells or that has impaired ability to interact with extracellular matrix components. It is unclear what effect these mutations have in cells and tissues. Researchers suspect that gene mutations disrupt the formation of the extracellular matrix, allowing a hyaline substance to leak through and build up in various body tissues. Alternatively, the mutations could impair the breakdown of excess extracellular matrix proteins, which then accumulate in tissues and lead to the signs and symptoms of hyaline fibromatosis syndrome.
Researchers are unsure why the severity of hyaline fibromatosis syndrome varies among affected individuals. Some studies have indicated that the severity of the condition may be linked to where in the gene the mutation occurs.
Learn more about the gene associated with Hyaline fibromatosis syndrome
ANTXR2
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Inherited systemic hyalinosis
Molluscum fibrosum
Murray syndrome
Puretic syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Juvenile hyaline fibromatosis
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
HYALINE FIBROMATOSIS SYNDROME; HFS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Burgi J, Kunz B, Abrami L, Deuquet J, Piersigilli A, Scholl-Burgi S, Lausch E,
Unger S, Superti-Furga A, Bonaldo P, van der Goot FG. CMG2/ANTXR2 regulates
extracellular collagen VI which accumulates in hyaline fibromatosis syndrome. Nat
Commun. 2017 Jun 12;8:15861. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15861.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Denadai R, Raposo-Amaral CE, Bertola D, Kim C, Alonso N, Hart T, Han S,
Stelini RF, Buzzo CL, Raposo-Amaral CA, Hart PS. Identification of 2 novel ANTXR2
mutations in patients with hyaline fibromatosis syndrome and proposal of a
modified grading system. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Apr;158A(4):732-42. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.35228. Epub 2012 Mar 1.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Deuquet J, Abrami L, Difeo A, Ramirez MC, Martignetti JA, van der Goot FG.
Systemic hyalinosis mutations in the CMG2 ectodomain leading to loss of function
through retention in the endoplasmic reticulum. Hum Mutat. 2009 Apr;30(4):583-9.
doi: 10.1002/humu.20872.
Citation on PubMed
Deuquet J, Lausch E, Superti-Furga A, van der Goot FG. The dark sides of
capillary morphogenesis gene 2. EMBO J. 2012 Jan 4;31(1):3-13. doi:
10.1038/emboj.2011.442. Epub 2011 Dec 6.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
El-Kamah GY, Fong K, El-Ruby M, Afifi HH, Clements SE, Lai-Cheong JE, Amr K,
El-Darouti M, McGrath JA. Spectrum of mutations in the ANTXR2 (CMG2) gene in
infantile systemic hyalinosis and juvenile hyaline fibromatosis. Br J Dermatol.
2010 Jul;163(1):213-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09769.x. Epub 2010 Mar 17.
No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Tanaka K, Ebihara T, Kusubata M, Adachi E, Arai M, Kawaguchi N, Utsunomiya J,
Miki Y, Hiramoto M, Hattori S, Irie S. Abnormal collagen deposition in fibromas
from patient with juvenile hyaline fibromatosis. J Dermatol Sci. 2009
Sep;55(3):197-200. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2009.06.005. Epub 2009 Jul 9. No
abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Yan SE, Lemmin T, Salvi S, Lausch E, Superti-Furga A, Rokicki D, Dal Peraro M,
van der Goot FG. In-depth analysis of hyaline fibromatosis syndrome frameshift
mutations at the same site reveal the necessity of personalized therapy. Hum
Mutat. 2013 Jul;34(7):1005-17. doi: 10.1002/humu.22324. Epub 2013 Apr 19.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Connective Tissue Disorders
Genetic Disorders
Gum Disease
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Contracture deformity
Genetics
Protein-losing enteropathy
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page