Dapsone Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dapsone Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616045.html
Dapsone Topical
pronounced as (dap' sone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dapsone topical is used to treat acne in children, teenagers, and adults. Dapsone is in a class of medications called sulfone antibiotics. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of bacteria and to decrease inflammation.
How should this medicine be used?
Dapsone comes as a gel to apply to the skin. It is usually applied once (7.5% gel) or twice (5% gel) daily. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Apply dapsone exactly as directed. Do not apply more or less of it or apply it more often than prescribed by your doctor. Applying more dapsone or applying dapsone more often than recommended will not speed up or improve results, but it may irritate your skin.
It may take up to 12 weeks before you feel the full benefit of dapsone gel. If your acne does not improve after 12 weeks of treatment, call your doctor.
Be careful not to get dapsone gel in your eyes, nose, or mouth.
To use the dapsone gel, follow these steps: Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Gently wash the affected skin and pat dry with a soft towel. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to recommend a gentle cleanser.
If you are using the 5% gel product, use your fingers to spread a pea-sized amount as a thin layer of gel over the affected area. If you are using the 7.5% gel product, use your fingers to spread a pea-sized amount as a thin layer of gel over the face and any other affected areas.
Rub the gel in gently and completely. It may feel gritty and you may see particles in the gel.
Put the cap back on the gel tube and close it tightly.
Wash your hands immediately after applying the gel.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using dapsone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dapsone, sulfonamide-derived medications ('sulfa drugs'), or any of the ingredients in dapsone gel. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while using dapsone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with dapsone: St. John's wort; topical benzoyl peroxide; acetaminophen (Tylenol). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using dapsone. Do not start any of these medications while using dapsone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had hemolytic anemia (a condition with an abnormally low number of red blood cells), glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6PD) deficiency (an inherited blood disorder), or methemoglobinemia (a condition with defective red blood cells that are unable to carry oxygen to the tissues in the body).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using dapsone, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using dapsone.
tell your doctor if you use topical products containing benzoyl peroxide (in Duac, in Onexton; found in many topical acne products). Using benzoyl peroxide products with dapsone gel may cause your skin or facial hair to turn yellow or orange temporarily.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra gel to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dapsone topical may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
skin redness or burning
skin drying
skin oiliness and peeling
itching
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using dapsone and call your doctor immediately:
numbness, burning or tingling in the hands or feet
muscle weakness
grey-bluish color of lips, nails, or inside of mouth
back pain
shortness of breath
tiredness
weakness
dark brown urine
fever
yellow or pale skin
rash
swelling of the face, lips, or eyes
Dapsone topical may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze this medication.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If you or someone else swallows dapsone, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aczone
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page