Acyclovir Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Acyclovir Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619029.html
Acyclovir Ophthalmic
pronounced as (ay sye' kloe veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ophthalmic acyclovir is used to treat an infection of the eye caused by herpes simplex virus. Acyclovir is in a class of antiviral medications called synthetic nucleoside analogues. It works by stopping the spread of the herpes virus in the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic acyclovir comes as an eye ointment to apply to the eyes. It is usually applied five times a day (about every 3 hours while awake) until the eye heals, and then 3 times a day for another 7 days. Apply acyclovir eye ointment at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use acyclovir eye ointment exactly as directed. Your doctor will tell you when you can start using ophthalmic acyclovir 3 times a day. Do not use more or less of it, or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should expect your symptoms to improve during your treatment. Call your doctor if your symptoms get worse or do not go away, or if you develop other problems with your eyes during your treatment.
To use the eye ointment, follow these instructions:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Use a mirror or have someone else apply the ointment.
Avoid touching the tip of the tube against your eye or anything else. The ointment must be kept clean.
Tilt your head forward slightly.
Holding the tube between your thumb and index finger, place the tube as near as possible to your eyelid without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your cheek or nose.
With the index finger of your other hand, pull the lower lid of your eye down to form a pocket.
Place a 1 cm (about a 1/2 inch) strip of ointment into the pocket made by the lower lid and the eye.
Gently close your eyes and keep them closed for 1 to 2 minutes to allow the medication to be absorbed.
Replace and tighten the cap right away.
Wipe off any excess ointment from your eyelids and lashes with a clean tissue. Wash your hands again.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking acyclovir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to acyclovir, valacyclovir (Valtrex), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in acyclovir ophthalmic ointment. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using ophthlamic acyclovir, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra ointment to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ophthalmic acyclovir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye stinging
red, swollen, or itchy eyelids
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives, itching, rash, swelling of the eyes, face, lips, mouth, throat, or tongue
new or worsening red, watery eyes, eye sensitivity to light, blurred vision, or pain around the eye
Ophthalmic acyclovir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows acyclovir ophthalmic ointment, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Avaclyr
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page