Aluminum Hydroxide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aluminum Hydroxide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a699048.html
Aluminum Hydroxide
pronounced as (a loo' mi num) (hye drox' ide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Aluminum hydroxide is used for the relief of heartburn, sour stomach, and peptic ulcer pain and to promote the healing of peptic ulcers.
How should this medicine be used?
Aluminum hydroxide comes as a capsule, a tablet, and an oral liquid and suspension. The dose and frequency of use depend on the condition being treated. The suspension needs to be shaken well before administration. Follow the directions on the package or prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand.
Other uses for this medicine
Aluminum hydroxide is also used sometimes to decrease the amount of phosphate in the blood of patients with kidney disease. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this drug for your condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking aluminum hydroxide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to aluminum hydroxide or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking, especially allopurinol (Lopurin, Zyloprim), alprazolam (Xanax), chlordiazepoxide (Librium, Mitran, and others), chloroquine (Aralen), cimetidine (Tagamet), clonazepam (Klonopin), clorazepate, dexamethasone (Decadron and others), diazepam (Valium, Valrelease, and Zetran), diflunisal (Dolobid), digoxin (Lanoxin), ethambutol (Myambutol), famotidine (Pepcid), halazepam (Paxipam), hydrocortisone (Cortone, Hydrocortone), isoniazid (Laniazid, Nydrazid), levothyroxine (Levothroid, Levoxyl, Synthroid, and others), lorazepam (Ativan), methylprednisolone (Medrol), oxazepam (Serax), penicillamine (Cuprimine, Depen), prednisone (Deltasone, Orasone), products containing iron, tetracycline (Sumycin, Tetracap, and others), ticlopidine (Ticlid), and vitamins.
be aware that aluminum hydroxide may interfere with other medicines, making them less effective. Take your other medications 1 hour before or 2 hours after aluminum hydroxide.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had hypertension, heart or kidney disease, or gastrointestinal bleeding.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking aluminum hydroxide, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Aluminum hydroxide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
loss of appetite
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
confusion
unusual tiredness or discomfort
muscle weakness
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Do not use aluminum hydroxide for more than 2 weeks unless your doctor tells you to do so.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
AlternaGEL
®
Alu-Cap
®
Alu-Tab
®
Amphojel
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page