Midodrine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Midodrine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616030.html
Midodrine
pronounced as (mye' doe dreen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Midodrine may cause supine hypertension (high blood pressure that occurs when lying flat on your back). This medication should only be used by people whose low blood pressure severely limits their ability to perform daily activities and who could not be treated successfully with other therapies. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking dihydroergotamine (DHE, Migranal). Also tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking, including ephedrine, phenylephrine, phenylpropanolamine, and pseudoephedrine. Many nonprescription products contain these medications (e.g. diet pills and medications for cough and colds), so check labels carefully. If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop taking midodrine and call your doctor immediately: awareness of your heartbeat, pounding in your ears, headache, or blurred vision. After beginning treatment, your doctor may tell you to continue taking midodrine only if you have significant improvement in your symptoms. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling while taking this medication.
Keep all appointments with your doctor. You should have your blood pressure checked in the standing and lying flat positions before starting treatment and regularly while you are taking midodrine.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking midodrine.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Midodrine is used to treat orthostatic hypotension (sudden fall in blood pressure that occurs when a person assumes a standing position). Midodrine is in a class of medications called alpha-adrenergic agonists. It works by causing blood vessels to tighten, which increases blood pressure.
How should this medicine be used?
Midodrine comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken three times a day during the daytime hours (such as morning, midday, and late afternoon [before 6PM]) with doses spaced at least 3 hours apart. Take the last daily dose of midodrine before an evening meal and at least 4 hours before bedtime. Take midodrine at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take midodrine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Take midodrine during daytime hours when you need to be upright. Avoid taking a dose when you will be lying down for any length of time. Also talk to your doctor about how to position yourself when you are lying down. Your doctor may tell you to raise the head of your bed when resting or sleeping.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking midodrine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to midodrine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in midodrine tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking midodrine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with midodrine: cimetidine (Tagamet), randitine (Zantac); phenylephrine; pseudoephedrine. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking midodrine. Do not start any of these medications while taking midodrine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have difficulty urinating, pheochromocytoma (tumor on a small gland near the kidneys), hyperthyroidism (condition that occurs when the thyroid gland produces too much thyroid hormone) or heart or kidney disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take midodrine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, vision problems, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking midodrine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking midodrine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it, as long as it is at least 4 hours before your bedtime. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Midodrine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
numbness and tingling
scalp itching
goose bumps
chills
frequent urination
urgent need to urinate
difficulty urinating
rash
stomach pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, stop taking midodrine and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
slow heartbeat
dizziness
fainting
Midodrine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
awareness of your heartbeat
pounding in your ears
headache
blurred vision
goose bumps
cold sensation
difficulty urinating
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to midodrine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Orvaten
®
¶
Proamatine
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page