Nicotine Gum: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nicotine Gum
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a684056.html
Nicotine Gum
pronounced as (nik' oh teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nicotine chewing gum is used to help people stop smoking cigarettes. Nicotine chewing gum should be used together with a smoking cessation program, which may include support groups, counseling, or specific behavioral change techniques. Nicotine gum is in a class of medications called smoking cessation aids. It works by providing nicotine to your body to decrease the withdrawal symptoms experienced when smoking is stopped and as a substitute oral activity to reduce the urge to smoke.
How should this medicine be used?
Nicotine gum is used by mouth as a chewing gum and should not be swallowed. Follow the directions on your package label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use nicotine gum exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than directed on the package label or as recommended by your doctor.
If you smoke your first cigarette more than 30 minutes after waking up, use the 2-mg gum. People who smoke their first cigarette within 30 minutes of waking up should use the 4-mg gum. Nicotine gum may be used regularly by chewing one piece of gum every 1 to 2 hours for the first 6 weeks, followed by one piece every 2 to 4 hours for 3 weeks, and then one piece every 4 to 8 hours for 3 weeks. If you have strong or frequent cravings, you may chew a second piece within one hour. To improve your chances of quitting smoking, chew at least 9 pieces of nicotine gum each day for the first 6 weeks.
Chew nicotine gum slowly until you can taste the nicotine or feel a slight tingling in your mouth. Then stop chewing and place (park) the chewing gum between your cheek and gum. When the tingling is almost gone (about 1 minute), start chewing again; repeat this procedure for about 30 minutes. Avoid eating and drinking for 15 minutes before and during chewing of nicotine gum.
Do not chew nicotine gum too fast, do not chew more than one piece of gum at a time, and do not chew one piece too soon after another. Chewing one piece of gum after another continuously may cause hiccups, heartburn, nausea, or other side effects.
Do not chew more than 24 pieces a day.
You should stop using nicotine gum after 12 weeks of use. If you still feel the need to use nicotine gum after 12 weeks, talk to your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using nicotine gum,
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using nicotine gum. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a heart attack, heart disease, irregular heart rate, ulcers, diabetes, or high blood pressure not controlled by medication; if you are under 18 years of age; or if you are on a sodium-restricted diet.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using nicotine gum, stop using it and call your doctor.
do not smoke cigarettes or use other nicotine products while using nicotine gum because nicotine overdose can occur.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use 2 pieces of gum at once or one after the other to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop using nicotine gum and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
mouth, tooth, or jaw problems
dizziness
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
weakness
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
difficulty breathing
rash
blisters in the mouth
Nicotine gum may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children and pets. Wrap used pieces of nicotine gum in paper and throw them away in the trash. Store nicotine gum at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about nicotine gum.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nicorette
®
Gum
Thrive
®
Gum
Other names
nicotine polacrilex
Last Revised -
10/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page