How are genetic conditions treated or managed?: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Help Me Understand Genetics
→
Genetic Consultation
→
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/understanding/consult/treatment/
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Many genetic disorders result from gene changes that are present in essentially every cell in the body. As a result, these disorders often affect many body systems, and most cannot be cured. However, approaches may be available to treat or manage some of the associated signs and symptoms.
For a group of genetic conditions called inborn errors of metabolism, which result from genetic changes that disrupt the production of specific enzymes, treatments sometimes include dietary changes or replacement of the particular enzyme that is missing. Limiting certain substances in the diet can help prevent the buildup of potentially toxic substances that are normally broken down by the enzyme. In some cases, enzyme replacement therapy can help make up for the enzyme shortage. These treatments are used to manage existing signs and symptoms and may help prevent future complications. An example of an inborn error of metabolism is
phenylketonuria (PKU)
.
For other genetic conditions, treatment and management strategies are designed to improve particular signs and symptoms associated with the disorder. These approaches vary by disorder and are specific to an individual's health needs. For example, a genetic disorder associated with a heart defect might be treated with surgery to repair the defect or with a heart transplant. Conditions that are characterized by defective blood cell formation, such as
sickle cell disease
, can sometimes be treated with a bone marrow transplant. Bone marrow transplantation can allow the formation of normal blood cells and, if done early in life, may help prevent episodes of pain and other future complications.
Some genetic changes are associated with an increased risk of future health problems, such as certain forms of cancer. One well-known example is familial
breast cancer
related to mutations in the
BRCA1
and
BRCA2
genes. Management may include more frequent cancer screening or preventive (prophylactic) surgery to remove the tissues at highest risk of becoming cancerous.
Genetic disorders may cause such severe health problems that they are incompatible with life. In the most severe cases, these conditions may cause a miscarriage of an affected embryo or fetus. In other cases, affected infants may be stillborn or die shortly after birth. Although few treatments are available for these severe genetic conditions, health professionals can often provide supportive care, such as pain relief or mechanical breathing assistance, to the affected individual.
Most treatment strategies for genetic disorders do not alter the underlying genetic mutation; however, a few disorders have been treated with
gene therapy
. This experimental technique involves changing a person's genes to prevent or treat a disease. Gene therapy, along with many other treatment and management approaches for genetic conditions, are under study in clinical trials.
Find out more about the treatment and management of genetic conditions:
GeneReviews
, a resource from the University of Washington and the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), provides detailed information about the management of specific genetic disorders as part of each peer-reviewed disease description.
MedlinePlus provides additional information related to the treatment of genetic conditions:
Inborn Errors of Metabolism
Bone Marrow Transplantation
Palliative care
(also known as supportive care)
Gene Therapy
Precision Medicine
ClinicalTrials.gov
, a service of the National Institutes of Health, provides easy access to information on clinical trials. You can search for specific trials or browse by condition, trial sponsor, location, or treatment approach.
Topics in the Genetic Consultation chapter
What is a genetic consultation?
Why might someone have a genetic consultation?
What happens during a genetic consultation?
How can I find a genetics professional in my area?
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How are genetic conditions diagnosed?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Other chapters in Help Me Understand Genetics
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page