Bohring-Opitz syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Bohring-Opitz syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/bohring-opitz-syndrome/
Bohring-Opitz syndrome
Description
Bohring-Opitz syndrome is a rare condition that affects the development of many parts of the body.
Most individuals with Bohring-Opitz syndrome have profound to severe intellectual disability, developmental delay, and seizures. Most affected individuals have a normal head shape and size with no brain abnormalities; however, some have abnormal development of the head. Abnormal development can lead to a small head size (
microcephaly
) and a skull abnormality called
trigonocephaly
, which gives the forehead a pointed appearance. Structural brain abnormalities can occur with or without head abnormalities. For example, the fluid-filled spaces near the center of the brain (ventricles) may be usually large (ventriculomegaly) or the tissue that connects the left and right halves of the brain (the corpus callosum) can be abnormally thin.
Eye problems that can affect vision also occur in people with Bohring-Opitz syndrome. People with this disorder may have protruding eyes (exophthalmos), eyes that do not point in the same direction (strabismus), widely spaced eyes (
hypertelorism
), or outside corners of the eyes that point upward (
upslanting palpebral fissures
). Affected individuals may have severe
nearsightedness
(
high myopia
) or abnormalities in the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (
the retina
) or the nerves that carry information from the eyes to the brain (optic nerves).
Additional facial differences associated with Bohring-Opitz syndrome can include a flat nasal bridge, nostrils that open to the front rather than downward (
anteverted nares
), a high arch or opening in the roof of the mouth (
high arched
or
cleft palate
), a split in the upper lip (cleft lip), a small lower jaw (micrognathia), low-set ears that are rotated backward, a red birthmark (nevus simplex) on the face (usually the forehead), a low frontal hairline often with eyebrows that grow together in the middle (synophrys), and excessive body and facial hair (hirsutism) that increases with age.
Some individuals with Bohring-Opitz syndrome have poor growth before birth (intrauterine growth retardation). During infancy, they grow and gain weight slowly and often have severe feeding difficulties with recurrent vomiting.
People with this condition often have characteristic body positioning, known as
Bohring-Opitz syndrome posture
. This posture consists of slouching shoulders, bent elbows and wrists, hands positioned with the wrists or all of the fingers angled outward toward the fifth finger (
ulnar deviation
), with the legs usually extended straight. Affected individuals usually stop exhibiting the Bohring-Opitz syndrome posture as they get older. Other abnormalities include joint deformities (called contractures) that are apparent at birth in the knees, hips, or other joints and abnormal muscle tone. Affected individuals can have recurrent infections and heart, kidney, or genital abnormalities. In rare cases, a childhood form of kidney cancer known as
Wilms tumor
can develop.
Some individuals with Bohring-Opitz syndrome do not survive past early childhood, while others live into adolescence or early adulthood. The most common causes of death are heart problems, abnormalities of the throat and airways that cause pauses in breathing (obstructive apnea), and lung infections.
Frequency
Bohring-Opitz syndrome is thought to be a rare condition, although its exact prevalence is unknown. More than 40 affected individuals have been described in the scientific literature.
Causes
Bohring-Opitz syndrome is caused by mutations in the
ASXL1
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in a process known as chromatin remodeling.
Chromatin
is the complex of DNA and proteins that packages DNA into chromosomes. The structure of chromatin can be changed (remodeled) to alter how tightly DNA is packaged. Through its role in chromatin remodeling, the
ASXL1
gene regulates the activity (expression) of many genes, including a group of genes known as HOX genes, which play important roles in development before birth. The ASXL1 protein can turn on (activate) or turn off (repress) HOX genes depending on when they are needed.
ASXL1
gene mutations reduce the amount of functional ASXL1 protein available, which likely disrupts the regulation of the activity of HOX genes and other genes during development. Altered activity of these genes probably leads to the neurological and physical features of this condition.
Learn more about the gene associated with Bohring-Opitz syndrome
ASXL1
Inheritance
Bohring-Opitz syndrome is considered an
autosomal dominant
condition, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
Most cases of the condition result from new (de novo) mutations in the gene that occur during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. No one with Bohring-Opitz syndrome has been known to have children.
Very rarely, individuals with Bohring-Opitz syndrome inherit the altered gene from their unaffected mother, who has the mutation only in some cells, including egg cells, but not in others. This phenomenon is known as mosaicism.
Other Names for This Condition
Bohring syndrome
BOPS
BOS
C-like syndrome
Oberklaid-Danks syndrome
Opitz trigonocephaly-like syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Bohring-Opitz syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Bohring-Opitz syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
BOHRING-OPITZ SYNDROME; BOPS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Bedoukian E, Copenheaver D, Bale S, Deardorff M. Bohring-Opitz syndrome caused
by an ASXL1 mutation inherited from a germline mosaic mother. Am J Med Genet A.
2018 May;176(5):1249-1252. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38686.
Citation on PubMed
Bohring A, Oudesluijs GG, Grange DK, Zampino G, Thierry P. New cases of
Bohring-Opitz syndrome, update, and critical review of the literature. Am J Med
Genet A. 2006 Jun 15;140(12):1257-63. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31265.
Citation on PubMed
Hoischen A, van Bon BW, Rodriguez-Santiago B, Gilissen C, Vissers LE, de Vries
P, Janssen I, van Lier B, Hastings R, Smithson SF, Newbury-Ecob R, Kjaergaard S,
Goodship J, McGowan R, Bartholdi D, Rauch A, Peippo M, Cobben JM, Wieczorek D,
Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Veltman JA, Brunner HG, de Vries BB. De novo nonsense
mutations in ASXL1 cause Bohring-Opitz syndrome. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun
26;43(8):729-31. doi: 10.1038/ng.868.
Citation on PubMed
Magini P, Della Monica M, Uzielli ML, Mongelli P, Scarselli G, Gambineri E,
Scarano G, Seri M. Two novel patients with Bohring-Opitz syndrome caused by de
novo ASXL1 mutations. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Apr;158A(4):917-21. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.35265. Epub 2012 Mar 14.
Citation on PubMed
Russell B, Johnston JJ, Biesecker LG, Kramer N, Pickart A, Rhead W, Tan WH,
Brownstein CA, Kate Clarkson L, Dobson A, Rosenberg AZ, Vergano SA, Helm BM,
Harrison RE, Graham JM Jr. Clinical management of patients with ASXL1 mutations
and Bohring-Opitz syndrome, emphasizing the need for Wilms tumor surveillance. Am
J Med Genet A. 2015 Sep;167A(9):2122-31. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37131. Epub 2015 Apr
29.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Craniofacial Abnormalities
Developmental Disabilities
Eye Diseases
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Failure to thrive
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page