Cidofovir Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cidofovir Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a696037.html
Cidofovir Injection
pronounced as (si dof ' o veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Cidofovir injection can cause kidney damage. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease. Tell your doctor if you are taking or have recently taken any other medications that may cause kidney damage, some of which include amikacin, amphotericin B (Abelcet, Ambisome), foscarnet (Foscavir), gentamicin, pentamidine (Pentam 300), tobramycin, vancomycin (Vancocin), and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Naprosyn, Aleve). Your doctor will probably tell you not to use cidofovir injection if you are taking or using one or more of these medications.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before, during, after your treatment to check your response to cidofovir injection.
Cidofovir injection has caused birth defects and problems with sperm production in animals. This medication has not been studied in humans, but it is possible that it may also cause birth defects in babies whose mothers received cidofovir injection during pregnancy. You should not use cidofovir injection while you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant unless your doctor decides that this is the best treatment for your condition.
Cidofovir injection has caused tumors in laboratory animals.
Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using cidofovir injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cidofovir injection is used along with another medication (probenecid) to treat cytomegaloviral retinitis (CMV retinitis) in people with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Cidofovir is in a class of medications called antivirals. It works by slowing the growth of CMV.
How should this medicine be used?
Cidofovir injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. It is usually given once every 2 weeks. The length of treatment depends on your body's response to the medication.
You must take probenecid tablets by mouth with each dose of cidofovir. Take a dose of probenecid 3 hours before receiving cidofovir injection and again 2 and 8 hours after your infusion is completed. Take probenecid with food to reduce nausea and stomach upset. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how these medications should be taken together.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using cidofovir injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cidofovir, probenecid (Probalan, in Col-Probenecid), sulfa-containing medications, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in cidofovir injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with cidofovir injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with cidofovir injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before using cidofovir injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using cidofovir injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription products may interact with cidofovir injection: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using cidofovir injection. Do not start any of these medications while using cidofovir injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you are a female using cidofovir injection, you should use effective birth control while receiving cidofovir and for 1 month after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during and after your treatment. If you are a male using cidofovir and your partner can become pregnant, you should use a barrier method (condom or diaphragm with spermicide) while you are using cidofovir injection and for 3 months after your final dose. If you or your partner becomes pregnant while receiving cidofovir, call your doctor immediately.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Do not breastfeed if you are infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS or are using cidofovir.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cidofovir injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting
nausea
diarrhea
loss of appetite
headache
hair loss
sores on the lips, mouth, or throat
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
eye pain or redness
vision changes such as light sensitivity or blurred vision
fever, chills, or cough
shortness of breath
pale skin
Cidofovir injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your eye doctor. You should have regularly scheduled eye exams during your treatment with cidofovir injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about cidofovir injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vistide
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
11/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page