Rasburicase Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rasburicase Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a610008.html
Rasburicase Injection
pronounced as (ras bure' i kase)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Rasburicase injection may cause a severe or life-threatening allergic reaction. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor or nurse immediately: chest pain or tightness; shortness of breath; lightheadedness; faintness; ; hives; rash; itching; swelling of the lips, tongue, or throat; or difficulty breathing or swallowing. If you experience a severe allergic reaction, your doctor will stop your infusion immediately.
Rasburicase injection may cause serious blood problems. Tell your doctor if you have glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency (an inherited blood disease). Your doctor will probably tell you that you cannot receive rasburicase injection. Also tell your doctor if you are of African or Mediterranean descent. If you experience any of the following symptoms, contact your doctor immediately: headache;shortness of breath; lightheadedness; weakness; confusion; fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat; seizures; pale or blue-gray skin color; yellowing of the skin or eyes; chills; extreme tiredness; and dark urine.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving rasburicase injection.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving rasburicase injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rasburicase injection is used to treat high levels of uric acid (a natural substance that builds up in the blood as tumors break down) in people with certain types of cancer who are being treated with chemotherapy medications. Rasburicase injection is in a class of medications called enzymes. It works by breaking down uric acid so that the body can eliminate it.
How should this medicine be used?
Rasburicase injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid to be injected intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or clinic. It is usually given over a period of 30 minutes once a day for up to 5 days. This medication is given as a single course of treatment that will not be repeated.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving rasburicase injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rasburicase, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in rasburicase injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
in addition to the condition mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving rasburicase injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving rasburicase injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rasburicase may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
constipation
diarrhea
stomach pain
mouth sores
throat pain
fever
headache
anxiety
join pain
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
pain, redness, swelling, or tenderness at the injection site
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the symptoms listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately.
Rasburicase injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to rasburicase injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about rasburicase injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Elitek
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page