Aspirin Rectal: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aspirin Rectal
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621021.html
Aspirin Rectal
pronounced as (as' pir in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Aspirin rectal is used to reduce fever and to relieve mild to moderate pain from headaches, menstrual periods, arthritis, toothaches, and muscle aches. Aspirin is in a group of medications called salicylates. It works by stopping the production of certain natural substances that cause fever, pain, swelling, and blood clots.
How should this medicine be used?
Aspirin rectal comes as a suppository to use rectally. Aspirin rectal is available without a prescription, but your doctor may prescribe aspirin to treat certain conditions. Follow the directions on the package or prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand.
Ask a doctor before you give aspirin to your child or teenager. Aspirin may cause Reye's syndrome (a serious condition in which fat builds up on the brain, liver, and other body organs) in children and teenagers, especially if they have a virus such as chicken pox or the flu.
Many aspirin products also come in combination with other medications such as those to treat cough and cold symptoms. Check product labels carefully before using two or more products at the same time. These products may contain the same active ingredient(s) and taking or using them together could cause you to receive an overdose. This is especially important if you will be giving cough and cold medications to a child.
Stop using aspirin rectal and call your doctor if your fever lasts longer than 3 days, if your pain lasts longer than 10 days, or if the part of your body that was painful becomes red or swollen. You may have a condition that must be treated by a doctor.
To insert an aspirin suppository into the rectum, follow these steps:
Wash your hands.
Remove the wrapper.
Lie down on your left side and raise your right knee to your chest. (A left-handed person should lie on the right side and raise the left knee.)
Using your finger, insert the suppository into the rectum, about 1/2 to 1 inch (1.25 to 2.5 centimeters) in infants and children and 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) in adults. Hold it in place for a few moments.
Remain lying down for 5 minutes to prevent the suppository from coming out.
Wash your hands thoroughly and resume your normal activities.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using aspirin rectal,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to aspirin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in the product. Ask your pharmacist or check the label on the package for a list of ingredients.
Tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using aspirin rectal. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with aspirin: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using aspirin rectal. Do not start any of these medications while using aspirin rectal without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, frequent stuffed or runny nose, or nasal polyps (growths on the linings of the nose). If you have these conditions, there is a risk that you will have an allergic reaction to aspirin. Your doctor may tell you that you should not take aspirin.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease. Also, tell your doctor if you drink three or more alcoholic drinks every day.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. Do not use aspirin doses greater than 81 mg (e.g., 325 mg) around or after 20 weeks of pregnancy, unless told to do so by your doctor. If you become pregnant while using aspirin rectal, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using aspirin.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually used as needed. If your doctor has told you to use aspirin rectal regularly, use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Aspirin rectal may cause side effects.
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, stop using aspirin rectal and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical attention:
bloody vomit
vomit that looks like coffee grounds
bright red blood in stools
black or tarry stools
hives
rash
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat
wheezing or difficulty breathing
ringing in the ears
loss of hearing
Aspirin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store aspirin suppositories in a cool place or in a refrigerator.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
ringing in the ears
loss of hearing
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about aspirin rectal.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aspirin
Other names
Acetylsalicylic acid
ASA
Last Revised -
12/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page