Clindamycin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clindamycin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682399.html
Clindamycin
pronounced as (klin'' da mye' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Many antibiotics, including clindamycin, may cause overgrowth of dangerous bacteria in the large intestine. This may cause mild diarrhea or may cause a life-threatening condition called colitis (inflammation of the large intestine). Clindamycin is more likely to cause this type of infection than many other antibiotics, so it should only be used to treat serious infections that cannot be treated by other antibiotics. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had colitis or other conditions that affect your stomach or intestines.
You may develop these problems during your treatment or up to several months after your treatment has ended. Call your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms during your treatment with clindamycin or during the first several months after your treatment has finished: watery or bloody stools, diarrhea, stomach cramps, or fever.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking clindamycin.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Clindamycin is used to treat certain types of bacterial infections, including infections of the lungs, skin, blood, female reproductive organs, and internal organs. Clindamycin is in a class of medications called lincomycin antibiotics. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of bacteria.
Antibiotics such as clindamycin will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Clindamycin comes as a capsule and a solution (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken three to four times a day. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection you have and how well you respond to the medication. Take clindamycin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take clindamycin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Take the capsules with a full glass (6 to 8 ounces [180 to 240 mL]) of water so that the medication will not irritate your throat. Do not lie down for at least 30 minutes after you take clindamycin capsules; sit upright or stand upright until at least 30 minutes have passed.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with clindamycin. If your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse, call your doctor.
Take clindamycin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking clindamycin too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
Clindamycin is also sometimes used to treat acne and is used along with other medications to treat anthrax (a serious infection that may be deliberately spread as part of a terror attack) and malaria (a serious infection that is spread by mosquitoes in certain parts of the world). Clindamycin is also sometimes used to treat ear infections, tonsillitis (infection that causes swelling of the tonsils), pharyngitis (infection that causes swelling in the back of the throat), and toxoplasmosis (an infection that may cause serious problems in people who do not have healthy immune systems or in unborn babies whose mothers are infected) when these conditions cannot be treated with other medications. Clindamycin is also sometimes used to treat bacterial vaginosis (an infection caused from too much of certain bacteria in the vagina). Clindamycin is also sometimes used to prevent endocarditis (infection of the heart valves) in certain people who are at risk of developing this infection as a result of a dental procedure. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking clindamycin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to clindamycin, lincomycin (Lincocin), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in clindamycin capsules or solution. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients. If you will be taking clindamycin capsules, tell your doctor if you are allergic to aspirin or tartrazine (a yellow dye found in some medications).
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking clindamycin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, allergies, eczema (sensitive skin that often becomes itchy or irritated) or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking clindamycin, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Clindamycin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
unpleasant or metallic taste in the mouth
joint pain
thick, white vaginal discharge
burning, itching, and swelling of the vagina
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
peeling or blistering skin
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
hoarseness
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
yellowing of the skin or eyes
decreased urination
new or worsening heartburn
difficulty swallowing
pain when swallowing
Clindamycin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not refrigerate clindamycin liquid because it may thicken and become hard to pour. Dispose of any unused clindamycin liquid after 2 weeks.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to clindamycin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the clindamycin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cleocin
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page