Levothyroxine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Levothyroxine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682461.html
Levothyroxine
pronounced as (lee voe thye rox' een)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Levothyroxine (a thyroid hormone) should not be used alone or along with other treatments to treat obesity or cause weight loss.
Levothyroxine may cause serious or life-threatening problems when given in large doses, especially when taken with amphetamines such as amphetamine (Adzenys, Dyanavel XR, Evekeo), dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), and methamphetamine (Desoxyn). Tell your doctor if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking levothyroxine: chest pain, rapid or irregular heartbeat or pulse, uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body, nervousness, anxiety, irritability, difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep, shortness of breath, or excessive sweating.
Talk to your doctor about the potential risks associated with this medication.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Levothyroxine is used to treat hypothyroidism (condition where the thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroid hormone). It is also used with surgery and radioactive iodine therapy to treat thyroid cancer. Levothyroxine is in a class of medications called hormones. It works by replacing thyroid hormone that is normally produced by the body.
Without thyroid hormone, your body cannot function properly, which may result in poor growth, slow speech, lack of energy, excessive tiredness, constipation, weight gain, hair loss, dry, thick skin, increased sensitivity to cold, joint and muscle pain, heavy or irregular menstrual periods, and depression. When taken correctly, levothyroxine reverses these symptoms.
How should this medicine be used?
Levothyroxine comes as a tablet and a capsule to take by mouth. It usually is taken once a day on an empty stomach, 30 minutes to 1 hour before breakfast. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take levothyroxine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow capsules whole; do not chew or crush them. Do not remove the capsule from the package until you are ready to take it.
Take the tablets with a full glass of water as they may get stuck in your throat or cause choking or gagging.
If you are giving levothyroxine to an infant, child, or adult who cannot swallow the tablet, crush and mix it in 1 to 2 teaspoons (5 to 10 mL) of water. Only mix the crushed tablets with water; do not mix it with food or soybean infant formula. Give this mixture by spoon or dropper right away. Do not store it for later use.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of levothyroxine and gradually increase your dose.
Levothyroxine controls hypothyroidism but does not cure it. It may take several weeks before you notice a change in your symptoms. Continue to take levothyroxine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking levothyroxine without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking levothyroxine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to levothyroxine, thyroid hormone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in levothyroxine tablets or capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking levothyroxine. ; Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you take calcium carbonate (Tums) or ferrous sulfate (iron supplement), take it at least 4 hours before or 4 hours after you take levothyroxine. If you take cholestyramine (Prevalite), colesevelam (Welchol), colestipol (Colestid), sevelamer (Renvela, Renagel), or sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate), take it at least 4 hours after you take levothyroxine.
the following nonprescription products may interact with levothyroxine: proton pump inhibitors such as esomeprazole (Nexium), lansoprazole (Prevacid), and omeprazole (Prilosec); antacids; simethicone; salicylate pain relievers such as aspirin and aspirin-containing products, choline magnesium trisalicylate, choline salicylate (Arthropan), diflunisal (Dolobid), magnesium salicylate (Doan's, others), and salsalate (Argesic, Disalcid, Salgesic); niacin; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking levothyroxine. Do not start any of these medications while taking levothyroxine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have adrenal insufficiency (condition in which the adrenal glands do not produce enough of certain hormones needed for important body functions). Your doctor may tell you not to take levothyroxine.
tell your doctor if you have recently received radiation therapy or if you have or have ever had diabetes; hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis); bleeding problems or anemia; porphyria (condition in which abnormal substances build up in the blood and cause problems with the skin or nervous system); osteoporosis (a condition in which the bones become thin and weak and break easily); pituitary gland (a small gland in the brain) disorders; any condition that makes it difficult for you to swallow; or kidney, heart, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking levothyroxine, call your doctor.
if you have surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking levothyroxine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Some foods and beverages, particularly those that contain soybeans, walnuts, and dietary fiber, may affect how levothyroxine works for you. Talk to your doctor before eating or drinking these foods.
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Levothyroxine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
weight gain or loss
headache
vomiting
diarrhea
changes in appetite
fever
changes in menstrual cycle
sensitivity to heat
hair loss
joint pain
leg cramps
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience either of the following symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
shortness of breath, wheezing, hives, itching, rash, flushing, stomach pain, nausea, or swelling of hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
chest pain
rapid or irregular heartbeat or pulse
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
nervousness
anxiety
irritability
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
shortness of breath
excessive sweating
confusion
loss of consciousness
seizure
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to levothyroxine.
Learn the brand name and generic name of your medication. Do not switch brands without talking to your doctor or pharmacist, as each brand of levothyroxine contains a slightly different amount of medication.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Levothroid
®
¶
Levo-T
®
Levoxyl
®
Synthroid
®
Tirosint
®
Unithroid
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page