Tobramycin Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tobramycin Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682660.html
Tobramycin Ophthalmic
pronounced as (toe bra mye' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ophthalmic tobramycin is used to treat eye infections. Tobramycin is in a class of medications called antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria that cause infections.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic tobramycin comes as as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eyes and as an eye ointment to apply to the eyes. The eye drops are usually applied every 4 to 8 hours and the ointment is usually applied two to four times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use tobramycin eye drops or ointment exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
If you are to use more than one drop in the same eye, wait at least 5 minutes before instilling the next drop.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
To use the eye ointment, follow these instructions:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Use a mirror or have someone else apply the ointment.
Avoid touching the tip of the tube against your eye or anything else. The ointment must be kept clean.
Tilt your head forward slightly.
Holding the tube between your thumb and index finger, place the tube as near as possible to your eyelid without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your cheek or nose.
With the index finger of your other hand, pull the lower lid of your eye down to form a pocket.
Place a small amount of ointment into the pocket made by the lower lid and the eye. A 1/2-inch (1.25-centimeter) strip of ointment usually is enough unless otherwise directed by your doctor.
Look downward, then gently close your eyes and keep them closed for 1 to 2 minutes to allow the medication to be absorbed.
Replace and tighten the cap right away.
Wipe off any excess ointment from your eyelids and lashes with a clean tissue. Wash your hands again.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using tobramycin eye drops or eye ointment,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tobramycin, other antibiotics, or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using tobramycin eye drops or eye ointment, call your doctor immediately.
you should know that your vision may be blurred during your treatment with tobramycin eye ointment. Avoid rubbing your eyes even if your vision is blurred. Do not drive a car or operate machinery if you are unable to see clearly.
tell your doctor if you wear soft contact lenses. You should not wear contact lenses if you have any eye infection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill or apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill or apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tobramycin eye drops or ointment may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
eye tearing
itching, stinging, or burning of the eye
swelling of the eye
temporary blurred vision (from the ointment)
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the tobramycin eye drops or ointment, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
AK-Tob
®
Tobrex
®
Brand names of combination products
TobraDex
®
(containing Dexamethasone, Tobramycin)
Tobraflex
®
(containing Fluorometholone, Tobramycin)
§
Tobrasone
®
(containing Fluorometholone, Tobramycin)
¶
Zylet
®
(containing Loteprednol, Tobramycin)
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
§
These products are not currently approved by the FDA for safety, effectiveness, and quality. Federal law generally requires that prescription drugs in the U.S. be shown to be both safe and effective prior to marketing. Please see the FDA website for more information on unapproved drugs (
https://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/Transparency/Basics/ucm213030.htm
) and the approval process (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/ucm054420.htm
).
Last Revised -
08/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page