Left ventricular noncompaction: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Left ventricular noncompaction
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/left-ventricular-noncompaction/
Left ventricular noncompaction
Description
Left ventricular noncompaction is a heart (cardiac) muscle disorder that occurs when the lower left chamber of the heart (left ventricle), which helps the heart pump blood, does not develop correctly. Instead of the muscle being smooth and firm, the cardiac muscle in the left ventricle is thick and appears spongy. The abnormal cardiac muscle is weak and has an impaired ability to pump blood because it either cannot completely contract or it cannot completely relax. For the heart to pump blood normally, cardiac muscle must contract and relax fully.
Some individuals with left ventricular noncompaction experience no symptoms at all; others have heart problems that can include sudden cardiac death. Additional signs and symptoms include abnormal blood clots, irregular heart rhythm (arrhythmia), a sensation of fluttering or pounding in the chest (palpitations), extreme fatigue during exercise (exercise intolerance), shortness of breath (dyspnea), fainting (syncope), swelling of the legs (lymphedema), and trouble laying down flat. Some affected individuals have features of other heart defects. Left ventricular noncompaction can be diagnosed at any age, from birth to late adulthood. Approximately two-thirds of individuals with left ventricular noncompaction develop heart failure.
Frequency
Left ventricular noncompaction is estimated to affect 8 to 12 per 1 million individuals per year. However, the condition is likely more common than this estimate because individuals who do not have any related signs or symptoms may not come to medical attention.
Causes
Variants (also known as mutations) in several genes have been found to cause left ventricular noncompaction. Variants in the
MYH7
and
MYBPC3
genes have been estimated to cause up to 30 percent of cases; variants in other genes are each responsible for a small percentage of cases. However, the cause of the condition is often unknown.
Most of the genes associated with left ventricular noncompaction, including
MYH7
and
MYBPC3
, provide instructions for making proteins that play a role in the function of structures within muscle fibers called
sarcomeres
. These structures are necessary for muscles to tense (contract). Regular contractions of
cardiac muscle
pump blood to the rest of the body. Other genes associated with left ventricular noncompaction are involved in certain signaling pathways, the formation and maintenance of the structural framework (cytoskeleton) of cardiac muscle cells, or regulation of the electrical signals that control the heartbeat.
It is unclear how genetic variants cause left ventricular noncompaction. Normally, during development before birth, cardiac muscle gets condensed (compacted), becoming smooth and firm. Variants in certain genes likely lead to changes in this process. As a result, the left ventricular cardiac muscle is not compacted but is thick and spongy, leading to left ventricular noncompaction.
Left ventricular noncompaction can also be part of syndromes that affect multiple parts of the body. When left ventricular noncompaction is part of a syndrome, it is caused by variants in the gene involved in that syndrome. Additionally, left ventricular noncompaction has been found to develop in a small percentage of women during their first pregnancy. In these women, the cause of the condition is unknown but may be influenced by the increased stress that pregnancy puts on the cardiac muscle. In some cases, the cardiac muscle returns to normal following pregnancy and in other cases, the affected women have the varied signs and symptoms of left ventricular noncompaction throughout their lives.
Learn more about the genes associated with Left ventricular noncompaction
HCN4
LDB3
LMNA
MYBPC3
MYH7
SCN5A
TAFAZZIN
TNNT2
Additional Information from NCBI Gene:
ACTC1
DTNA
MIB1
PRDM16
TPM1
Inheritance
Left ventricular noncompaction can have different inheritance patterns.
In most cases, including when the condition is caused by variants in the
MYH7
or
MYBPC3
gene, left ventricular noncompaction is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In most cases, an affected person inherits the variant from
one affected parent
. Other cases result from
new variants in the gene
and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Other cases of left ventricular noncompaction are inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have variants. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Left ventricular noncompaction can also be inherited in an
X-linked recessive pattern
. Some genes associated with this condition (such as the
TAFAZZIN
gene) are located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two
sex chromosomes
. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a variant would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
Other Names for This Condition
Fetal myocardium
Honeycomb myocardium
Hypertrabeculation syndrome
Isolated noncompaction of the ventricular myocardium
Left ventricular hypertrabeculation
Left ventricular myocardial noncompaction cardiomyopathy
Left ventricular non-compaction
LVHT
LVNC
Non-compaction of the left ventricular myocardium
Noncompaction cardiomyopathy
Spongy myocardium
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Dilated cardiomyopathy 1D
Genetic Testing Registry: Left ventricular noncompaction
Genetic Testing Registry: Left ventricular noncompaction 1
Genetic Testing Registry: Left ventricular noncompaction 10
Genetic Testing Registry: Left ventricular noncompaction 7
Genetic Testing Registry: Left ventricular noncompaction 8
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Left ventricular noncompaction
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1C, WITH OR WITHOUT LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION; CMD1C
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1D; CMD1D
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 1; LVNC1
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 2; LVNC2
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1Y; CMD1Y
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 8; LVNC8
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 10; LVNC10
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1R; CMD1R
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1S; CMD1S
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 7; LVNC7
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Bennett CE, Freudenberger R. The Current Approach to Diagnosis and Management
of Left Ventricular Noncompaction Cardiomyopathy: Review of the Literature.
Cardiol Res Pract. 2016;2016:5172308. doi: 10.1155/2016/5172308. Epub 2016 Jan
11.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Dong X, Fan P, Tian T, Yang Y, Xiao Y, Yang K, Liu Y, Zhou X. Recent
advancements in the molecular genetics of left ventricular noncompaction
cardiomyopathy. Clin Chim Acta. 2017 Feb;465:40-44. doi:
10.1016/j.cca.2016.12.013. Epub 2016 Dec 15.
Citation on PubMed
Finsterer J, Stollberger C, Towbin JA. Left ventricular noncompaction
cardiomyopathy: cardiac, neuromuscular, and genetic factors. Nat Rev Cardiol.
2017 Apr;14(4):224-237. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2016.207. Epub 2017 Jan 12.
Citation on PubMed
Towbin JA, Lorts A, Jefferies JL. Left ventricular non-compaction
cardiomyopathy. Lancet. 2015 Aug 22;386(9995):813-25. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61282-4. Epub 2015 Apr 9.
Citation on PubMed
Wang C, Takasaki A, Watanabe Ozawa S, Nakaoka H, Okabe M, Miyao N, Saito K,
Ibuki K, Hirono K, Yoshimura N, Yu X, Ichida F. Long-Term Prognosis of Patients
With Left Ventricular Noncompaction　- Comparison Between Infantile and Juvenile
Types. Circ J. 2017 Apr 25;81(5):694-700. doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-16-1114. Epub
2017 Feb 2.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Cardiomyopathy
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page