Potassium Chloride Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Potassium Chloride Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625021.html
Potassium Chloride Injection
pronounced as ( poe tas′ ee um klor′ ide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Why is this medication prescribed?
Potassium chloride is used to prevent or treat low levels of potassium in the body. Potassium chloride is in a class of medications called electrolytes. It works by to provide potassium to the body to maintain fluid and electrolyte balance.
How should this medicine be used?
Potassium chloride injection comes as a solution (liquid). It is mixed in a larger amount of solution and given into a vein by a healthcare provider. It will be given in an amount depending on your condition.
Your doctor will monitor potassium levels in your blood and increase or decrease your dose as needed.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving potassium chloride,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving potassium chloride. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have high levels of potassium in your blood or kidney disease. Your doctor may decide not to give you potassium chloride.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Potassium chloride may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms tell your doctor immediately:
redness, pain, and swelling at the site of injection
weakness; confusion; tingling, numbness, or burning in the arms and legs; irregular heartbeat
Potassium chloride may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to potassium chloride.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page