Metolazone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Metolazone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682345.html
Metolazone
pronounced as (me tol' a zone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Metolazone, is used to reduce the swelling and fluid retention caused by heart failure or kidney disease. It also is used alone or with other medications to treat high blood pressure. Metolazone is in a class of medications called diuretics ('water pills'). It causes the kidneys to reduce the amount of water and salt in the body by increasing the amount of urine.
How should this medicine be used?
Metolazone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day. Take metolazone at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take metolazone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of metolazone and gradually increase your dose, depending on your response to this medication.
Metolazone controls high blood pressure but does not cure it. Continue to take metolazone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking metolazone without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking metolazone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to metolazone, sulfa drugs, thiazides, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in metolazone tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking metolazone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with metolazone: aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking metolazone. Do not start any of these medications while taking metolazone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have kidney or liver failure. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take metolazone.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, gout, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE, a chronic inflammatory condition), or parathyroid, heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking metolazone, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking metolazone.
you should know that metolazone may make you dizzy or drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking metolazone. Alcohol can make the side effects from metolazone worse.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Metolazone may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
you should know that metolazone may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking metolazone. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Follow your doctor's directions. they may include a daily exercise program and a low-sodium or low-salt diet, potassium supplements, and increased amounts of potassium-rich foods (e.g., bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice) in your diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Metolazone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
weakness
restlessness
headache
muscle cramps
joint pain or swelling
constipation
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
dry mouth, dark urine, decreased sweating, dry skin, and other signs of dehydration
chest pain
rapid, irregular, or pounding heartbeats
hives
rash
itching
blistering or peeling skin
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty swallowing or breathing
sore throat with fever
unusual bleeding or bruising
upset stomach
extreme tiredness
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
flu-like symptoms
Metolazone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
dizziness
drowsiness
fainting
slow or difficult breathing
upset stomach
coma
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to metolazone.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking metolazone.
Learn the brand name of your medication. Do not switch brands without talking to your doctor or pharmacist, as different brands of metolazone may work differently in the body.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mykrox
®
¶
Zaroxolyn
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page