Pamidronate Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pamidronate Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601163.html
Pamidronate Injection
pronounced as (pa mi droe' nate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pamidronate is used to treat high levels of calcium in the blood that may be caused by certain types of cancer. Pamidronate is also used along with cancer chemotherapy to treat bone damage caused by multiple myeloma (cancer that begins in the plasma cells [a type of white blood cell that produces substances needed to fight infection]) or by breast cancer that has spread to the bones. Pamidronate is also used to treat Paget's disease (a condition in which the bones are soft and weak and may be deformed, painful, or easily broken). Pamidronate injection is in a class of medications called bisphosphonates. It works by slowing bone breakdown, increasing bone density (thickness) and decreasing the amount of calcium released from the bones into the blood.
How should this medicine be used?
Pamidronate injection comes as a solution (liquid) to inject into a vein slowly, over 2 to 24 hours. It is usually injected by a health care provider in a doctor's office, hospital, or clinic. It may be given once every 3 to 4 weeks, once a day for 3 days in a row, or as a single dose that may be repeated after 1 week or longer. The treatment schedule depends on your condition.
Your doctor may recommend a calcium supplement and a multivitamin containing vitamin D to take during your treatment. You should take these supplements every day as directed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving pamidronate injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pamidronate injection, alendronate (Fosamax), etidronate (Didronel), risedronate (Actonel), tiludronate (Skelid), zoledronic acid (Zometa), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pamidronate injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving pamidronate injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
tell your doctor if you are being treated with radiation therapy and if you have or have ever had thyroid surgery, seizures, or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should use a reliable method of birth control to prevent pregnancy while you are receiving pamidronate. If you become pregnant while receiving pamidronate, call your doctor immediately. Talk to your doctor if you plan to become pregnant at any time in the future because pamidronate may remain in your body for years after you stop using it.
you should know that pamidronate may cause serious problems with your jaw, especially if you have dental surgery or treatment while you are taking the medication. A dentist should examine your teeth and perform any needed treatments before you start to receive pamidronate. Be sure to brush your teeth and clean your mouth properly while you are receiving pamidronate. Talk to your doctor before having any dental treatments while you are receiving this medication.
you should know that pamidronate injection may cause severe bone, muscle, or joint pain. You may begin to feel this pain within days, months, or years after you first receive pamidronate injection. Although this type of pain may begin after you have received pamidronate injection for some time, it is important for you and your doctor to realize that it may be caused by pamidronate. Call your doctor right away if you experience severe pain at any time during your treatment with pamidronate inejction. Your doctor may stop giving you pamidronate injection and your pain may go away after you stop treatment with this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Call your doctor if you miss a dose of pamidronate or an appointment to receive a dose of pamidronate.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pamidronate injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
redness, swelling, or pain in the injection spot
stomach pain
loss of appetite
constipation
nausea
vomiting
heartburn
change in ability to taste food
sores in the mouth
fever
headache
dizziness
excessive tiredness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
coughing
difficulty urinating or painful urination
swelling of the hands, arms, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
painful or swollen gums
loosening of the teeth
numbness or heavy feeling in the jaw
poor healing of the jaw
vomit that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds
bloody or black and tarry stools
shortness of breath
fast heartbeat
fainting
sudden tightening of muscles
numbness or tingling around the mouth
eye pain or tearing
Pamidronate injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
If you are administering this medication at home, your health care provider will tell you how to store it. Follow these instructions carefully.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
fever
change in ability to taste food
sudden tightening of the muscles
numbness or tingling around the mouth
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to pamidronate injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aredia
®
Other names
ADP Sodium
AHPrBP Sodium
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page