Sofosbuvir, Velpatasvir, and Voxilaprevir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sofosbuvir, Velpatasvir, and Voxilaprevir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617037.html
Sofosbuvir, Velpatasvir, and Voxilaprevir
pronounced as (soe fos' bue vir) (vel pat' as vir) (vox" i la' pre vir)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
You may already be infected with hepatitis B (a virus that infects the liver and may cause severe liver damage), but not have any symptoms of the disease. In this case, taking the combination of sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir may increase the risk that your infection will become more serious or life-threatening and you will develop symptoms. Tell your doctor if you have or ever had a hepatitis B virus infection. Your doctor will order a blood test to see if you have or have ever had hepatitis B infection. Your doctor will also monitor you for signs of hepatitis B infection during and for several months after your treatment. If necessary, your doctor may give you medication to treat this infection before and during your treatment with the combination of sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir. If you experience any of the following symptoms during or after your treatment, call your doctor immediately: excessive tiredness, yellowing of the skin or eyes, loss of appetite, nausea or vomiting, pale stools, pain in upper right side of the stomach area, or dark urine.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before, during, and after your treatment to check your body's response to the combination of sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir.
Talk to your doctor about the risk(s) of taking sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir.
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir is used to treat chronic (long-term) hepatitis C infection (swelling of the liver caused by a virus) in adults who have already received other HCV treatments. Sofosbuvir is a non-nucleoside NS5B polymerase inhibitor. It works by decreasing the amount of hepatitis C virus in the body. Velpatasvir is a hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5A inhibitor. It works by stopping the virus that causes hepatitis C from spreading inside the body. Voxilaprevir is in a class of medications called HCV NS3/4A protease inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HCV in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with food once daily for 12 weeks. Take sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Continue to take sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir even if you feel well. The length of your treatment depends on your condition, how well you respond to the medication, and whether you experience severe side effects. Do not stop taking sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in the combination of sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane, in Rifamate, in Rifater). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir if you are taking rifampin.
some medications should not be taken with sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir . Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
if you are taking aluminum or magnesium containing antacids (Maalox, Mylanta), take them 4 hours before or 4 hours after sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir.
the following herbal product may interact with sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir. Do not start this mediation while taking sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any type of liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose with food as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
fatigue
diarrhea
weakness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
depression
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
rash
sleepiness
confusion
swelling of stomach area
vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds
dark, black, or bloody stools
Sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vosevi
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page