Miconazole Buccal: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Miconazole Buccal
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618060.html
Miconazole Buccal
pronounced as (mi kon' a zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Buccal miconazole is used to treat yeast infections of the mouth and throat in adults and children 16 years of age and older. Miconazole buccal is in a class of medications called imidazoles. It works by stopping the growth of fungi that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Buccal miconazole comes as a tablet to apply to the upper gum of the mouth. It is usually applied once a day in the morning, after you brush your teeth, for 14 days. Use buccal miconazole at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use miconazole exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Do not swallow, chew, or crush the tablet.
You may eat and drink while the tablet is in place.
To use buccal miconazole, follow these steps:
Find the area on the upper gum above your left and right incisor teeth (the teeth just to the left and right of your two front teeth). Alternate placement between the right and left side of the mouth, each time a tablet is used.
With dry hands, remove one tablet from the bottle.
Gently apply the rounded side of the tablet to the upper gum area as high as it will go on your gum above one of your incisor teeth.
Hold the tablet in place for 30 seconds by gently pressing on the outside of the upper lip over the tablet.
If the tablet does not stick to your gum or it sticks to your cheek or the inside of your lip, reposition it to stick to your gum.
Leave the tablet in place until it dissolves.
Clear away any remaining tablet material before applying your next tablet.
Do not interfere with the placement of the tablet. Check to see if the tablet is still in place after eating, drinking, rinsing your mouth, or brushing your teeth. Avoid the following while you are using miconazole buccal.
Do not touch or press on the tablet once it has been applied.
Do not wear upper dentures.
Do not vigorously rinse your mouth.
Do not hit the tablet when brushing your teeth.
Do not chew gum when the tablet is in place.
If the tablet comes off within the first 6 hours of application, reapply the same tablet. If it still will not stick, then apply a new tablet. If you accidentally swallow the tablet within the first 6 hours of application, drink a glass of water and place a new tablet on your gum. If the tablet falls off or is swallowed 6 or more hours after application, do not apply a new tablet until your next regular time.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using buccal miconazole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to miconazole, milk protein concentrate, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in buccal miconazole. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using buccal miconazole. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using buccal miconazole, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Miconazole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
headache
nausea
vomiting
upper stomach pain
change in or loss of taste
dry mouth
toothache
cough
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using miconazole and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes
swelling or pain where medication was applied
Miconazole buccal may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the buccal miconazole, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Oravig
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page