Oxybutynin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Oxybutynin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682141.html
Oxybutynin
pronounced as (ox i byoo' ti nin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Oxybutynin is used to treat overactive bladder (a bladder condition that causes sudden urges to urinate that may be hard to control) and to control bladder muscles weakened in certain nerve conditions. Oxybutynin is in a class of medications called anticholinergics/antimuscarinics. It works by relaxing the bladder muscles.
How should this medicine be used?
Oxybutynin comes as a tablet, a syrup, and an extended-release (long-acting) tablet to take by mouth. Take the tablets and syrup two to four times a day. Take the extended-release tablet with or without food once a day. Take oxybutynin at around the same time(s) every day.
Take oxybutynin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the extended-release tablets whole with plenty of water or other liquid. Do not split, chew, or crush the extended-release tablets. Tell your doctor if you or your child cannot swallow tablets.
Use a dose-measuring spoon or cup to measure the correct amount of liquid for each dose, not a household spoon.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of oxybutynin and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every week.
Oxybutynin may control your symptoms but will not cure your condition. Continue to take oxybutynin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking oxybutynin without talking to your doctor.
You may notice some improvement in your symptoms within the first 2 weeks of your treatment. However, it may take 6–8 weeks to experience the full benefit of oxybutynin. Talk to your doctor if your symptoms do not improve within 8 weeks.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking oxybutynin,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking oxybutynin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had narrow angle glaucoma (a serious eye condition that may cause vision loss), any condition that stops your bladder from emptying completely, or any condition that causes your stomach to empty slowly or incompletely. Your doctor may tell you not to take oxybutynin.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the large intestine and rectum; gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD; condition in which stomach acid flows back up into the esophagus and cause pain); hiatal hernia (condition in which a part of the stomach pushes up into the chest); hyperthyroidism (condition where the body makes too much thyroid hormone); myasthenia gravis (a nerve problem that makes muscles weak); Parkinson's disease; dementia; fast or irregular heartbeat; high blood pressure; benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH, enlargement of the prostate); or heart, liver, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking oxybutynin, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking oxybutynin tablets or syrup if you are 65 year of age or older. Older adults should not usually take oxybutynin tablets or syrup because they are not as safe and may not be as effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking oxybutynin.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy or cause blurred vision. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
talk to your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are taking this medication. Alcohol can make the side effects from oxybutynin worse.
you should know that oxybutynin may make it harder for your body to cool down. Avoid extreme heat, and call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment if you have fever or other signs of heat stroke such as dizziness, nausea, headache, confusion, and fast pulse after being in the heat.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Oxybutynin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth, eyes, nose or skin
blurred vision
stomach pain, constipation, diarrhea, nausea, heartburn, gas
change in ability to taste food
headache
dizziness, weakness, confusion
sleepiness or difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
nervousness
flushing
swelling of the hands, arms, feet, ankles, or lower legs
back or joint pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, hives and/or swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat
hoarseness, difficulty breathing or swallowing
frequent, urgent, or painful urination
fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
Oxybutynin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
restlessness, irritability, agitation, uncontrollable shaking of a part of your body, seizure
memory loss, confusion or hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist), coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
flushing
fever
irregular heartbeat
vomiting
difficulty urinating
slowed or difficult breathing
wide pupils (black circles in the centers of the eyes)
dry skin
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
If you are taking the extended-release tablet, you may notice something that looks like a tablet in your stool. This is just the empty tablet shell and does not mean that you did not get your complete dose of medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ditropan
®
¶
Ditropan
®
XL
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page