CLCN2-related leukoencephalopathy: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
CLCN2-related leukoencephalopathy
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/clcn2-related-leukoencephalopathy/
CLCN2-related leukoencephalopathy
Description
CLCN2
-related leukoencephalopathy is a disorder that affects the brain. People with this condition have neurological problems that become apparent anytime from childhood to adulthood; the problems generally do not worsen much over time. Most affected individuals have difficulty with coordination and balance (ataxia) but can walk without support, and many have frequent headaches. Individuals diagnosed in childhood usually also have learning disabilities, while those whose symptoms begin in adulthood typically also have vision problems. These vision problems are due to breakdown of the light-sensing tissue at the back of the eyes (retinopathy) or degeneration (atrophy) of
the optic nerves
, which carry information from the eyes to the brain. Some affected individuals have mild muscle stiffness (spasticity). Affected males are unable to father children (infertile).
Rarely, affected individuals have dizziness (vertigo), ringing in the ears (tinnitus), hearing loss, episodes of abnormal movements (paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia), or psychiatric disorders. However, it is unclear whether these are features of
CLCN2
-related leukoencephalopathy or coincidental findings.
The neurological problems in
CLCN2
-related leukoencephalopathy are caused by abnormalities in the brain. People with this condition have leukoencephalopathy, an abnormality of the brain's white matter that can be detected with medical imaging. White matter consists of nerve fibers covered by a fatty substance called
myelin
. Myelin insulates nerve fibers and promotes the rapid transmission of nerve impulses. In affected individuals, the myelin becomes fluid-filled (edematous), impairing nerve impulse transmission.
Frequency
The prevalence of
CLCN2
-related leukoencephalopathy is unknown. At least 16 cases have been reported in the scientific literature.
Causes
As its name suggests,
CLCN2
-related leukoencephalopathy is caused by mutations in the
CLCN2
gene. The
CLCN2
gene provides instructions for making a
chloride channel
called ClC-2. This channel transports negatively charged chlorine atoms (chloride ions) across cell membranes and plays a key role in a cell's ability to generate and transmit electrical signals. ClC-2 channels are embedded within the
outer membrane
of most cells, and their function is thought to be particularly important in nerve cells (neurons) in the brain. The ClC-2 channel regulates the size (volume) of neurons by playing a role in their intake and release of water as well as maintaining a normal balance of ions in cells.
Some
CLCN2
gene mutations impair the stability of the protein, which reduces channel function. Other
CLCN2
gene mutations lead to the production of a channel protein that is trapped inside the cell and cannot get to the cell membrane, or that is nonfunctional and quickly broken down. These types of mutations cause a complete loss of ClC-2 channel function.
As a result of this reduction in ClC-2 channel activity, certain brain cells and the
myelin
that surrounds neurons become filled with too much water and cannot function properly. Fluid-filled myelin cannot transmit nerve impulses effectively, resulting in neurological problems such as ataxia and the other signs and symptoms of
CLCN2
-related leukoencephalopathy.
Learn more about the gene associated with CLCN2-related leukoencephalopathy
CLCN2
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
CC2L
Leukoencephalopathy with ataxia
Leukoencephalopathy with mild cerebellar ataxia and white matter edema
Leukoencephalopathy with white matter edema
LKPAT
Additional Information & Resources
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY WITH ATAXIA; LKPAT
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Gaitan-Penas H, Apaja PM, Arnedo T, Castellanos A, Elorza-Vidal X, Soto D,
Gasull X, Lukacs GL, Estevez R. Leukoencephalopathy-causing CLCN2 mutations are
associated with impaired Cl- channel function and trafficking. J
Physiol. 2017 Nov 15;595(22):6993-7008. doi: 10.1113/JP275087. Epub 2017 Oct 9.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Giorgio E, Vaula G, Benna P, Lo Buono N, Eandi CM, Dino D, Mancini C,
Cavalieri S, Di Gregorio E, Pozzi E, Ferrero M, Giordana MT, Depienne C, Brusco
A. A novel homozygous change of CLCN2 (p.His590Pro) is associated with a
subclinical form of leukoencephalopathy with ataxia (LKPAT). J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 2017 Oct;88(10):894-896. doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2016-315525. Epub 2017 May
4. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Stolting G, Fischer M, Fahlke C. CLC channel function and dysfunction in
health and disease. Front Physiol. 2014 Oct 7;5:378. doi:
10.3389/fphys.2014.00378. eCollection 2014.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Wang H, Xu M, Kong Q, Sun P, Yan F, Tian W, Wang X. Research and progress on
ClC‑2 (Review). Mol Med Rep. 2017 Jul;16(1):11-22. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6600.
Epub 2017 May 18.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Zeydan B, Uygunoglu U, Altintas A, Saip S, Siva A, Abbink TEM, van der Knaap
MS, Yalcinkaya C. Identification of 3 Novel Patients with CLCN2-Related
Leukoencephalopathy due to CLCN2 Mutations. Eur Neurol. 2017;78(3-4):125-127.
doi: 10.1159/000478089. Epub 2017 Jul 26. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Brain Diseases
Genetic Disorders
Movement Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page