Rasagiline: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rasagiline
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a606017.html
Rasagiline
pronounced as (ra sa' ji leen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rasagiline is used alone or in combination with another medication to treat the symptoms of Parkinson's disease (a slowly progressing disease of the nervous system causing a fixed face without expression, tremor at rest, slowing of movements, walking with shuffling steps, stooped posture and muscle weakness). Rasagiline is in a class of medications called monoamine oxidase (MAO) type B inhibitors. It works by increasing the amounts of certain natural substances in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Rasagiline comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food. Take rasagiline at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take rasagiline exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of rasagiline and may increase your dose based upon your body's response to this medication.
Do not stop taking rasagiline without talking to your doctor. Your doctor will probably decrease your dose gradually. If you suddenly stop taking rasagiline, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as a fever; muscle stiffness; unsteadiness, wobbliness, or lack of coordination; or changes in consciousness. Tell your doctor if you experience any of these symptoms when your dose of rasagiline is decreased.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking rasagiline,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rasagiline, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in rasagiline tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: MAO inhibitors such as phenelzine (Nardil), selegiline (Eldepryl), or tranylcypromine (Parnate).
some medications should not be taken with rasagiline. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with rasagiline. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting rasagiline with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking rasagiline, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with rasagiline: St. John's wort; dextromethorphan. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking rasagiline. Do not start any of these medications while taking rasagiline without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, mental illness or psychosis;kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking rasagiline, call your doctor.
you should know that rasagiline may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, nausea, sweating, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common during the first 2 months of taking rasagiline. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that rasagiline may cause serious, life-threatening high blood pressure when taken with certain medications or foods. Carefully follow your doctor's instructions about medications and foods to be avoided. Call your doctor right away if you have a severe headache, blurred vision, or any of the other symptoms listed below as serious side effects.
you should know that people who have Parkinson's disease have a higher risk of melanoma (a type of skin cancer) than people who do not have Parkinson's disease. It is not known whether this increased risk is caused by Parkinson's disease, medications used for Parkinson's disease such as rasagiline, or other factors. You should have regular visits with a dermatologist to examine your skin for melanoma.
you should know that some people who took rasagiline or similar medications to treat Parkinson's disease experienced intense urges to gamble, increased sexual urges, and other urges that they were unable to control. Tell your doctor if you experience new or increased gambling urges, increased sexual urges, or other intense urges while taking rasagiline.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
You will need to avoid eating foods that contain very high amounts of tyramine, such as aged cheeses (e.g., Stilton or blue cheese) during your treatment with rasagiline. Talk to your doctor or dietitian about which foods you should avoid during your treatment or if you do not feel well after eating or drinking certain foods while taking rasagiline.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. Skip the missed dose and take your next dose at the usual time the next day.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rasagiline may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
mild headache
joint or neck pain
heartburn
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
constipation
diarrhea
loss of appetite
weight loss
flu-like symptoms
fever
sweating
red, swollen, and/or itchy eyes
dry mouth
swollen gums
unsteadiness, wobbliness, or lack of coordination
involuntary, repeated body movements
lack of energy
sleepiness
abnormal dreams
depression
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet
rash
bruising or purple discoloration on skin
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
severe headache
blurred vision
seizures
chest pain
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
confusion
unconsciousness
slow or difficult speech
dizziness or faintness
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
hallucinating (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
extreme restlessness
difficulty thinking clearly or understanding reality
Rasagiline may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of rasagiline overdose may occur as late as 1 to 2 days after the overdose. Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
drowsiness
dizziness
faintness
irritability
hyperactivity
agitation or restlessness
severe headache
hallucinating
confusion
loss of coordination
difficulty opening the mouth
rigid body spasm that may include an arched back
twitching muscles
seizures
loss of consciousness
fast or irregular heart beat
pain in the area between the stomach and chest
difficulty breathing or slowed breathing
diarrhea
fever
sweating
cool, clammy skin
shivering
increase in pupil size (black circle in middle of eye)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Azilect
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page