Calcitriol Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Calcitriol Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613046.html
Calcitriol Topical
pronounced as (kal" si trye' ol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Calcitriol topical is used to treat mild to moderate plaque psoriasis (a skin disease in which red, scaly patches form on some areas of the body) in adults and children 2 years of age and older. Calcitriol is in a class of medications called vitamin D analogs. It works by helping to stop the production of extra skin cells that may build up and form scales on the skin and by decreasing the activity of immune cells in the skin.
How should this medicine be used?
Calcitriol comes as an ointment to apply to the skin. It is usually applied two times a day, in the morning and evening. Apply calcitriol ointment at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Apply calcitriol ointment exactly as directed. Do not apply more or less of it or apply it more often than prescribed by your doctor. Your doctor will tell you how much ointment to apply. In children 2 to 6 years of age, do not use more than one tube (100 gm) of calcitriol ointment per week. In adults and children 7 years of age and older, do not use more than two tubes (200 gm) of calcitriol ointment per week.
Apply calcitriol ointment to the areas of skin affected by plaque psoriasis. Do not apply calcitriol ointment to healthy skin or anywhere on your face, eyes, lips, or vagina. Do not swallow the medication.
Apply the ointment to the affected skin and gently rub the ointment into the skin until no medication is visible. Do not cover the skin where you applied calcitriol ointment with a bandage or dressing unless your doctor tells you that you should. Wash your hands well with soap and water after you apply calcitriol ointment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using calcitriol topical,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to calcitriol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in calcitriol topical. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney stones or any condition that affects the level of calcium in your blood.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using calcitriol topcial, call your doctor. If you are breastfeeding while using calcitriol topical, do not apply it directly to the nipple and areola (the colored area around each nipple).
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra ointment to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Calcitriol topical may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if either of these symptoms is severe or does not go away:
skin pain or discomfort
itching
Calcitriol topical may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze or refrigerate calcitriol ointment.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows calcitriol ointment or applies too much ointment, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to calcitriol topical.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vectical
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page