Quetiapine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Quetiapine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a698019.html
Quetiapine
pronounced as (kwe tye' a peen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Important warning for older adults with dementia:
Studies have shown that older adults with dementia (a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities and that may cause changes in mood and personality) who take antipsychotics (medications for mental illness) such as quetiapine have an increased risk of death during treatment.
Quetiapine is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of behavioral problems in older adults with dementia. Talk to the doctor who prescribed this medication if you, a family member, or someone you care for has dementia and is taking quetiapine. For more information visit the FDA website:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs
Important warning for people who have depression:
A small number of children, teenagers, and young adults (up to 24 years of age) who took medications for depression during clinical studies became suicidal (thinking about harming or killing oneself or planning or trying to do so). Children, teenagers, and young adults who take antidepressants to treat depression or other mental illnesses may be more likely to become suicidal than children, teenagers, and young adults who do not take antidepressants to treat these conditions. However, experts are not sure about how great this risk is and how much it should be considered in deciding whether a child or teenager should take an antidepressant. Children younger than 10 years of age should not normally take quetiapine, but in some cases, a doctor may decide that quetiapine is the best medication to treat a child's condition.
You should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways when you take quetiapine or other antidepressants even if you are an adult over age 24. You may become suicidal, especially at the beginning of your treatment and any time that your dose is increased or decreased. You, your family, or your caregiver should call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: new or worsening depression; thinking about harming or killing yourself, or planning or trying to do so; extreme worry; agitation; panic attacks; difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep; aggressive behavior; irritability; acting without thinking; severe restlessness; and frenzied abnormal excitement. Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor when you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
Your healthcare provider will want to see you often while you are taking quetiapine, especially at the beginning of your treatment. Be sure to keep all appointments for office visits with your doctor.
The doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with quetiapine. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You also can obtain the Medication Guide from the FDA website:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
.
No matter what your age, before you take an antidepressant, you, your parent, or your caregiver should talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of treating your condition with an antidepressant or with other treatments. You should also talk about the risks and benefits of not treating your condition. You should know that having depression or another mental illness greatly increases the risk that you will become suicidal. This risk is higher if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had bipolar disorder (mood that changes from depressed to abnormally excited) or mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood) or has thought about or attempted suicide. Talk to your doctor about your condition, symptoms, and personal and family medical history. You and your doctor will decide what type of treatment is right for you.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Quetiapine tablets and extended-release (long-acting) tablets are used to treat the symptoms of schizophrenia (a mental illness that causes disturbed or unusual thinking, loss of interest in life, and strong or inappropriate emotions). Quetiapine tablets and extended-release tablets are also used alone or with other medications to treat episodes of mania (frenzied, abnormally excited or irritated mood) or depression in patients with bipolar disorder (manic depressive disorder; a disease that causes episodes of depression, episodes of mania, and other abnormal moods). In addition, quetiapine tablets and extended-release tablets are used with other medications to prevent episodes of mania or depression in patients with bipolar disorder. Quetiapine extended-release tablets are also used along with other medications to treat depression. Quetiapine tablets may be used as part of a treatment program to treat bipolar disorder and schizophrenia in children and teenagers. Quetiapine is in a class of medications called atypical antipsychotics. It works by changing the activity of certain natural substances in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Quetiapine comes as a tablet and as an extended-release tablet to take by mouth. The tablets are usually taken one to three times a day with or without food. The extended-release tablets are usually taken once a day in the evening without food or with a light meal. Take quetiapine at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take quetiapine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow quetiapine extended-release tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of quetiapine and gradually increase your dose during the first week of your treatment. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about the amount of medication you should take each day at the beginning of your treatment.
If you do not take quetiapine for one week or longer, you should call your doctor before you start taking the medication again. Your doctor will probably tell you to start taking a low dose of the medication and gradually increase your dose as you did when you first started taking quetiapine.
Quetiapine may help control your symptoms but will not cure your condition. Continue to take quetiapine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking quetiapine without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop taking quetiapine, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep. Your doctor will probably want to decrease your dose gradually.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking quetiapine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to quetiapine, any other medications. or any of the ingredients in quetiapine tablets or extended-release tablets. Ask your doctor or pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking quetiapine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription product may interact with quetiapine: cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking quetiapine. Do not start this medication while taking quetiapine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had diabetes or a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause irregular heartbeat, fainting, or sudden death). Also tell your doctor if you have ever used street drugs or overused prescription medications. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a low level of potassium or magnesium in your blood, a low number of white blood cells, are unable to completely empty your bladder, any condition that makes it difficult for you to swallow, trouble keeping your balance, seizures, cataracts, high cholesterol, high prolactin levels, an enlarged prostate, high or low blood pressure, a heart attack, a stroke, breast cancer or thyroid, heart or liver disease. Tell your doctor if you have constipation, severe vomiting, diarrhea or signs of dehydration now, or if you develop these symptoms at any time during your treatment. Also, if you have ever had to stop taking a medication for mental illness because of severe side effects, be sure to tell your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, especially if you are in the last few months of your pregnancy, or if you plan to become pregnant or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking quetiapine, call your doctor. Quetiapine may cause problems in newborns following delivery if it is taken during the last months of pregnancy. You should not breastfeed while taking quetiapine.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking quetiapine.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell your doctor or dentist that you are taking quetiapine.
you should know that quetiapine may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery and take precautions to avoid falls until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication. Do not drink alcohol while taking quetiapine.
you should know that you may experience hyperglycemia (increases in your blood sugar) while you are taking this medication, even if you do not already have diabetes. If you have schizophrenia, you are more likely to develop diabetes than people who do not have schizophrenia, and taking quetiapine or similar medications may increase this risk. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking quetiapine: extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, or weakness. It is very important to call your doctor as soon as you have any of these symptoms, because high blood sugar can cause a serious condition called ketoacidosis. Ketoacidosis may become life-threatening if it is not treated at an early stage. Symptoms of ketoacidosis include: dry mouth, nausea and vomiting, shortness of breath, breath that smells fruity, and decreased consciousness.
you should know that quetiapine may make it harder for your body to cool down when it gets very hot. While you are taking quetiapine, you should avoid excessive exercise, stay inside as much as possible and dress lightly in hot weather, stay out of the sun, and drink plenty of fluids.
you should know that quetiapine may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. This is more common when you first start taking quetiapine and when your dose is increased. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that quetiapine may cause an increase in blood pressure in children and teenagers taking quetiapine. When quetiapine is used in children or teenagers, your doctor will check your blood pressure before starting treatment and regularly while you are taking this medication.
you should know that when quetiapine is used to treat schizophrenia or bipolar disorder in children, it should be used as part of a total treatment program which may include counseling and special education. Make sure to follow all of your doctor's and/or therapist's instructions.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
You should know that you may gain weight while you are taking this medication. Talk to your doctor about ways to control weight gain, such as eating a healthy, balanced diet and exercising. You and your doctor should check your weight regularly while you are taking quetiapine.
Be sure to drink plenty of water every day while you are taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Quetiapine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section are severe or do not go away:
dizziness, feeling unsteady, or having trouble keeping your balance
pain in the joints, back, neck, or ears
weakness
dry mouth
vomiting
indigestion
constipation
gas
stomach pain or swelling
increased appetite
excessive weight gain
stuffy nose
headache
pain
irritability
difficulty thinking or concentrating
difficulty speaking or using language
loss of coordination
unusual dreams
numbness, burning, or tingling in the arms or legs
missed menstrual periods
breast enlargement in males
discharge from the breasts
decreased sexual desire or ability
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING or SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fainting
falling
seizures
changes in vision
uncontrollable movements of your arms, legs, tongue, face, or lips
painful erection of the penis that lasts for hours
fever
muscle stiffness, pain, or weakness
excess sweating
fast or irregular heartbeat
confusion
unusual bleeding or bruising
sore throat, fever, chills, difficult or painful urination, or other signs of infection
hives
rash
blisters
tightening of the neck muscles or the throat
tongue sticking out
difficulty breathing or swallowing
Quetiapine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
Quetiapine may cause cataracts. You will need to have eye exams to check for cataracts at the beginning of your treatment and every six months during your treatment. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking quetiapine.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
drowsiness
dizziness
fainting
fast heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to quetiapine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Seroquel
®
Seroquel
®
XR
Last Revised -
06/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page