Megestrol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Megestrol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682003.html
Megestrol
pronounced as (me jes' trol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Megestrol tablets are used to relieve the symptoms and reduce the suffering caused by advanced breast cancer and advanced endometrial cancer (cancer that begins in the lining of the uterus). Megestrol suspension is used to treat loss of appetite, malnutrition, and severe weight loss in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Megestrol should not be used to prevent loss of appetite and severe weight loss in patients who have not yet developed this condition. Megestrol is a man-made version of the human hormone progesterone. It treats breast cancer and endometrial cancer by affecting female hormones involved in cancer growth. It increases weight gain by increasing appetite.
How should this medicine be used?
Megestrol comes as a tablet, an oral suspension (liquid), and a concentrated oral suspension (Megace ES) to take by mouth. The tablets and suspension are usually taken several times a day. The concentrated suspension is usually taken once a day. Take megestrol at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take megestrol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the liquid well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
The concentrated suspension is used in different dosages than the regular suspension. Do not switch from one to the other without talking to your doctor.
Do not stop taking megestrol without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Megestrol is also sometimes used to treat malnutrition in patients with cancer, prostatic hypertrophy (enlargement of a male reproductive gland called the prostate), endometriosis (condition in which the type of tissue that lines the uterus grows in other areas of the body), and endometrial hyperplasia (overgrowth of the lining of the uterus). Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking megestrol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to megestrol, any other medications, or any of the inactive ingredients in megestrol tablets, suspension, or concentrated suspension. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the inactive ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking megestrol. Your doctor may need to adjust the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a blood clot anywhere in the body, a stroke, diabetes, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking megestrol, call your doctor immediately. Megestrol may harm the fetus. Do not breastfeed while you are taking megestrol.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking megestrol if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take megestrol to treat loss of appetite and weight loss.
you should know that megestrol may interfere with the normal menstrual cycle (period) in women. However, you should not assume that you cannot become pregnant. Use a reliable method of birth control to prevent pregnancy.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, during or shortly after your treatment, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking megestrol.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Megestrol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
impotence
decreased sexual desire
unexpected vaginal bleeding
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
gas
rash
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
nausea
vomiting
dizziness
weakness
blurred vision
extreme thirst
frequent urination
extreme hunger
leg pain
difficulty breathing
sharp, crushing chest pain or heaviness in chest
slow or difficult speech
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
Megestrol may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
diarrhea
nausea
stomach pain
shortness of breath
cough
lack of energy
unsteady walking
chest pain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to megestrol.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Megace
®
¶
Megace
®
ES
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
12/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page