Rizatriptan: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rizatriptan
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601109.html
Rizatriptan
pronounced as (rye za trip' tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rizatriptan is used to treat migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes cause nausea and sensitivity to sound and light). Rizatriptan is in a class of medications called selective serotonin receptor agonists. It works by narrowing blood vessels in the brain, stopping pain signals from being sent, which stops the release of certain natural substances that cause pain, nausea, and other symptoms of migraine. Rizatriptan does not stop migraine attacks from coming or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Rizatriptan comes as a tablet and an orally disintegrating tablet to take by mouth. Take at the first sign of a migraine headache. If your symptoms improve after you take rizatriptan but return after 2 hours or longer, you may take a second tablet. However, if your symptoms do not improve after you take the first tablet, do not take a second tablet and call your doctor. Your doctor will tell you the maximum number of tablets you may take in a 24-hour period.
Take rizatriptan exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
To take the orally disintegrating tablet, use dry hands to peel back the foil packaging. Immediately take out the tablet and place it on your tongue. The tablet will quickly dissolve and can be swallowed with saliva. No water is needed to swallow disintegrating tablets. Do not open the foil packaging or remove the orally disintegrating tablet until just before you are ready to take it.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more often after taking rizatriptan.
If you take rizatriptan more often or for longer than the recommended period of time, your headaches may get worse or may occur more frequently. You should not take rizatriptan or any other headache medication for more than 10 days per month. Call your doctor if you need to take rizatriptan to treat more than 4 headaches in a 1-month period.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking rizatriptan,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rizatriptan, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past 24 hours: other selective serotonin receptor agonists such as almotriptan, eletriptan, naratriptan, sumatriptan, or zolmitriptan; or ergot-type medications such as bromocriptine, cabergoline, dihydroergotamine, and ergoloid mesylates, ergonovine, ergotamine (Cafergot
®
, Ergomar
®
), methylergonovine (Methergine
®
), methysergide (Sansert
®
), and pergolide.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) inhibitor such as isocarboxazid, phenelzine, or tranylcypromine.
some medications should not be taken with rizatriptan. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with rizatriptan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting rizatriptan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking rizatriptan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease; a heart attack; angina (chest pain); irregular heartbeats; stroke or 'mini-stroke'; high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, kidney disease, liver disease or problems with blood vessels limiting blood flow throughout the body such as Raynaud's disease (problems with blood flow to the fingers, toes, ears, and nose), or ischemic bowel disease (bloody diarrhea and stomach pain caused by decreased blood flow to the intestines). Tell your doctor if you smoke or are overweight, or if you have gone through menopause. Tell your doctor if any family members have or have had heart disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take rizatriptan.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you plan to be sexually active while you are taking this medication, talk to your doctor about effective methods of birth control. If you become pregnant while taking rizatriptan, call your doctor.
you should know that rizatriptan may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication will affect you.
talk to your doctor about your headache symptoms to make sure they are caused by migraine. Rizatriptan should not be used to treat certain headaches.
if you have phenylketonuria (PKU, a condition in which a special diet must be followed to prevent damage to your brain), you should know that the orally disintegrating tablets contain phenylalanine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rizatriptan may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness, tiredness, sleepiness
upset stomach, vomiting, diarrhea
tremors
flushing (feeling of warmth)
dry mouth
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
tightness, pain, pressure, or heaviness in the chest, throat, neck, or jaw
rapid, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
shortness of breath
fever, sweating, confusion, fast or irregular heartbeat, and severe muscle stiffness
lightheadedness, problems speaking, weakness or inability to feel an arm or leg
bloody diarrhea
paleness or blue color of the fingers and toes
coldness, or no feeling in hands or feet
difficulty breathing
changes in vision, ringing in ears
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Do not remove tablets from the blister pack until just before use. Store the medication at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, or call local emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
drowsiness
dizziness or faintness
rapid, pounding, or irregular heart beat
shortness of breath
loss of bladder control
upset stomach
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you take rizatriptan.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Maxalt
®
Maxalt-MLT
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page