Apraclonidine Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Apraclonidine Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608005.html
Apraclonidine Ophthalmic
pronounced as (a pra klon' i deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Apraclonidine 0.5% eye drops are used for the short-term treatment of glaucoma (a condition that can cause damage to the optic nerve and vision loss, usually due to increased pressure in the eye) in people who are taking other medications for this condition and still have increased pressure in the eye. Apraclonidine 1% eye drops are used to prevent or reduce increased pressure in the eye during and after certain types of laser eye surgery. Apraclonidine is in a class of medications called alpha-2-adrenergic agonists. It lowers the pressure in the eye by decreasing the amount of fluid produced within the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Apraclonidine comes as a 0.5% solution (liquid) and a 1% solution to instill in the eye. The 0.5% solution is usually instilled in the affected eye(s) three times a day. The 1% solution is usually instilled in the eye that is being treated 1 hour before laser eye surgery and again immediately after the surgery. If you are using apraclonidine eye drops regularly, use them at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use apraclonidine eye drops exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of them or use them more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Apraclonidine eye drops are only for use in the eye. Do not swallow the eye drops.
Apraclonidine 0.5% eye drops may not continue to control your eye pressure after you have used them for a period of time, usually less than 1 month. Your doctor will examine you often while you are using apraclonidine 0.5% eye drops to see whether the eye drops are still working for you.
Apraclonidine 0.5% eye drops help to control glaucoma for a short period of time but do not cure the condition. Continue to use apraclonidine 0.5% eye drops even if you feel well. Do not stop using apraclonidine 0.5% eye drops without talking to your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eyedrops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
If you are to use more than one drop in the same eye, wait at least 5 minutes before instilling the next drop.
If you are using the 0.5% eye drops, replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip. If you are using the 1% eye drops, discard the bottle and use a new bottle for your second dose.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using apraclonidine eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to apraclonidine, clonidine (Catapres, Catapres TTS, in Clorpres, Duraclon) or any other medications.
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors such as isocarboxazid (Marplan), phenelzine (Nardil), selegiline (Eldepryl, Emsam, Zelapar) and tranylcypromine (Parnate).
Some medications should not be used with apraclonidine eye drops. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when used with apraclonidine eye drops. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before using apraclonidine eye drops with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using apraclonidine eye drops, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
if you are using other eye medications, instill them at least 5 minutes before or after you instill apraclonidine eye drops
tell your doctor if you recently had a heart attack and if you have or have ever had depression; diabetes; high blood pressure; a stroke or ministroke; Raynaud's disease (condition that causes sudden tightening of the blood vessels in the fingers and toes); thromboangiitis obliterans (inflammation of the blood vessels in the arms and legs); fainting; or heart, liver, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while you are using apraclonidine eye drops, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. If you will be using apraclonidine 1% drops on the day you have laser eye surgery, your doctor will probably tell you not to breast-feed that day.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using apraclonidine eye drops.
you should know that apraclonidine eye drops may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are using apraclonidine eye drops. Alcohol can make the side effects from apraclonidine worse.
you should know that using apraclonidine eye drops may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill extra drops to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Apraclonidine eye drops may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
red, swollen, itchy, or teary eyes
eye discomfort
feeling that something is in the eye
irregular, slow, or pounding heartbeat
blurred vision
pale eyes
dry eyes
widened pupils (dark circles in the center of the eyes)
raised eyelids
lack of usual coordination
lack of energy
sleepiness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
unusual dreams
dizziness
headache
depression
irritability
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
changed sense of taste or smell
dry mouth
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
constipation
diarrhea
dry or burning nose
chest heaviness or burning
skin redness
rash
itching
feeling hot
clammy or sweaty palms
decreased sexual desire
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fainting
swelling of the face, eyes, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
shortness of breath
Apraclonidine eye drops may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows apraclonidine eye drops, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
slowed pulse
sleepiness
chills
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Iopidine
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page