Bicalutamide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bicalutamide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a697047.html
Bicalutamide
pronounced as (bye ka loo' ta mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bicalutamide is used with another medication (gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists; such as leuprolide or goserelin) to treat metastatic prostate cancer (cancer that started in the prostate and has spread to other parts of the body). Bicalutamide is in a class of medications called nonsteroidal antiandrogens. It works by blocking the effect of androgen (a male hormone), to stop the growth and spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Bicalutamide comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day, either in the morning or evening. Take bicalutamide at around the same time every day. You should begin taking bicalutamide on the same day you begin injecting the luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take bicalutamide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Bicalutamide along with the luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone may help stop the growth and spread of cancer cells but does not cure prostate cancer. Continue to take both bicalutamide and the luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone even if you feel better. Do not stop taking these medications without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking bicalutamide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bicalutamide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in bicalutamide tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any of the following: alprazolam (Xanax); anticoagulants ('blood thinners') such as warfarin (Coumadin); aripiprazole (Abilify); buspirone (Buspar); calcium channel blockers such as amlodipine (Norvasc), diltiazem (Cardizem, Dilacor, Tiazac), felodipine (Plendil), nifedipine (Adalat, Procardia), nisoldipine (Sular), and verapamil (Calan, Covera, Isoptin, Verelan); chlorpheniramine; cholesterol-lowering medications (statins) such as atorvastatin (Lipitor), lovastatin (Mevacor), and simvastatin (Zocor); clarithromycin (Biaxin); cyclosporine (Neoral, Sandimmune); diazepam (Valium); erythromycin (E.E.S., E-Mycin, Erythrocin); HIV protease inhibitors such as indinavir (Crixivan), ritonavir (Norvir), and saquinavir (Invirase, Fortovase); methadone (Dolophine); midazolam (Versed); pimozide (Orap); quinidine (Quinidex, Quinaglute); quinine; sildenafil (Viagra); tacrolimus (Prograf); tamoxifen (Nolvadex); telithromycin (Ketek); trazodone (Desyrel); triazolam (Halcion); and vincristine (Vincasar). Many other medications may also interact with bicalutamide, so be sure to tell your doctor about all the medications you are taking, even those that do not appear on this list.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
you should know that bicalutamide is only for use in men. If taken by pregnant women, bicalutamide can cause abnormalities in the fetus. Women who are or may become pregnant should not take bicalutamide. If you take bicalutamide while you are pregnant, call your doctor immediately.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bicalutamide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
hot flashes or flushing
bone, back, or pelvic pain
muscle weakness
muscle or joint pain
headache
shortness of breath
increased blood pressure
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
cough
constipation
nausea
vomiting
abdominal pain
diarrhea
gas
change in weight (loss or gain)
loss of appetite
dizziness
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
difficulty sleeping
feeling of uneasiness or dread
rash
sweating
inability to get or keep an erection
need to urinate frequently during the night
bloody urine
painful or difficult urination
frequent and urgent need to urinate
difficulty emptying bladder
painful or swollen breasts
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
yellowing of the skin or eyes
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
extreme tiredness
unusual bleeding or bruising
lack of energy
upset stomach
loss of appetite
flu-like symptoms
dull or sharp side pain
chest pain
Bicalutamide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to bicalutamide.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Casodex
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page