Cytarabine Lipid Complex Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cytarabine Lipid Complex Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a612003.html
Cytarabine Lipid Complex Injection
pronounced as (sye tare' a been)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Cytarabine lipid complex injection has been discontinued in the US. Because this drug is no longer available in the US market, the material in this monograph is no longer updated. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers’ labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Cytarabine lipid complex injection must be given in a hospital or medical facility under the supervision of a doctor who is experienced in giving chemotherapy medications for cancer.
Cytarabine lipid complex injection may cause a serious or life-threatening reaction. Your doctor will give you a medication to prevent this reaction and will monitor you carefully after you receive a dose of cytarabine lipid complex. If you experience the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately: nausea, vomiting, headache, and fever.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cytarabine lipid complex is used to treat lymphomatous meningitis (a type of cancer in the covering of the spinal cord and brain). Cytarabine lipid complex is in a class of medications called antimetabolites. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells in your body.
How should this medicine be used?
Cytarabine lipid complex comes as a liquid to be injected intrathecally (into the fluid-filled space of the spinal canal) over 1 to 5 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. At first, cytarabine lipid complex is given as five doses spaced 2 weeks apart (at weeks 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9); then 4 weeks later, five more doses are given spaced 4 weeks apart (at weeks 13, 17, 21, 25, and 29). You will have to lay flat for 1 hour after you receive a dose of cytarabine lipid complex injection.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving cytarabine lipid complex injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cytarabine or any of the ingredients in cytarabine lipid complex injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have meningitis. Your doctor will probably not want you to receive cytarabine lipid complex.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant while you are receiving cytarabine lipid complex injection. If you become pregnant while receiving cytarabine lipid complex, call your doctor. Cytarabine lipid complex may harm the fetus.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cytarabine lipid complex may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
constipation
stomach pain
tiredness
weakness
muscle or joint pain
trouble falling or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
sudden change or loss of vision or hearing
dizziness
fainting
confusion or memory loss
seizure
numbness, burning, or tingling in the hands, arms, feet, or legs
loss of bowel or bladder control
loss of feeling or movement on one side of the body
difficulty walking or unsteady walking
sudden fever, severe headache, and stiff neck
difficulty breathing or swallowing
rash
hives
itching
unusual bleeding or bruising
fever, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, or other signs of infection
Cytarabine lipid complex may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to cytarabine lipid complex.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
DepoCyt
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page