Acebutolol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Acebutolol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a687003.html
Acebutolol
pronounced as (a se byoo' toe lole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Acebutolol is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat high blood pressure. Acebutolol also is used to treat certain irregular heart rhythms. Acebutolol is in a class of medications called beta blockers. It works by relaxing blood vessels and slowing heart rate to improve blood flow and decrease blood pressure.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Acebutolol comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It usually is taken once or twice a day. To help you remember to take acebutolol, take it around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take acebutolol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of acebutolol and gradually increase your dose to allow your body to adjust to the medication. Talk to your doctor about how you feel and about any symptoms you experience during this time.
Acebutolol controls your condition but does not cure it. Continue to take acebutolol even if you feel well. Do not stop taking acebutolol without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop taking acebutolol, you may experience serious heart problems such as angina (chest pain), heart attack, or an irregular heartbeat. Your doctor will probably want to decrease your dose gradually over 2 weeks. Your doctor will watch you carefully and will probably tell you to avoid physical activity during this time.
Other uses for this medicine
Acebutolol is also used sometimes to treat chest pain (angina). Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking acebutolol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to acebutolol, any other medications, or any ingredients in acebutolol capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking while you are taking acebutolol. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with acebutolol: nasal decongestants such as oxymetazoline (Afrin, Neo-Synephrine, Vicks Sinex, others) or cough and cold combination products that contain phenylephrine or pseudoephedrine. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking acebutolol. Do not start any of these medications while taking acebutolol without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have a slow or irregular heart rate or heart failure. Your doctor may tell you not to take acebutolol.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart, kidney, or liver disease; asthma or other lung diseases; problems with blood circulation; diabetes; or hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid gland). Also tell your doctor if you have ever had a serious allergic reaction to a food or any other substance.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking acebutolol, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking acebutolol.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that acebutolol may increase the risk of hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) and prevent the warning signs and symptoms that would tell you that your blood sugar is low. Let your doctor know if you are unable to eat or drink normally or are vomiting while you are taking acebutolol. You should know the symptoms of low blood sugar and what to do if you have these symptoms.
you should know that if you have allergic reactions to different substances, your reactions may be worse while you are using acebutolol, and your allergic reactions may not respond to the usual doses of injectable epinephrine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Acebutolol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness
lightheadedness
excessive tiredness
headache
constipation
diarrhea
upset stomach
nausea
muscle or joint pain
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
shortness of breath or wheezing
slow heart rate
muscle or joint pain
unusual weight gain
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
chest pain
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
slow heartbeat
dizziness
fatigue or weakness
fainting
difficulty breathing
cough or wheezing
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly to determine your response to acebutolol. Your doctor may ask you to check your pulse (heart rate). Ask your pharmacist or doctor to teach you how to take your pulse. If your pulse is faster or slower than it should be, call your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking acebutolol.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sectral
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
08/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page