Kindler epidermolysis bullosa: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Kindler epidermolysis bullosa
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/kindler-epidermolysis-bullosa/
Kindler epidermolysis bullosa
Description
Kindler epidermolysis bullosa (or Kindler EB) is a rare type of epidermolysis bullosa, which is a group of genetic conditions that cause the skin to be very fragile and to blister easily.
From early infancy, people with Kindler EB have skin blistering, particularly on the backs of the hands and the tops of the feet. The blisters occur less frequently over time, although repeated blistering on the hands can cause scarring that fuses the skin between the fingers and between the toes. Affected individuals also develop thin, papery skin starting on the hands and feet and later affecting other parts of the body; changes in skin coloring; and small clusters of visible blood vessels just under the skin (telangiectases). This combination of features is known as poikiloderma. In some affected individuals, the skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet thickens and hardens (
hyperkeratosis
). Kindler EB can also cause people to be highly sensitive to ultraviolet (UV) rays from the sun and to sunburn easily.
Kindler EB can also affect the moist lining (mucosae) of the mouth, eyes, esophagus, intestines, genitals, and urinary system, causing these tissues to be very fragile and easily damaged. Affected individuals commonly develop severe gum disease that can lead to early tooth loss. The moist tissues that line the eyelids and the white part of the eyes (the conjunctiva) can become inflamed (conjunctivitis), and damage to the clear outer covering of the eye (the
cornea
) can affect vision. Narrowing (stenosis) of the
esophagus
, which is the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach, causes difficulty with swallowing that worsens over time. Some affected individuals develop health problems related to inflammation of the
colon
(colitis) or damage to the mucosa in the
vagina
,
the anus
, or the tube that carries urine from the bladder out of the body (the
urethra
).
Kindler EB increases the risk of developing a form of cancer called
squamous cell carcinoma
. This type of cancer arises from squamous cells, which are found in the outer layer of skin (
the epidermis
) and in the mucosae. In people with Kindler EB, squamous cell carcinoma occurs most often on the skin, lips, and the lining of the mouth (oral mucosa).
Frequency
Kindler EB appears to be rare. About 250 cases have been reported worldwide.
Causes
Kindler EB results from variants (also known as mutations) in the
FERMT1
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein known as kindlin-1. This protein is found in epithelial cells, which are the cells that line the surfaces and cavities of the body. In the skin, kindlin-1 plays a critical role in specialized cells called keratinocytes, which are the major component of
the epidermis
. Kindlin-1 is involved in several important cell functions, including cell growth and division (proliferation), the attachment of cells to the underlying network of proteins and other molecules (cell-matrix adhesion), and the movement (migration) of cells.
Most variants in the
FERMT1
gene prevent the production of any functional kindlin-1. A lack of this protein disrupts many essential cell functions. For example, keratinocytes without kindlin-1 have an abnormal structure and cannot grow or divide normally. They are also less able to attach the epidermis to the underlying layer of skin (the dermis). These changes make the skin fragile and prone to blistering. Similarly, a lack of kindlin-1 in epithelial cells of the mucosae causes damage that makes these tissues extremely fragile. It is unclear how a shortage of kindlin-1 is related to
squamous cell carcinoma
in people with Kindler EB.
Learn more about the gene associated with Kindler epidermolysis bullosa
FERMT1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have variants. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Congenital bullous poikiloderma
Kindler syndrome
Kindler's syndrome
Poikiloderma of Kindler
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Kindler syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Kindler epidermolysis bullosa
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
KINDLER SYNDROME; KNDLRS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Ashton GH, McLean WH, South AP, Oyama N, Smith FJ, Al-Suwaid R, Al-Ismaily A,
Atherton DJ, Harwood CA, Leigh IM, Moss C, Didona B, Zambruno G, Patrizi A, Eady
RA, McGrath JA. Recurrent mutations in kindlin-1, a novel keratinocyte focal
contact protein, in the autosomal recessive skin fragility and photosensitivity
disorder, Kindler syndrome. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Jan;122(1):78-83. doi:
10.1046/j.0022-202X.2003.22136.x.
Citation on PubMed
Bardhan A, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Chapple ILC, Fine JD, Harper N, Has C, Magin
TM, Marinkovich MP, Marshall JF, McGrath JA, Mellerio JE, Polson R, Heagerty AH.
Epidermolysis bullosa. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Sep 24;6(1):78. doi:
10.1038/s41572-020-0210-0.
Citation on PubMed
Has C, Bauer JW, Bodemer C, Bolling MC, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Diem A, Fine JD,
Heagerty A, Hovnanian A, Marinkovich MP, Martinez AE, McGrath JA, Moss C, Murrell
DF, Palisson F, Schwieger-Briel A, Sprecher E, Tamai K, Uitto J, Woodley DT,
Zambruno G, Mellerio JE. Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis
bullosa and other disorders with skin fragility. Br J Dermatol. 2020
Oct;183(4):614-627. doi: 10.1111/bjd.18921. Epub 2020 Mar 11.
Citation on PubMed
Has C, Castiglia D, del Rio M, Diez MG, Piccinni E, Kiritsi D, Kohlhase J,
Itin P, Martin L, Fischer J, Zambruno G, Bruckner-Tuderman L. Kindler syndrome:
extension of FERMT1 mutational spectrum and natural history. Hum Mutat. 2011
Nov;32(11):1204-12. doi: 10.1002/humu.21576. Epub 2011 Sep 20.
Citation on PubMed
Jobard F, Bouadjar B, Caux F, Hadj-Rabia S, Has C, Matsuda F, Weissenbach J,
Lathrop M, Prud'homme JF, Fischer J. Identification of mutations in a new gene
encoding a FERM family protein with a pleckstrin homology domain in Kindler
syndrome. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Apr 15;12(8):925-35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg097.
Citation on PubMed
Lai-Cheong JE, McGrath JA. Kindler syndrome. Dermatol Clin. 2010
Jan;28(1):119-24. doi: 10.1016/j.det.2009.10.013.
Citation on PubMed
Siegel DH, Ashton GH, Penagos HG, Lee JV, Feiler HS, Wilhelmsen KC, South AP,
Smith FJ, Prescott AR, Wessagowit V, Oyama N, Akiyama M, Al Aboud D, Al Aboud K,
Al Githami A, Al Hawsawi K, Al Ismaily A, Al-Suwaid R, Atherton DJ, Caputo R,
Fine JD, Frieden IJ, Fuchs E, Haber RM, Harada T, Kitajima Y, Mallory SB, Ogawa
H, Sahin S, Shimizu H, Suga Y, Tadini G, Tsuchiya K, Wiebe CB, Wojnarowska F,
Zaghloul AB, Hamada T, Mallipeddi R, Eady RA, McLean WH, McGrath JA, Epstein EH.
Loss of kindlin-1, a human homolog of the Caenorhabditis elegans
actin-extracellular-matrix linker protein UNC-112, causes Kindler syndrome. Am J
Hum Genet. 2003 Jul;73(1):174-87. doi: 10.1086/376609. Epub 2003 Jun 3.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Youssefian L, Vahidnezhad H, Uitto J. Kindler Syndrome. 2016 Mar 3 [updated
2022 Jan 6]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK349072/
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Skin Conditions
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Epidermolysis bullosa
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page