Pralsetinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pralsetinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620057.html
Pralsetinib
pronounced as (pral" se' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pralsetinib is used to treat a certain type of non small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in adults that has spread to other parts of the body. It is also used to treat a certain type of thyroid cancer in adults and children 12 years of age and older that is getting worse or that has spread to other parts of the body. Pralsetinib is used to treat a certain type of thyroid cancer in adults and children 12 years of age and older that is getting worse or that has spread to other parts of the body and cannot be treated with radioactive iodine. Pralsetinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of a certain naturally occurring substance that may be needed to help cancer cells multiply.
How should this medicine be used?
Pralsetinib comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken once daily on an empty stomach, at least 2 hours before and at least 1 hour after a meal. Take pralsetinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take pralsetinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you vomit after taking pralsetinib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may decrease your dose or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment if you experience certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with pralsetinib.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking pralsetinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pralsetinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pralsetinib capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with pralsetinib: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking pralsetinib. Do not start any of this medication while taking pralsetinib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had lung or breathing problems other than lung cancer, bleeding problems, high blood pressure, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. Pralsetinib may interfere with the action of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, or injections), so you should not use these as your only method of birth control during your treatment. You must use a non-hormonal birth control such as a barrier method (device that blocks sperm from entering the uterus such as a condom or a diaphragm). Ask your doctor to help you choose a method of birth control that will work for you. If you are female, you will need to have a pregnancy test before you start treatment, and you should use non-hormonal birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 2 weeks after your final dose. If you are a male and your partner can become pregnant, you should use effective birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for 1 week after your final dose. If you or your partner becomes pregnant while taking pralsetinib, call your doctor. Pralsetinib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while taking pralsetinib and for 1 week after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking pralsetinib.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking pralsetinib. Your doctor may tell you not to take pralsetinib 5 days before your surgery and will tell you when to start taking the medication again.
you should know that your blood pressure may increase during your treatment with pralsetinib. Your doctor will monitor your blood pressure carefully, and may prescribe medication to treat high blood pressure if it develops.
you should know that you may experience tumor lysis syndrome (TLS; a condition caused by the fast breakdown of cancer cells that can cause kidney failure and other complications) during your treatment with pralsetinib. To help reduce your risk of experiencing TLS, your doctor may ask you to drink water before and during your treatment, and each time your dose is increased. In addition, your doctor will give you a medication to take before starting and during your treatment to help prevent this side effect. If you experience any of the following symptoms of TLS, call your doctor immediately: fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, confusion, shortness of breath, seizures, irregular heartbeat, dark or cloudy urine, unusual tiredness, or muscle or joint pain.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose on the same day as soon as you remember it. Then, continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pralsetinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
diarrhea
dry mouth
mouth sores
muscle or bone pain
tiredness
swelling of hands, ankles, or feet
numbness or tingling in the arms, hands, legs, or feet
rash
decreased appetite
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
confusion, headache, shortness of breath, dizziness, or chest pain
fever, shortness of breath, or cough
pale skin, fatigue, or shortness of breath
yellowing of skin or eyes, dark-colored urine, loss of appetite, decreased energy, or pain on right side of stomach area
unusual bleeding or bruising
black and tarry stools
red blood in stools
bloody vomit
vomiting material that looks like coffee grounds
coughing up blood
unusual vaginal bleeding
frequent nose bleeds
drowsiness, confusion, headache, or difficulty speaking
Pralsetinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order a lab test before your treatment to find out if your cancer can be treated with pralsetinib. Your doctor will also order certain lab tests before, during, and after your treatment to check your body's response to pralsetinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Gavreto
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page