Dihydroergotamine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dihydroergotamine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603022.html
Dihydroergotamine Injection
pronounced as (dye hye droe er got' a meen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Do not take dihydroergotamine if you are taking any of the following medications: antifungals such as itraconazole (Sporanox) and ketoconazole (Nizoral); HIV protease inhibitors such as indinavir (Crixivan), nelfinavir (Viracept), and ritonavir (Norvir); or macrolide antibiotics such as clarithromycin (Biaxin), erythromycin (E.E.S., E-Mycin, Erythrocin), and troleandomycin (TAO).
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dihydroergotamine is used to treat migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes are accompanied by nausea and sensitivity to sound and light) and cluster headaches (severe headaches usually on one side of the head or around one eye). Dihydroergotamine is in a class of medications called ergot alkaloids. It works by tightening blood vessels in the brain and by stopping the release of natural substances in the brain that cause swelling.
How should this medicine be used?
Dihydroergotamine comes as a solution to inject subcutaneously (under the skin), intramuscularly (in the muscle), or intravenouslyly (into a vein). Dihydroergotamine can be given subcutaneously at home to treat a migraine headache or given intramuscularly or intravenously at a doctor's office or hospital to treat a migraine or cluster headache. Additional dose(s) can be given every hour if headache continues but no more than 3 total doses should be given subcutaneously or intramuscularly or more than 2 total doses intravenously in a 24-hour period of time. Dihdroergotamine should not be used daily and no more than 6 doses should be given in 1 week. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use dihydroergotamine exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Dihydroergotamine can damage the heart and other organs if it is used too often. Dihydroergotamine should be used only to treat a migraine that is in progress. Do not use dihydroergotamine to prevent a migraine from beginning or to treat a headache that feels different than your usual migraine.
You may receive your first dose of dihydroergotamine in your doctor's office so that your doctor can monitor your reaction to the medication and be sure that you know how to use the nasal spray or administer the injection correctly. After that, you may inject dihydroergotamine at home. Be sure that you and anyone who will be helping you inject the medication read the manufacturer's information for the patient that comes with dihydroergotamine before using it for the first time at home.
If you are using the solution for injection, you should never reuse syringes. Dispose of syringes in a puncture resistant container. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to dispose of the puncture resistant container.
To use the solution for injection, follow these steps:
Check your ampule to be sure it is safe to use. Do not use the ampule if it is broken, cracked, labeled with an expiration date that has passed, or contains a colored, cloudy, or particle-filled liquid. Return that ampule to the pharmacy and use a different ampule.
Wash your hands well with soap and water.
Check to be sure all the liquid is at the bottom of ampule. If any liquid is at the top of the ampule, gently flick it with your finger until it falls to the bottom.
Hold the bottom of the ampule in one hand. Hold the top of the ampule between the thumb and pointer of your other hand. Your thumb should be over the dot on the top of the ampule. Push the top of the ampule backward with your thumb until it breaks off.
Tilt the ampule at a 45-degree angle and insert the needle into the ampule.
Pull back the plunger slowly and steadily until the top of the plunger is even with the dose your doctor told you to inject.
Hold the syringe with the needle pointing upward and check if it contains air bubbles. If the syringe does contain air bubbles, tap it with your finger until the bubbles rise to the top. Then slowly push the plunger up until you see a drop of medication at the tip of the needle.
Check the syringe to be sure it contains the correct dose, especially if you had to remove air bubbles. If the syringe does not contain the correct dose, repeat steps 5 to 7.
Choose a spot to inject the medication on either thigh, well above the knee. Wipe the area with an alcohol swab using a firm, circular motion, and allow it to dry.
Hold the syringe with one hand and hold a fold of skin around the injection site with the other hand. Push the needle all the way into the skin at a 45- to 90-degree angle.
Keep the needle inside the skin, and pull back slightly on the plunger.
If blood appears in the syringe, pull the needle slightly out of the skin and repeat step 11.
Push the plunger all the way down to inject the medication.
Pull the needle quickly out of the skin at the same angle you inserted it.
Press a new alcohol pad on the injection site and rub it.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using dihydroergotamine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dihydroergotamine, other ergot alkaloids such as bromocriptine (Parlodel), ergonovine (Ergotrate), ergotamine (Cafergot, Ercaf, others), methylergonovine (Methergine), and methysergide (Sansert), or any other medications.
do not take dihydroergotamine within 24 hours of taking ergot alkaloids such as bromocriptine (Parlodel), ergonovine (Ergotrate), ergotamine (Cafergot, Ercaf, others), methylergonovine (Methergine), and methysergide (Sansert); or other medications for migraine such as frovatriptan (Frova), naratriptan (Amerge), rizatriptan (Maxalt), sumatriptan (Imitrex), and zolmitriptan (Zomig).
some medications should not be taken with dihydroergotamine. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with dihydroergotamine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting dihydroergotamine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking dihydroergotamine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription product may interact with dihydroergotamine: nicotine. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking dihydroergotamine. Do not start any of these medications while taking dihydroergotamine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have a family history of heart disease and if you have or have ever had high blood pressure; high cholesterol; diabetes; Raynaud's disease (a condition that affects the fingers and toes); any disease that affects your circulation or arteries; sepsis (a severe infection of the blood); surgery on your heart or blood vessels; a heart attack; or kidney, liver, lung, or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using dihydroergotamine, call your doctor immediately.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using dihydroergotamine.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Smoking cigarettes while using this medication increases the risk of serious side effects.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dihydroergotamine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away.
stuffy nose
tingling or pain in the nose or throat
dryness in the nose
nosebleed
taste changes
upset stomach
vomiting
dizziness
extreme tiredness
weakness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
color changes, numbness or tingling in fingers and toes
muscle pain in arms and legs
weakness in arms and legs
chest pain
speeding or slowing of heart rate
swelling
itching
cold, pale skin
slow or difficult speech
dizziness
faintness
Dihydroergotamine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not refrigerate or freeze. Dispose of unused medication for injection 1 hour after you open the ampule.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
numbness, tingling, and pain in fingers and toes
blue color in fingers and toes
slowed breathing
upset stomach
vomiting
fainting
blurred vision
dizziness
confusion
seizures
coma
stomach pain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor may order certain tests to check your body's response to dihydroergotamine.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
DHE-45
®
Injection
Last Revised -
01/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page