Molindone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Molindone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682238.html
Molindone
pronounced as (moe lin' done)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Studies have shown that older adults with dementia (a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities and that may cause changes in mood and personality) who take antipsychotics (medications for mental illness) such as molindone have an increased chance of death during treatment.
Molindone is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of behavior problems in older adults with dementia. Talk to the doctor who prescribed this medication if you, a family member, or someone you care for has dementia and is taking molindone. For more information visit the FDA website:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs
Why is this medication prescribed?
Molindone is used to treat the symptoms of schizophrenia (a mental illness that causes disturbed or unusual thinking, loss of interest in life, and strong or inappropriate emotions). Molindone is in a class of medications called conventional (typical) antipsychotics. It works by decreasing abnormal excitement in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Molindone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken three or four times a day. Try to take molindone at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take molindone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of molindone and gradually increase your dose after 3 to 4 days. Later, your doctor may increase or decrease your dose, depending on your response to the medication and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with molindone.
Molindone may help to control your condition but will not cure it. Continue to take molindone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking molindone without talking to your doctor. It may take several weeks or longer for you to feel the full benefit of molindone.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking molindone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to molindone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in molindone. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking molindone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression, breast cancer, trouble keeping your balance, or a low number of white blood cells in your blood.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, especially if you are in the last few months of your pregnancy, or if you plan to become pregnant or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking molindone, call your doctor. Molindone may cause problems in newborns following delivery if it is taken during the last months of pregnancy.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking molindone.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy and may affect your thinking and movements. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are taking molindone. Alcohol can make the side effects of molindone worse.
you should know that molindone may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose, and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Molindone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dizziness, feeling unsteady, or having trouble keeping your balance
dry mouth
blurred vision
increased saliva
nausea
constipation
difficulty urinating
blank facial expression
shuffling walk
unusual, slowed, or uncontrollable movements of any part of the body
restlessness
excitement or increased activity
depression
inappropriate happiness
breast enlargement
breast milk production
menstrual period changes (missed periods or heavy bleeding)
changes in sex drive
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment,:
fever
muscle stiffness
falling
confusion
fast or irregular heartbeat
rash
sweating
neck cramps
tongue that sticks out of the mouth
tightness in the throat
difficulty breathing or swallowing
fine, worm-like tongue movements
uncontrollable, rhythmic face, mouth, or jaw movements
seizures
changes in vision
Molindone may cause other side effects. Tell your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
unusual, slowed, or uncontrollable movements of any part of the body
loss of consciousness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to molindone.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Moban
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page