Nivolumab and relatlimab-rmbw: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nivolumab and relatlimab-rmbw
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622037.html
Nivolumab and relatlimab-rmbw
pronounced as (nye vol' ue mab and rel at' li mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nivolumab and relatlimab is used to treat certain types of melanoma (a type of skin cancer) that has spread to other parts of the body or cannot be removed by surgery in adults and children 12 years of age or older who weigh at least 40 kg. Nivolumab and relatlimab are in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. They work by helping your immune system to slow or stop the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Nivolumab and relatlimab comes as a solution (liquid) to be given intravenously (into a vein) over 30 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or medical facility. It is usually given every 4 weeks for as long as your doctor recommends that you receive treatment.
Nivolumab and relatlimab may cause serious or life-threatening reactions during an infusion. A doctor or nurse will watch you closely while you are receiving the infusion and shortly after the infusion to be sure you are not having a serious reaction to the medication. Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms that may occur during the infusion: chills or shaking, itching, rash, flushing, difficulty breathing, dizziness, fever, and feeling faint.
Your doctor may slow down your infusion, delay it, or stop your treatment with nivolumab and relatlimab injection, or treat you with additional medications depending on your response to the medication and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking nivolumab and relatlimab,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nivolumab, relatlimab, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in nivolumab and relatlimab. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an organ transplant. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an autoimmune disease (condition in which the immune system attacks a healthy part of the body) such as Crohn's disease (condition in which the immune system attacks the lining of the digestive tract causing pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fever), ulcerative colitis (condition that causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum), or lupus (condition in which the immune system attacks many tissues and organs including the skin, joints, blood, and kidneys); any type of lung disease or breathing problems; or thyroid, kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You will need to take a pregnancy test before you receive nivolumab and relatlimab. You should not become pregnant while you are receiving nivolumab and relatlimab injection. You should use effective birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with nivolumab and relatlimab injection and for at least 5 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant while receiving nivolumab and relatlimab injection, call your doctor immediately. Nivolumab and relatlimab injection may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while receiving nivolumab and relatlimab injection and for 5 months after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nivolumab and relatlimab may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
muscle pain or weakness
headache
reduced appetite
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
shortness of breath
new or worsening cough
coughing up blood
chest pain
diarrhea
stomach area pain or tenderness
stools that are black, tarry, sticky, or contain blood
tiredness or weakness
feeling cold
deepening of voice or hoarseness
rapid heartbeat
increased sweating
changes in weight (gain or loss)
changes in mood or behavior (decreased sex drive, irritability, or forgetfulness)
pain, burning, tingling, or numbness in the hands or feet
headaches, including those that are unusual or will not go away
confusion
fever
hair loss
itching, rash, hives, or blisters on your skin
constipation
nausea
vomiting
drowsiness
dizziness or fainting
yellowing of skin or eyes, dark-colored urine, bleeding or bruising more easily than normal, loss of appetite, decreased energy, or pain on right side of stomach area
increased thirst
decreased or increased urination
swelling of face, arms, legs, feet or ankles
blood in urine
changes in vision, including sensitivity to light
breath that smells fruity
painful sores in mouth, nose, throat, or genital area
Nivolumab and relatlimab may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to nivolumab and relatlimab.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Opdualag
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page