Indapamide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Indapamide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a684062.html
Indapamide
pronounced as (in dap' a mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Indapamide is used to treat hypertension (high blood pressure) and fluid retention (swelling caused by body fluid pooling in certain tissues) that can happen with heart failure(HF; a condition where the heart muscle weakens and cannot blood as well). Indapamide is in a class of medications called diuretics ("water pills"). It works by causing the kidneys to get rid of unneeded salt and water from the body into the urine.
Untreated high blood pressure can damage the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. This damage may cause heart disease, a heart attack, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. Along with medication, making the following changes will also help to control your blood pressure: eating a diet low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Indapamide comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take with or without food once daily in the morning. Take indapamide at around the same time every day.
Take indapamide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Indapamide controls high blood pressure but does not cure it. Continue to take indapamide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking indapamide without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Indapamide also is used to treat swelling and fluid retention caused by various medical conditions other than heart disease. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this medicine for your condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking indapamide,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with indapamide. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with indapamide. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting indapamide with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking indapamide, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart rhythm problems, diabetes, gout, or kidney, liver, thyroid, or parathyroid disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. Do not breast-feed while taking this medicine. If you become pregnant while taking indapamide, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking indapamide.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Follow your doctor's directions. They may include a daily exercise program and a low-sodium or low-salt diet, potassium supplements, and increased amounts of potassium-rich foods (e.g., bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice) in your diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Frequent urination may last for up to 6 hours after a dose and should decrease after you take indapamide for a few weeks. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headaches
drowsiness, dizziness, tiredness, weakness, confusion
muscle cramps or spasms or numbness in fingers or toes
nervousness, tension, irritability
frequent urination
If you have any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rapid, excessive weight loss
severe skin rash with itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
feeling of racing heart or irregular beat, lightheadedness
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly, and blood tests should be done occasionally.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lozol
®
¶
Brand names of combination products
Widaplik
®
(containing Amlodipine, Telmisartan, Indapamide)
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page